古文：初五日暂憩悉檀寺。
现代文：初五日暂住在悉檀寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he temporarily stayed at Siddan-ji Temple.

古文：莘野乃翁沈君，具柬邀余同悉檀诸禅侣，以初六日供斋狮林，是日遂不及出。
现代文：萃野的父亲沈君，备好柬帖邀请我和悉檀寺众禅侣。初六日在狮子林供斋食，这天就没来得及出去。
English: Sukeno's father, Shen Jun, had prepared an invitation card to invite me and the Siddanji Zen monks. On the sixth day of the first month, we offered a meal in the lion forest, but we didn't have time to go out that day.

古文：初六日悉檀四长老饭后约赴沈君斋：沈君亦以献岁周花甲年初满六十岁，余乃录除夕下榻四诗为祝。
现代文：初六日悉檀寺四位长老饭后约着去赴沈君的斋会，沈君也在一年之始满六十岁，我于是录下除夕夜住宿时的四首诗作为祝贺。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the four elders of Siddan Temple made an appointment to go to Shen Jun's luncheon after dinner. Shen Jun also turned sixty at the beginning of the year, so I recorded four poems from the New Year's Eve stay as congratulations.

古文：仍五里，至天香庐侧，又蹑ｎｉè登峻二里而登莘野楼，则白云、翠月、玄明诸静侣皆在。
现代文：仍然走五里，到天香的居室旁边，又攀登二里陡坡而上萃野的山楼，白云、翠月、玄明等各位静侣都在。
English: I still walked five miles to get next to Tian Xiang's living room, and climbed two miles of steep slope to the mountain tower in Zhuyeye. Baiyun, Tsui Yue, Xuan Ming, and other quiet couples were there.

古文：进餐后，遂同四长老遍探林中诸静室。
现代文：进餐后，就同四位长老一齐拜访林中各静室。
English: After dinner, he and the four elders visited each of the seclusion rooms in the forest.

古文：宛转翠微间，天气清媚，茶花鲜娇，云关翠隙，无所不到。
现代文：环绕于青山之中，空气清新阳光明媚，茶花鲜艳娇美，云关翠隙，无所不到。
English: Surrounded by green mountains, the air is fresh and sunny, the camellias are bright and delicate, and everything is within easy reach.

古文：先过隐空，为留盒茗。
现代文：先拜访隐空，用茶盒款待。
English: First, visit the hidden space and treat yourself with a tea box.

古文：过兰宗、野愚，俱下山。
现代文：拜访兰宗、野愚，都下山了。
English: After visiting Lanzong and Nogu, they all went down the mountain.

古文：过体极静庐，预备茶盒以待。
现代文：拜访玄明，喝茶吃松籽。拜访白云，喝茶吃茶实。拜访体极的静室，他预备了茶盒来招待。
English: He visited Xuanming, drank tea and ate pine seeds. He visited Baiyun, drank tea and ate tea seeds. He visited the quiet room at the end of the body, and he prepared a tea box to invite.

古文：下午，仍饭于莘野楼。
现代文：下午，仍然在萃野楼吃饭。
English: In the afternoon, we still had dinner at Sukeno-ro.

古文：今主摩尼，间归本刹，乃四长老之兄行也。
现代文：四位长老硬要我骑马走，顺西垂下二里，经过兰陀寺西，从寺前往东转，于是经幻住庵前下坡，四里，回到悉檀寺。
English: The four elders insisted that I ride my horse, and I rode two miles down the west slope, passed the west side of the Lando Temple, turned east from the temple, and then rode four miles down the slope in front of the hallucinatory hermitage, and returned to the Siddan Temple.

古文：有子现在鹤庠。野愚师又至，遂共斋本刹。下午，野愚、兰宗由塔盘往大士阁，余赴大觉之招。
现代文：初七日早晨起床，大觉寺的遍周让他的徒弟用柬帖来邀请，我打算去时，恰巧良一、兰宗来到，又有本寺的复吾法师从摩尼寺来，野愚法师又来，于是一同在本寺吃斋。下午，野愚、兰宗经过塔盘去大士阁，我去赴大觉寺的邀请。
English: On the morning of the seventh day of the first month of the year, Hen Zhou of Daegu Temple asked his apprentice to invite him with a greeting card. When I was planning to go, Chakolya I and Ran Zong came, and Fogo Mage of this temple came from Mani Temple, and Nogu Mage came again, so they ate together at this temple. In the afternoon, Nogu and Ran Zong went through the tower to Daeshikaku, and I went to Daegu Temple's invitation.

古文：小食后，腹果甚，遂乘间往寂光，录前所未竟碑。
现代文：小吃后，腹中很饱，于是乘空去寂光寺，录以前所没录完的碑文。
English: After the snack, his stomach was full, so he flew to Jakko Temple to record the previously unfinished inscription.

古文：仍饭于大觉，而还悉檀宿。
现代文：仍然在大觉寺吃饭，然后返回悉檀寺住宿。
English: We still had dinner at Daikaku-ji Temple and then went back to Siddan-ji Temple for the night.

古文：初八日饭后，四长老候往本无塔院，盖先期以是日祭扫也，余从之。
现代文：初八日饭后，四位长老等着去本无塔院，因为事先约定今天祭奠扫墓，我跟随他们去。
English: After dinner on the eighth day of the first month, the four elders were waiting to go to Benmuto-in, and I followed them because it had been agreed in advance that there would be a memorial service and a grave-sweeping today.

古文：仍还由大路，循东岭而南，半里，为静闻瘗ｙì掩埋骨处，乃登拜之。
现代文：沿寺左边的龙潭往东下一里，又经过一股东边的水，往南走半里，则内支龙砂，从东向西突起，与中支大士阁所在的山峰，从两边对峙在悉檀寺之前，地势十分紧凑。
English: Along the Longtan on the left of the temple, one mile to the east, and passing through the water on one side of the road, half a mile to the south, the Inner Branch of the Dragon Sands, protruding from east to west, and the mountain peak where the Central Branch of the Daishi Pavilion is located, face off from both sides in front of Siddan Temple, the terrain is very compact.

古文：又南一里，则龙砂古代神话中的四方神中的青龙，代表东方。东边左砂即龙砂，此指山势外支，又自东岭分突而西，与西支传衣之峰对，亦夹持于悉檀之前，其势甚雄。
现代文：悉檀寺前后左右的各股水流，都从这里流出去。道路从岭坳往南穿过。我同弘辨、萃野特地往西探岭，隔着峡谷往西眺望，中支向南突起，延伸到这里结束，大士阁傍靠在山下，是天然的险要之地，为悉檀寺而设置的。仍然返回沿大路走，顺东岭往南，半里，到埋静闻遗骨之处，于是上去祭拜。又往南一里，则龙砂外支，又从东岭分出、突起，往西延伸，与西支传衣寺之峰相对，也从两边对峙于悉檀寺之前，形势十分雄伟。
English: All the streams around and in front of Siddan-ji Temple flow out from here. The road passes through the ridge to the south. I, along with Hongban and Zhuye, made a special trip to West Tanling and looked west across the canyon. The middle branch protrudes to the south and ends here. Daishi Pavilion is located at the foot of the mountain and is a natural critical place, set up for Siddan-ji Temple. I still returned to walk along the road and follow Dongling to the south, half a mile, to the place where Jingwen's remains were buried, and then went to worship. Another mile to the south, there is the outer branch of Long

古文：大士阁东龙潭诸水，阁西瀑布诸水，悉由此而出。
现代文：大士阁东边龙潭等水，阁西边曝布等水，都从这里流出。
English: The water such as Longtan on the east side of Dashi Pavilion and the water such as Xuanbu on the west side of Pavilion both flow out from here.

古文：此岭为一山之龙砂，而在悉檀为尤近，即鸡足前三距鸡脚爪中之东南支也。
现代文：此岭为整座山的龙砂，而距离悉檀寺尤其近，就是鸡足山前面三距之中的东南支。
English: This ridge is the dragon sand of the whole mountain, and it is especially close to Siddan Temple, which is the southeast branch in the middle of the three distances in front of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：其脉自绝顶东亘，屏立空中，为罗汉壁、狮子林、点头峰、九重崖后脊。
现代文：山脉从绝顶往东横贯，屏立于空中，为罗汉壁、狮子林、点头峰、九重崖的后脊。
English: The mountain range runs eastward from the highest peak, standing like a screen in the sky. It is the back ridge of the Luohan Wall, Lion Forest, Nodding Peak, and Nine-Storied Cliff.

古文：中支由罗汉壁下坠而止于大士阁，东支由九重崖东南环为此岭，若臂之内抱，先分一层为内砂，与中支大士阁对，又纡此层为外砂，与西支传衣后峰对。
现代文：中支从罗汉壁往下坠延到大士阁结束，东支从九重崖往东南环绕为此岭，像手臂向内环抱那样，先分出的一层是内砂，与中支大士阁相对，又绕此层为外砂，与西支传衣寺后峰相对。
English: The middle branch descends from the Rohan Wall to the end of the Daishi Pavilion, and the eastern branch wraps around the ridge from the Jiujie cliff to the southeast, like an arm wrapping around itself. The first layer to separate is the inner sand, opposite the middle branch of the Daishi Pavilion, and the outer sand around this layer, opposite the west branch of the Dangui Temple.

古文：其势自东而西突，其度脊少坳如马鞍，故昔以马鞍岭名之。
现代文：整个地势从东向西突起，那延神的山脊稍稍下陷，如同马鞍，所以从前用马鞍岭为名。
English: The entire terrain protrudes from east to west, and the ridge of the Yanshin slightly sinks, like a saddle, so it was formerly called Saddle Ridge.

古文：余初入鸡山抵大觉，四顾山势，重重回合，丛林净室，处处中悬，无不恰称，独此处欠一塔，为山中缺陷。
现代文：我刚进鸡足山到大觉寺时，环顾四周山势，重重环绕叠合，僧徒聚集的静室，处处悬在正中，没有不恰当、不相称之处，唯独这里缺一座塔，成为山中的缺陷。
English: When I just entered the Jiu Foot Mountain to Da Jie Temple, I looked around the mountain, surrounded and superimposed, the seclusion room where the monks gathered, everywhere hanging in the middle, there was nothing inappropriate or disproportionate, except that there was a tower missing, which became a defect in the mountain.

古文：及至悉檀，遥顾此峰尤奇，以为焉得阿育王大现神通于八万四千中，分一灵光于此。
现代文：等到了悉檀寺，遥看此峰尤为神奇，不知是否能得阿育王大现神通于八万四千光明之中，分一灵光于此地。
English: When I arrived at Siddan-ji Temple, it was especially magical to see this peak from afar. I wondered if I could obtain the power of Ah Iuk-Wang Tae-Hyun in the midst of eighty-four thousand points of light, and receive a ray of light here.

古文：既晤弘辨，问仙陀何在？曰： 在塔盘。 
现代文：和弘辨见面后，问仙陀在哪里？回答说： 在塔盘。 
English: When they met, he asked, "Where is Sendo?" and she replied, "In the tower."

古文：问塔盘何在？
现代文：间塔盘在哪里？
English: Where is the inter-pylon?

古文：则正指此山也。
现代文：则指的正是这座山。
English: It is this mountain that is being referred to.

古文：时尚未竖塔心，不能遥瞩，自后则瞻顾如对矣。
现代文：当时还没竖塔心，不能远看，从后面看则如同在对面。
English: At that time, there was no vertical tower core, so you couldn't see far away, but from behind it was as if you were on the opposite side.

古文：人谓鸡山前伸三距，惟西支长，而中东二支俱短，非也。
现代文：人们说鸡足山前面伸出的三距，是西支长，而中、东二支都短，不对。
English: People say that the three spurs protruding from the front of the Chicken's Foot Mountain are the west branch, while the middle and east branches are short, which is not true.

古文：中支不短，不能独悬于中，令外支环拱。
现代文：中支如短，不可能独自高悬在正中，让外支环绕。
English: If the middle branch is short, it is impossible to hang high in the middle alone and let the outer branch surround it.

古文：西支固长，然其势较低，盖虎砂正欲其低也。
现代文：西支固然长，但其地势较低，因为作为虎砂正希望其低。
English: Although the west branch is long, its terrain is low, because as the tiger sand is rising, it wants to be low.

古文：若东支之所谓短者，自其环抱下坠处言之，则短，自其横脊后拥处言之，则甚长而崇，非西支之可并也。
现代文：至于东支的所谓短，从环抱下坠之处评论，是短，从横贯山脊、簇拥于后之处评论，则是很长而且高，不是西支所能相提并论的。
English: As for the so-called shortness of the east branch, it is short from the point of hugging and falling, and it is long and high from the point of crossing the ridge and clustering behind, which is not comparable to the west branch.

古文：盖西支缭绕而卑低，虎砂也，而即以为前案；东支夭屈伸自如矫而尊，龙砂也，而兼以为后屏，皆天设地造，自然之奇，拟议所不及者也。
现代文：因为西支环绕而势低，是虎砂，因而就作为前面的案山；东支屈伸自如而势尊，是龙砂，因而兼作为背后的屏障，都是天设地造的自然奇观，是人工设计所无法比拟的。
English: Because the west branch is surrounded by and has low potential, it is tiger sand, so it is used as the front of the mountain; the east branch is stretched out and has high potential, it is dragon sand, so it is also used as a barrier behind. They are all natural wonders created by heaven and earth, and are incomparable by artificial design.

古文：塔盘当峰头，在马鞍中坳之西，有大路在马鞍之间，则东南下鸡坪关者；有岐路在马鞍之东，则东北向本无塔院者。
现代文：塔盘位处峰头，在马鞍岭正中的坳地西边，有大路在马鞍的中间，是从东南通往鸡坪关，有岔路在马鞍的东边，是往东北通向本无塔院。
English: The pylon is located at the top of the peak, on the west side of the ridge in the middle of Ma On Shan. There is a highway in the middle of Ma On Shan, leading from the southeast to Jipingguan. There is a causeway on the east side of Ma On Shan, leading to the northeast to Ben Wu Pagoda.

古文：昔闻霄汉鹊桥，以渡水也，今反为水渡，抑更奇矣。大觉则抑之地中以倒射，此则浮之空中使交通，皆所谓颠倒造化也。
现代文：当时在塔盘作工的有一百多人，但峰头没有水，马鞍岭东峰很高处有水，因中间的坳地而不能流到西峰，于是在坳地中竖起数排木柱，在木柱上架桥接水。木柱有四丈多高，树木剖开挖空为沟，横接在松柱末端。从前听说天河上的鹊桥，是为了渡过水，如今此桥反而是让水渡过来，也许这更加奇妙啊。
English: At that time, there were more than a hundred people working on the tower, but there was no water at the top of the peak. There was water at a very high point on the east peak of Ma'anshanling, but it could not flow to the west peak because of the ploughed ground in the middle. Therefore, several rows of wooden pillars were erected in the ploughed ground, and a bridge was built over the wooden pillars to connect the water. The wooden pillars were as high as four feet, and the trees were cut open to form a ditch, and they were connected horizontally at the end of the pine pillars. It was once said that the bridge over the Tianhe River was built to

古文：由坳东向循峰，则鸡山大脊之南尽处也。
现代文：沿坳地向东顺峰走，是鸡足山主脊的南边尽头处。
English: Walking along the ridge to the east of Shunfeng, it is the southern end of the main ridge of the Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：其前复开大洋，分支环抱，又成一向，可谓灵山面面奇矣。
现代文：前面又十分开阔，分支山脉环抱，又成为一种趋向，可以称得上灵山面面奇观了。
English: The front is also very open, surrounded by branching mountains, and has become a trend, which can be called a miracle on the mountain surface.

古文：共二里，登谒本无塔。
现代文：共走二里，上去拜本无塔。
English: We walked a total of two miles, and there was no tower to go up and worship.

古文：诸静侣及三番僧皆助祭，余则享馂焉。
现代文：塔很雄伟，三塔并立，中间供奉本公的骨灰，左右是弟子普、同二塔。
English: The tower is very majestic. The three towers stand side by side, with the ashes of the principal enshrined in the middle, and disciples Pu and Tong two towers on the right and left.

古文：时同祭者，四长老外，则白云、复吾、沈公及莘野诸后裔俱集。
现代文：左面为塔院，可以休息和居住。各位静侣以及外族的僧人都来助祭，我则享用了剩余的食物。当时一同来祭祀的，除四位长老外，则白云、复吾、沈公以及萃野等众后裔都会集了。
English: To the left is the pagoda, where you can rest and live. All the monks, both lay and foreign, came to assist in the ritual, and I enjoyed the leftover food. In addition to the four elders who came to worship together at that time, all the descendants of Baiyun, Fogo, Shengong, and Suyeon gathered.

古文：若兰宗、艮一，则本公雁行，故不至云。
现代文：至于兰宗、良一，是本公的弟兄辈，所以没有来。
English: As for Lanzong and Liangyi, they are brothers of Honguo, so they didn't come.

古文：祭后，仙陀、纯白又携祭品往祭马鞍岭北三塔，遂及静闻。
现代文：祭祀后，仙陀、纯白又携带祭品去祭祀马鞍岭北的三塔，于是连带祭祀静闻。
English: After the ritual, Senda and Pure White also carried offerings to the three pagodas in the north of Ma On Ling, and then they left together with the ritual.

古文：下午，还过塔盘，叩仙陀，谢其祭静闻也。
现代文：下午，返回经过塔盘，叩拜仙陀，感谢他对静闻的祭祀。
English: In the afternoon, return through the tower, worship Senda, and thank him for the sacrifice of Jinghan.

古文：初九日晨餐后，余即携杖西行。
现代文：初九日早饭后，我熟携带手杖往西行。
English: After breakfast on the 9th day of the first month, I walked west with my cane.

古文：三里，过息阴轩。
现代文：三里，经过息阴轩。
English: Sanli, passing through Xiyin Xuan.

古文：轩在中支之脊，大觉寺之前案也，为本无师静摄养生处。
现代文：息阴轩在中支的脊上，是大觉寺的前案，为本无法师静修的地方。
English: Located on the ridge of the middle branch, Siyin Xuan is the precursor to Dajue Temple, and is a place for those who cannot study to meditate.

古文：额为佥宪冯元成时可所书。
现代文：匾额为左副都御史冯元成所题写的。
English: The plaque was inscribed by Feng Yuancheng, the Left Deputy Governor of the Capital.

古文：筇竹轩，亦曰息阴，以本无从筇竹披剃也。其前有三岐：从左渡涧，趋大觉、寂光；从右渡涧，趋传衣，下接待；从后直上，则分渡右涧，或由慧林而上对峰，或陟西支而抵华严焉。
现代文：轩前有三条岔路：从左边渡过沟洞，到大觉寺、寂光寺；从右边渡过沟涧，到传衣寺，下到接待寺；从后面直上，则渡过另一道右边的沟涧，或者经过慧林庵然后上圣峰寺，或者登西支然后到华严寺。
English: In front of the hall, there are three side roads: from the left, cross the ditch and go to Daikakuji Temple and Jakko Temple; from the right, cross the ditch and go to Denei Temple and go down to the reception temple; from the back, go straight up and cross the other ditch on the right, or go through Eirin-an and then go to Shoufeng Temple, or go up to the west branch and go to Huayan Temple.

古文：余乃先半里从右渡，转而东上南岭，半里，盘其东崖之上，即瀑布之西峰也。
现代文：我于是先走半里往右渡过沟涧，然后转东上南岭，半里，绕到南岭东崖之上，就是瀑布西边的山峰。
English: So I first walked half a mile to the right across the gully, then turned east up Nanling, half a mile, around to the top of the East Nanling cliff, which is the peak on the west side of the waterfall.

古文：于是循之南行，东瞩中支之大士阁在其下，东支之塔盘岭对其上。
现代文：于是顺峰往南行，往东看到中支的大士阁在下面，东支的塔盘岭正对上面。
English: So Shunfeng went to the south, and to the east, he saw the middle branch of the Daoshi Pavilion below, and the east branch of the Tower Pan Ridge directly above.

古文：平行三里，乃东转随坡下，一里，则传衣寺东向倚山之半。
现代文：平行三里，于是转东沿坡下，一里，则传衣寺朝东靠在山腰上。
English: Parallel for three miles, then turn east down the slope, one mile, then Deneiji Temple to the east on the mountainside.

古文：其北先有止止庵，嘿庵真语所建，传衣大机禅师之友也。
现代文：寺北早先有止止庵，嘿庵真语所建，他是传衣寺大机禅师的朋友。
English: To the north of the temple, there was earlier a Hoji-an, built by Heian Shingyu, who was a friend of the Zen master Daiki of Denei-ji Temple.

古文：又南为净云，彻空真炳所建。
现代文：又南为净云庵，彻空真炳所建。
English: To the south is Jingyun's hermitage, which was built by Cho Kuk Jinsong.

古文：又南有弥陀、圆通、八角三庵，皆连附于传衣寺者，而八角名之最著，以昔有八角亭，今改创矣。
现代文：又南有弥陀、圆通、八角三庵，都和传衣寺相关联，而八角庵最著名，因为从前有八角亭，如今改建为庵。
English: To the south, there are the three hermitages of Mido, Rundo, and Hakkaku, all of which are associated with Denei-ji Temple, and Hakkaku-an is the most famous, because there was once an octagonal pavilion, which has now been converted into a hermitage.

古文：八角开创于嘉靖间，为吉空上人所建。
现代文：八角亭开创于嘉靖年间，是吉空上人所建。
English: The octagonal pavilion was founded in the Jiajing period and was built by Jikong Shonin.

古文：其南即为传衣寺，寺基开爽，规模宏拓，前有大坊，题曰 竹林清隐 ，乃直指毛堪苏州毛具茨也。
现代文：亭南就是传衣寺，寺基开阔，规模宏大，前面有大坊，题写着 竹林清隐 ，是直指使毛堪所命名，很不相称。
English: To the south of the pavilion is the Dangui Temple. The temple grounds are broad and the scale is huge. There is a large temple in front of it, with the inscription "Chikurin Chingin" (竹林清隐), which was named directly after Mao Kan. It is very incongruous.

古文：所命，颇不称。上又一直指大标所题古松诗，止署曰 白岳 。
现代文：上面又是一个直指使用大字所写的古松诗，只署名 白岳 。
English: There is also an old pine tree poem written in capital letters, signed only as 白岳.

古文：古松当坊前，本大三围，乃龙鳞，非五鬣，此指枕针也。
现代文：古松在坊前，根有三围大，是龙鳞松，不是五械松。
English: The old pine tree in front of the house has three large roots. It is a dragon scale pine, not a five-machine pine.

古文：山间巨松皆五鬣，耸干参天，而老龙鳞颇无大者，遂以纠拿见奇。干丈五以上，辄四面横枝而出，枝大侔于干，其端又倒垂斜攫ｊｕé像爪抓取，尾大不掉，干几分裂。
现代文：山中的巨松都是五蠢松，树干高耸于空中，而这古龙鳞松很不高大，只以曲折缠绕见奇，树干粗一丈五以上，于是朝四面生出横枝，枝和干一样粗，枝头又倒垂斜倾，尾大不掉，主干几乎被分裂。
English: The giant pines in the mountains are all five-lobed pines, the trunks towering high in the air, while this ancient dragon-scaled pine is very small, only surprising with twists and turns. The trunk is more than five times thick, so in the morning it produces cross-branches on all sides, the branches are as thick as the trunk, the branches are upside down and slanted, the tail is not large, and the trunk is almost split.

古文：今筑台拥干，高六七尺，又植木支其横枝，仅免于裂，亦幸矣。
现代文：如今筑起台保护主干，台高六七尺，又竖木头支撑那些横枝，主干才免于分裂，也算幸运了。
English: Now, a platform has been built to protect the main trunk. The platform is 67 feet high, and the vertical wood supports those cross-branches. The main trunk is only saved from splitting, which is also lucky.

古文：由梯登台，四面横枝倒悬于外，或自中跃起，或自巅垂飏，其纷纠翔舞之态，不一而足，与天台翥，其一类耶？
现代文：沿梯登上台，四周的横枝倒悬于外，有的从中跃起，有的从顶上下垂飞扬，那纷乱纠结、飘扬飞舞的姿态，不能一一列举，和天台山翁凤大概是一类吧！
English: Climbing onto the stage along the staircase, the surrounding cross-branches hanging upside down, some leaping up from the middle, some flying from the top, the tangled, fluttering and flying posture cannot be listed one by one, and it is probably the same as the Tiantai Mountain Wengfeng!

古文：坊联曰： 花为传心开锦绣，松知护法作虬龙。 
现代文：坊上的对联是： 花为传心开锦绣，松知护法作虬龙。 
English: The couplets on the wall are: Flowers are for conveying the heart, brocade for embroidery, and pine cones for dragons.

古文：为王元翰聚洲笔。
现代文：是王元翰聚洲的手笔。
English: It was written by Wang Yuanhan Juzhou.

古文：门联曰： 峰影遥看云盖结，松涛静听海潮生。 
现代文：门联为： 峰影遥看云盖结，松涛静听海潮生。 
English: The portals are as follows: the shadow of the peak looks at the knot of the cloud cover in the distance, and the pine forest quietly listens to the sea tides.

古文：为罗汝芳近溪笔。
现代文：是罗汝芳近溪的手笔。
English: It was written by Luo Rufang near the creek.

古文：差可人意。
现代文：大体上让人满意。
English: On the whole, this is a satisfactory result.

古文：然罗联涛潮二字连用，不免叠床之病，何不以 声 字易 涛 字乎？
现代文：然而罗汝芳的门联涛潮二字连用，不免有重复累赘的毛病，为什么不用 声 字替换 涛 字呢？
English: However, Luo Rufang's use of the word "gate" in conjunction with the word "tide" inevitably has the problem of being repetitive. Why not replace the word "tide" with the word "voice"?

古文：寺昔为圆信庵，嘉靖间，李中谿ｘī元阳为大机禅师宏创成寺，其徒印光、孙法界，戒律法规一如大机。
现代文：传衣寺从前名圆信庵，嘉靖年间，李中黯元阳为大机禅师扩建成寺，其徒弟印光、再传弟子法界，遵守戒律精细严格，和大机禅师一样。
English: Denei-ji Temple was formerly known as Enshin-an Temple. During the Jiajing Dynasty, Li Zhongye Yuanyang expanded and built the temple as a Daiki Zen master. His apprentice, Inko, passed on the teachings of the Dharma to his disciples, observing the precepts in a fine and strict manner, just like the Daiki Zen master.

古文：万历辛丑元日毁于火，法界复鼎建之，视昔有加。
现代文：万历辛丑年元旦，寺毁于火灾，法界又大力修建，比原来还好。
English: On the New Year's Day of the Year of the Ox, the temple was destroyed by fire, but the Dharma Realm was vigorously rebuilt, and it is better than before.

古文：先是余过止止庵，一病僧留饭，坐久之，见其方淅米，乃去，饭于净云僧觉心处，遂入参寺中，入其西藏经阁。
现代文：在这之前我拜访止止庵，一位生病的僧人留我吃饭，坐了很久，看见他正在淘米，于是离去，到静云庵僧人觉心那里吃饭，于是就进寺中参观，进入寺西的藏经阁。
English: Prior to this, I visited Tetsuji-an. A sick monk kept me for dinner and I sat there for a long time. I saw that he was scavenging for rice, so I left and went to eat at the monastery of Shizun-an, where the monk Tsukeshin was. I then visited the middle of the temple and entered the book collection on the west side of the temple.

古文：阁前山茶树小而花甚盛，为折两枝而出。
现代文：阁前的山茶花树小但花开得很繁盛，因此折了两枝才出来。
English: The camellia tree in front of the pavilion is small but the flowers are blooming very profusely, so it took two branches to come out.

古文：乃东北下峡中，一里，有垣围一区，濬山为池，畜金鱼于中，结茅龛于上者，亦传衣之裔僧也。
现代文：于是往东北下到峡谷中，走一里，有墙围着一片地，开山建池，在池中养金鱼，在上面盖草房，也是传衣寺后代僧人的。
English: So he went to the northeast down to the canyon, walked one mile, there was a wall around a piece of land, opened a mountain, built a pond, raised goldfish in the pond, and built a grass house on top, which was also a descendant of the monks of Dangui Temple.

古文：云影山光，以一泓印之，不觉潭影空心。
现代文：云影山光，印上一池水，不觉水中的身影湛然空明，心中的杂念荡涤干净。
English: Cloud shadow, mountain light, printed on a pool of water. Unconsciously, the figure in the water is soaring and clear, and the miscellaneous thoughts in the heart are wiped clean.

古文：又东北下半里，抵峡底，则瀑布之下流也，去瀑布已一曲。
现代文：又往东北下半里，到达峡底，是瀑布的下游，距离瀑布已经转了一道弯。
English: Another half mile to the northeast, reaching the bottom of the canyon, is the downstream of the waterfall, and the distance from the waterfall has turned a corner.

古文：昔从瀑上瞰，不见其底，今从峡底涉，亦不见其瀑。
现代文：从前从瀑布上面俯瞰，看不见峡底；现在从峡底穿越，也看不见瀑布。
English: In the past, if you looked down from the top of the waterfall, you couldn't see the bottom of the gorge; now, if you cross from the bottom of the gorge, you can't see the waterfall.

古文：峡西有草庐菜畦，则犹传衣之蔬圃也。
现代文：峡谷西边有草房菜地，还是传衣寺的菜园。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there is a meadow and vegetable garden, which is also the vegetable garden of Dengye Temple.

古文：峡中水至是如引丝，反不如悬瀑之势巨矣。
现代文：峡谷中的水流到这里犹如拉细的丝带，反而比不上瀑布飞悬的气势了。
English: The water flow in the canyon is like a thin ribbon here, but it is not as powerful as the waterfall.

古文：渡涧，乃东上坡，一里而至大道，则大士阁之侧也。
现代文：渡过沟涧，就往东上坡，一里走到大路上，是大士阁的旁边。
English: After crossing the ravine, we went uphill to the east and walked one mile to the main road, next to the Daishi-gakuen.

古文：阁倚中支南突之半，其前有坊有楼，历级甚峻，后为阁，飞甍叠栋，上供大士，左右各有楼，其制亦敞。
现代文：大士阁傍靠在中支往南突起的山腰上，阁前有坊有楼，经过很陡的石阶，后面是阁，屋脊飞起，栋柱重叠，阁上供奉观音菩萨，左右各有楼，规模也很宽敞。
English: The Daishi Pavilion is located on the mountainside protruding from the middle to the south. In front of the pavilion, there are pavilions and buildings, passing through very steep stone steps. Behind is the pavilion, the roof ridge flies up, the columns overlap, the pavilion is dedicated to Guanyin Bodhisattva, and there are buildings on both sides, the scale is also very spacious.

古文：乃万历丙午，直指沈公所建，选老僧拙愚者居之，命曰三摩寺。
现代文：是万历丙午年直指使沈公所建，挑选老僧拙愚住在这里，命名为三摩寺。
English: It was built by the direct order of Shen Gong in the year of Wanli Bingwu, and the old monk Zhuoyu was selected to live here, and it was named Sanma Temple.

古文：余录碑阁下，忽一僧殷勤款曲，问之，乃拙公之徒虚宇也。
现代文：我在阁下录碑文，忽然有一僧人殷勤应酬，问他，是拙公的徒弟虚宇。
English: I was inscribing an inscription in your honor, when suddenly a monk graciously approached me and asked if I was Humpty Dumpty's apprentice, Humpty Dumpty.

古文：虚宇又为兰宗之派，今拙公没，虚宇当事。
现代文：虚宇又是兰宗的支派，如今拙公去世，虚宇主事。
English: The false universe is also a branch of the Orchid School. Now that my grandfather has passed away, the false universe is in charge.

古文：昨野愚、兰宗宿此，想先道余，故虚宇一见惓惓，且留宿。
现代文：昨天野愚、兰宗住在这里，想来事先说到我，所以虚宇一见面就诚恳而深切，并且留我住宿。
English: Yesterday, Yogo and Lanzong stayed here and wanted to come and talk about me in advance, so as soon as they met, they were sincere and sincere, and they let me stay.

古文：余以日暮碑长，许之。令顾仆返悉檀，乃下榻于西楼之奥室位于西南的房间。初十日晨起盥栉，而顾仆至，言弘辨师遣僧往丽江已行，盖为余前茅者打前战。
现代文：我因为太阳落山而碑文又长，答应住下，让顾仆回悉檀寺，我就在西楼的内室住宿。初十日早晨起来梳洗时，顾仆就来了，说弘辨法师派往丽江府的僧人已经启程，为我打前锋。
English: Because the sun had set and the inscription was long, I agreed to stay. I asked the attendant to take me back to Siddan Temple, and I stayed in the inner room of the West Building. On the morning of the 10th day of the first month, when I got up to wash, the attendant came and said that the monk sent to Lijiang Prefecture by Koban Mage had set off to fight for me.

古文：余乃候饭，即从寺右大道北上，二里，陟中支之脊，有庵踞其上，曰牟尼庵。
现代文：我于是等吃过饭，就从寺右的大路往北上，二里，攀登中支的山脊，有庵坐落在上面，名牟尼庵。
English: So, after I had eaten, I walked north from the main road to the right of the temple for two miles, climbing the ridge of the middle branch. There was a hermitage on the top, Namouni hermitage.

古文：其前松影桃花，恍有异致。
现代文：庵前松影桃花，仿佛有不同寻常的景致。
English: The pine trees and peach blossoms in front of the hermitage look like an unusual landscape.

古文：庵后即观瀑亭，回瞰瀑布，真有观不足之意。
现代文：庵后就是观瀑亭，回首俯瞰瀑布，真有看不够的意味。
English: Behind the hermitage is the waterfall viewing pavilion. Looking back over the waterfall, it really is a sight to behold.

古文：仍溯中支二里，过息阴轩，从其后直西一里，又南下渡涧西行，已在大觉寺蔬圃之南矣。
现代文：仍然沿中支往上二里，经过息阴轩，从轩后直西走一里，又南下渡过沟涧往西行，已经走到大觉寺菜园的南面了。
English: I still walked two miles up along the middle branch, passed through Xiyin Xuan, walked one mile straight west from Xuan Hou, and then went south and crossed the gully to the west, and I have reached the south of the vegetable garden of Da Jue Temple.

古文：盖大觉蔬圃当中支之后，中支至是自北转东，其西有二流交会，即瀑布之上流也。
现代文：原来大觉寺菜园地处中支背后，中支延伸到这里从北转向东，菜园西有两股水会合，就是瀑布的上游。
English: Originally, the vegetable garden of Daikyo-ji Temple was located behind the middle branch, and the middle branch extended here from north to east. In the west of the vegetable garden, two streams meet, which is the upper reaches of the waterfall.

古文：一自罗汉壁东南下，一自华严东北流，二水之交，中夹一支，其上为慧林庵，乃西南支东出之旁派，圣峰白云寺所倚者也。
现代文：一股从罗汉壁往东南流，一股从华严寺往东北流，二股水交错，中间夹着一座山，上面有慧林庵，是西南支向东分出的支脉，圣峰寺、白云寺傍靠山边。
English: One stream flows from the Lohan Wall to the southeast, one from the Hua Yan Temple to the northeast, the two streams intersect, and a mountain is sandwiched in the middle, with the Eilin Temple on top, which is the branch of the southwest branch to the east, and the Shifeng Temple and Baiyun Temple next to the mountain side.

古文：华严之路，又从圃东渡其下流。
现代文：去华严寺的路，又顺菜园往东渡过瀑布下游。
English: On the way to Huayan Temple, we passed the lower reaches of the waterfall along the vegetable garden to the east.

古文：乃从涧南溯之西上，一里半，渐逾支脊。
现代文：于是沿沟涧南岸溯流西上，一里半，渐渐翻越支脉的山脊。
English: So the stream followed the south bank of the ravine westward for a mile and a half, gradually climbing over the ridge of the branch.

古文：其南复有一涧，与西支东走之脊隔。
现代文：脊南又有道沟涧，和西支往东走向的山脊相隔。
English: To the south of the ridge, there is another gully, separating it from the ridge that runs eastward from the western branch.

古文：又从其涧北溯之西上，一里余，见脊上有冢坟墓三四，后有轩楼遗构，与冢俱颓。
现代文：又顺着沟涧北岸溯流西，一里多，看到山脊上有三四座坟，坟后有遗留的高楼建筑，和坟一样都废坏了。
English: I followed the north bank of the ravine for more than a mile to the west, and saw three or four graves on the ridge, with abandoned high-rise buildings behind the graves. Like the graves, they were all ruined.

古文：此脊乃西支余派，直送而出，无有环护，宜其然也。
现代文：此脊是西支的余脉，直送而出，四周没有护卫，十分自然。
English: This ridge is the remnant of the western branch, straight ahead, no guards around, very natural.

古文：由冢西复下峡，其峡复有二：在南者，自西支法照寺南发源，东下经华严寺北，至此而与北涧合；在北者，自西支法照寺北发源，东下经毗卢寺北，至此而与南涧合。
现代文：沿坟西又下峡谷，峡谷又分二：在南边的，从西支法照寺南面发源，往东延伸，经过华严寺北面，到这里就与北边的沟涧会合；在北边的，从西支法照寺北面发源：往东延伸，经过毗卢寺北，到这里就与南边的沟涧会合。
English: Along the west side of the tomb, there is another canyon, and the canyon is divided into two parts: on the south side, it originates from the south side of the west branch of Fazhao Temple and extends to the east, passing through the north side of Huayan Temple, where it meets the gully on the north side; on the north side, it originates from the north side of the west branch of Fazhao Temple and extends to the east, passing through the north side of Bilu Temple, where it meets the gully on the south side.

古文：二水之交，中夹一支，为华严寺北向之案，亦西南支东出之旁派，毗卢、祝国二寺所倚者也。
现代文：二股水交错，中间夹着一支山脉，是华严寺向北的案山，也是西南支向东分出的支脉，毗卢、祝国二寺傍靠山边。
English: Two streams of water intersect, with a mountain range sandwiched in the middle. It is the north-facing hill of Hua Yan Temple, and it is also the branch of the southwest branch to the east, adjacent to the two temples of Lu and Zhu Guo, next to the mountainside.

古文：涉北涧，有二岐：随涧西行者，为祝国、毗卢道；由支端登脊而上，溯南涧之北西行者，为华严道。
现代文：越过北边的沟涧，也有二条岔路：顺沟涧往西走，是去祝国寺、毗卢寺的路；沿支脉边登脊而上，溯南边沟涧北岸往西行，是去华严寺的路。
English: Beyond the gully on the north side, there are also two paths: walking west along the gully, it is the road to Zhuguo Temple and Bilu Temple; climbing up the ridge along the branch line and tracing the north bank of the gully on the south side to the west, it is the road to Hua Yan Temple.

古文：余乃登脊，瞰南涧行。
现代文：我于是攀登山脊，俯瞰南边沟涧而行。
English: So I climbed the ridge overlooking the south gully.

古文：一里，有亭桥横跨涧上，乃华严藉为下流之钥也。
现代文：一里，有亭桥横跨在沟涧上，于是华严寺凭借此作为下游要地。
English: For one kilometer, there is a pavilion bridge across the ravine, so Hua Yan Temple uses this as a downstream important place.

古文：度桥，始为西南本支，又西半里而得华严寺。
现代文：过桥，才是西南支本身，又往西走半里到华严寺。
English: Crossing the bridge, it is the southwestern branch itself, and walk half a mile west to Huayan Temple.

古文：寺当西南支之脊，东北向九层崖而峙，地迥向异，又山中一胜也。
现代文：寺地处西南支的山脊上，东北面向九重崖峙立，地势和以前所见的大不相同，又是山中的一处胜景。
English: The temple is located on the ridge of the southwestern branch of the mountain, and faces the nine-story cliff in the northeast. The terrain is very different from what we have seen before, and it is also a scenic spot in the mountains.

古文：盖鸡山中东二支，及绝顶诸刹，皆东南二向，曾无北拱者，惟此寺回首返照，北大山诸林刹，历历倒涌，亦觉改观。
现代文：因为鸡足山中、东二支，以及绝顶各寺庙，都是向东、向南两种方向，不曾有向北的，唯有此寺回头返照，北面大山众多的静室庙宇，历历倒拥，也令人觉得改观。
English: Because the middle and eastern branches of the Chicken's Foot Mountain, as well as the temples at the very top, are both eastward and southward, and there has never been one to the north, only this temple looks back, and the numerous still-room temples on the north face of the mountain are crowded with history, which also makes people feel that the appearance has changed.

古文：规模亦整，与传衣伯仲。
现代文：寺的规模也整齐，和传衣寺不相上下。
English: The size of the temple is also neat, and is comparable to that of Dangui Temple.

古文：嘉靖间，南都古德月堂开建，其徒月轮，以讲演名，万历初，圣母赐藏。
现代文：嘉靖年间，南京的先辈月堂开创，其徒弟月轮，以演讲经论出名。万历初年，皇太后赐经藏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the forefathers of Nanjing, the Yue-tang, founded it, and their apprentice, the Yue-lun, became famous for lecturing on the scriptures. In the first year of the Wanli era, the empress dowager gave it to him to keep.

古文：后遭回禄火灾。
现代文：后来遭到火灾。
English: It was later destroyed by fire.

古文：今虽重建，绀宇依然，而法范寂寥矣。
现代文：如今虽然重新修建，佛寺依旧原样，而佛教经典空缺。
English: Today, although it has been rebuilt, the Buddhist temple is still as it was, and the Buddhist classics are empty.

古文：寺东有路，东行山脊，乃直达传衣者。
现代文：寺东有路，往东在山脊上行走，是直达传衣寺的路。
English: There is a road to the east of the temple, and if you walk on the ridge to the east, it is a direct road to Chuanui Temple.

古文：由寺前峡上西行，半里，复有亭桥横跨涧上，即东桥上流也。
现代文：从寺前峡谷边往西走，半里，又有亭桥横跨在沟涧上，就是东边亭桥的上游。
English: Half a mile west from the edge of the Teramae Canyon, there is a pavilion bridge across the gully, which is the upper reaches of the pavilion bridge on the east side.

古文：寺左右各有桥有亭，山中之所仅见。
现代文：一座寺左右分别有桥有亭，山中仅看到这一处。
English: There is a bridge and a pavilion on each side of a temple, but only this one can be seen in the mountains.

古文：过桥，又陟其北向余支，蹑冈半里，旋冈脊，过毗卢寺，寺前为祝国寺，俱东向踞冈。
现代文：过桥，又攀登往北延伸的余支，沿冈上半里，绕过冈脊，经过毗卢寺，寺前是祝国寺，都面向东坐落在冈上。
English: Cross the bridge, climb the remaining branch that extends to the north, walk along the upper half of the hill, go around the ridge, pass by the Bilu Temple, and in front of the temple is the Zhuguo Temple, all facing east and located on the hill.

古文：寺北有涧东下，即前所涉之北涧也。
现代文：寺北有沟涧往东延伸，就是先前所渡过的北涧。
English: To the north of the temple, there is a gully that extends to the east, which is the northern gully that we crossed earlier.

古文：又由其南崖溯之西上，一里半，有寺踞冈脊，是为法照寺。
现代文：又从其南岸溯之往西上，一里半，有寺坐落在冈脊上，这是法照寺。
English: A mile and a half westward from its southern shore, there is a temple perched on a ridge. This is Hossho-ji Temple.

古文：盖西南支自铜佛殿下南坠，至此东转，当转折处，又东抽一支以为毗卢、祝国之脉，而横亘于华严之前者也，是为西南余支之第一。
现代文：原来西南支从铜佛殿下往南坠延，到这里向东转，在转折处又向东伸出一支成为毗卢寺、祝国寺所在的山脉，并横贯于华严寺之前，这是西南支的第一道余脉。
English: Originally, the southwestern branch extended southward from under the Bronze Buddha Hall, and turned eastward here. At the turning point, a mountain range that became the location of the Viro Temple and the Zhuguo Temple stretched out to the east, and ran across Huayan Temple. This is the first remnant of the southwestern branch.

古文：法照之北，又分一冈相夹，无住庵倚之，即下为颓冢之支，是为西南余支之第二。
现代文：法照寺的北部，又分出一道冈相对立，无住庵傍靠着冈，就是下面有乱坟的支脉，这是西南支的第二道余脉。
English: In the northern part of Hossho-ji Temple, there is also a hill that stands in opposition to it. The uninhabited hermitage next to the hill is the branch with the tumultuous graves below. This is the second remaining vein of the southwestern branch.

古文：屡有路直北逾冈渡峡而横去，皆向圣峰、会灯之大道。
现代文：多处有路直北越冈过峡然后横伸过去，都是通向圣峰寺、会灯寺的大路。
English: In many places, there are roads that go straight north over the hill, cross the gorge and then stretch across, all of which are the main roads leading to the Shengfeng Temple and Huiguang Temple.

古文：余欲析其分支之原，遂从峡中溯之而上，于是南舍法照，北绕无住之后，峡路渐翳，丛箐横柯，遂成幽阒，然已渐逼绝顶之下矣。
现代文：我想剖析分支的本原，就从峡谷中溯之而上，于是离开南边的法照寺，往北绕到无住寺之后，峡谷中的路渐渐隐蔽不见，树木丛生的山谷草木枝茎交错，于是成为幽深、寂静之处，但己经渐渐接近绝顶下面了。
English: I wanted to analyze the origin of the branch, so I traced it up from the canyon, so I left the south side of Fazhao Temple and went around the north to Muzhu Temple. After that, the road in the canyon gradually disappeared, and the wooded valley became a deep, quiet place, but it was gradually approaching the bottom of the peak.

古文：时路无行人，随一桃花箐村氓行。
现代文：此时途中没有行人，跟随一个桃花著的乡民走。
English: At this time, there were no pedestrians on the way, so I followed a peach-blossomed villager.

古文：一里，北循峡中，又一里，北蹑坠脊，又一里，遂逾脊而西。
现代文：一里，往北顺峡谷走，又一里，往北攀登下坠的山脊，又一里，就翻越山脊往西走。
English: I walked one mile to the Beishun Gorge, another mile north to climb the fallen ridge, and another mile to cross the ridge to the west.

古文：乃西见香木坪之前山外拥，华首门之绝壁高悬，桃花箐之过腋西环，而此脊上自铜佛殿，下抵法照寺，转而东去，界此脊西一壑，另成一境，则放光寺所倚也。
现代文：于是往西看见香木坪的前山向外耸拥，华首门的绝壁高悬，桃花著延伸的侧壁向西环绕，而此脊上面起自铜佛殿，下面抵达法照寺，然后转东延伸，分隔出此脊西边的壑谷，另外形成一片境地，是放光寺傍靠之处。
English: So I looked westward and saw the front hill of Xiangmu Ping towering outward, the cliff of Huashou Gate hanging high, the side wall extending westward with peach blossoms, and this ridge rising from the Bronze Buddha Hall, reaching Fazhao Temple below, and then extending eastward, separating the valley on the west side of this ridge, and forming another area, which is the place next to Houguang Temple.

古文：逾脊，更西北盘壑上行，又一里半而得大路，已直逼华首门下崖矣。
现代文：越过脊，另外向西北盘绕壑谷往上走，又一里半就走到大路，已经直逼华首门下面的山崖了。
English: After crossing the ridge and going up the valley to the northwest, I walked another mile and a half to the main road, and I was already right up against the cliff below Huashu Gate.

古文：其路东自圣峰来，西由放光出桃花箐，抵邓川州，为大道。
现代文：路从东边沿圣峰寺伸来，往西经过放光寺出到桃花著，抵达邓川州，是大路。
English: The road stretches from the east along the Shengfeng Temple, westward through the Hwangguang Temple to the Peach Blossom, and arrives at Dengchuanzhou, which is a major road.

古文：余西随之，半里而放光寺在焉。
现代文：我往西顺大路走，半里就到了放光寺。
English: I walked half a mile along Xishun Road and arrived at Hoko Temple.

古文：其寺南向，后倚绝壁，前临盘壑，以桃花箐为右关，以西南首支为左护，其地虽在三距之外，而实当绝顶之下，发光钟异，良有以也。
现代文：放光寺向南，背靠绝壁，前临曲折的壑谷，以桃花警为右关，以西南支第一余脉为左护，这里虽然在鸡足山三距之外，而实际上正处在绝顶之下，发光聚集异彩，确实是有原因的。
English: Hokoji Temple faces south, with its back against the cliff, and the tortuous Shibuya Valley in front, with the Peach Blossom Police as the right pass, and the southwest branch of the first remaining vein as the left guard. Although it is three kilometers away from the Chicken Foot Mountain, it is actually under the peak, and there is indeed a reason for the luminescence to gather.

古文：余初自曹溪华首门下瞰之，见其寺沉沉直坠壑底，以为光从窅阒中上腾，乃鼯栖虺毒蛇伏之窟。
现代文：我当初从曹溪寺、华首门往下看，看见放光寺沉沉地直落在壑谷底，以为光从深暗寂静之中往上升，是箫鼠栖息、毒蛇潜伏的洞穴。
English: When I first looked down from Caoxi Temple and Huashou Gate, I saw that the Fahuang Temple was sinking straight down to the bottom of the valley. I thought that the light was rising from the dark silence, and that it was a cave where moles lived and vipers lurked.

古文：及至而犹然在万壑盘拱之上，而上眺华首，则一削万仞，横拓甚阔，其间虽有翠纹烟缕，若绣痕然，疑无可披陟，孰知其上乃西自曹溪，东连铜佛殿，固自有凌云之路，横缘于华首之前也。
现代文：等走到这里，才知道寺仍然在万壑环抱之上，而往上眺望华首门，则是一刀削出的万初绝壁，横着拓开，十分宽阔，其间虽然有翠纹烟缕犷像绣上去的痕迹一样，怀疑不能穿越、攀登，谁知壁上面则西起曹溪寺，东连铜佛殿，本来自身就有凌云之路，横伸在华首门之前。
English: When I got here, I realized that the temple was still surrounded by thousands of reeds, and when I looked up at the Huashou Gate, it was a great cliff carved out by a knife. It was wide and very broad, and although there were traces of smoky reeds like embroidered marks, I doubted that I could cross it or climb it. Who knew that above the wall, there was Caoxi Temple to the west and the Bronze Buddha Hall to the east. Originally, there was the Lingyun Road itself, stretching in front of the Huashou Gate.

古文：然当身历华首时，止仰上崖之穹崇，不觉下壁之峻拔，至是而上下又合为一幅，其巍廓又何如也？
现代文：然而当亲身经过华首门时，只仰视到上面崖壁的弯隆，感觉不到下面崖壁的峻拔，到此地就上崖下崖又合为一幅，巍峨雄峻又有什么能比得上呢？
English: However, when passing through the Huashou Gate in person, you only look up to the curvature of the cliff wall above, and do not feel the steepness of the cliff wall below. At this point, the cliff and the cliff are merged into one, and what can compare to the towering grandeur?

古文：然则鸡山虽不乏层崖，如华首、罗汉、九重诸处，其境界固高，而雄杰之观，莫以逾此矣。
现代文：然而鸡足山虽然不缺乏层层崖壁，如华首门、罗汉壁、九重崖等处，境界固然崇高，但雄伟的大观，没有一处能超越这里。
English: However, although there is no lack of cliff walls on Jiu Foot Mountain, such as Huashoumen, Luohan Wall, Jiujie Cliff and so on, although the boundary is lofty, there is no place that can surpass this majestic view.

古文：寺前以大坊为门，门下石金刚立于寺院门前的天王像二座，镂刻甚异，狰狞之状，恍与烟云同活。
现代文：寺前以大坊为门，门下的两座石金刚，雕刻得十分奇特，狰狞的形状，仿佛与山水名胜一同生成。
English: In front of the temple, the main gate is called "Daibo." The two stone "King Kongs" under the gate are carved in a very peculiar way. The shape of the dragonflies seems to have been created together with the scenic spots.

古文：其内为前楼，楼之前有巨石峙于左，高丈五，而大如之；上擎下削，构亭于上，蒋宾川题曰： 四壁无然。 
现代文：其内是前楼，楼前有巨石峙立在左边，一丈五高，宽大处也相同；上面高耸下面陡削，上面建有亭子，宾川蒋知州题字为： 四壁无然。 
English: Inside it is the front building. In front of the building, there is a huge stone standing on the left. It is five meters high, and the width is the same. The top is high and the bottom is steep, and there is a pavilion on top. The inscription of Binchuan Jiangchizhou is: No walls.

古文：其北面正可仰瞻华首，而独为楼脊所障，四壁之中，独翳此绝胜一面，不为无憾。
现代文：北面正好能够仰视华首门，但唯独被楼顶所遮挡，四壁之中，独独遮了这最引人入胜的一面，不能不感到遗憾。
English: On the north side, it is possible to look up at the Huashu Gate, but it is only blocked by the roof. Among the four walls, this is the most fascinating side, and I cannot help but feel regret.

古文：寺建于嘉靖间，陕西僧圆惺所构。
现代文：放光寺创建于嘉靖年间，是陕西僧人圆惺建造的。
English: Founded in the Jiajing period, Hoko Temple was built by monks from Shaanxi Province.

古文：万历初，毁而复兴。
现代文：万历初年，寺毁后又重建。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the temple was destroyed and then rebuilt.

古文：李元阳有碑，范铜而镌之，然镌字不能无讹。
现代文：有李元阳写的碑，用铜模铸造镌刻，但镌刻的字有错。
English: There is a monument written by Li Yuanyang, engraved with a copper mold casting, but the engraved words are wrong.

古文：其后嗣归空更建毗卢阁，阁成而神庙赐藏。
现代文：其后嗣僧人归空另外修建毗卢阁，阁修成后神宗皇帝赐给经藏。
English: His heirs, the monks, returned to Ku separately to build the Vihlu Pavilion. After the pavilion was completed, Emperor Shenzong gave it to Jingzang.

古文：余录铜碑，殿中甚暗，而腹亦馁。
现代文：我录铜碑，殿中光线很暗，而肚子也饿了。
English: I record the bronze monument, the light in the hall is very dim, and my stomach is hungry.

古文：时主僧俱出，止一小沙弥在，余畀之青蚨钱，乃爇竹为炬，煮蔬为供。
现代文：这时主事的僧人都出去了，只有一个小和尚在，我给他铜钱，才用竹子烧火，煮菜给我吃。
English: At this time, the monks in charge had all gone out, and only a small monk was there. I gave him a copper coin, and he used bamboo to light a fire and cook vegetables for me to eat.

古文：既饭，东遵大道一里，逾垂支之脊又一里余，盘坠峡之上，得分岐焉。
现代文：饭后，往东沿大路走一里，翻越垂下来支脉的山脊又一里多，盘绕往下坠的峡谷之上，到了岔路。
English: After dinner, I walked east along the main road for a mile, climbed over the ridge of the hanging branches for another mile and more, wound around the falling canyon, and arrived at the fork.

古文：一过峡直东者，为圣峰路；一蹑岭北上者，为会灯路，始为登顶正道。
现代文：一条路越过峡谷直东，是去圣峰寺的路；一条路登岭往北上，是去会灯寺的路，这才是登顶的正道。
English: One road crosses the canyon straight east, is the road to the Sacred Peak Temple; one road climbs the ridge to the north, is the road to the Lantern Temple, which is the right way to the top.

古文：余乃北蹑上岭，数曲而至会灯寺。
现代文：我于是往北登上岭，多次转弯后到会灯寺。
English: So I headed north up the ridge, and after several turns, I arrived at Hoenwangsa Temple.

古文：寺南向，昔为廓然师静室，今其嗣创为寺。
现代文：寺向南，从前是廓然法师的静室，如今其继承衣钵的弟子创建为寺。
English: The south side of the temple was once the seclusion room of a hardened mage, but has now been turned into a temple by the disciple who inherited his mantle.

古文：罗为近溪先生汝芳，李为见罗先生材，皆江西人，同为司道游此。又上有亭，为仰高亭，中有碑，为万历间按君周懋相所立，纪登山及景仰二先生意。
现代文：从寺西又转朝北上，又转了数道弯，一里多就经过迎叶寺。寺向东，这是古时的迎叶殿。从寺前往北进入峡谷，峡谷西面起自绝顶，东面起自罗汉壁，两道山崖相对夹成的，峡谷中垂着石阶路。稍稍上去有坊，是罗、李二先生游览之处。又上去有亭，是仰高亭，亭中有碑，是万历年间巡按周愚相所立，纪念登山和景仰罗、李二先生之意。
English: From the west of the temple, it turned northward, and after several turns, it passed Yingye Temple for more than a kilometer. To the east of the temple, this is the ancient Yingye Hall. From the temple to the north, it entered the canyon. The canyon starts from the peak in the west, from the Rohan Wall in the east, and the two cliffs are sandwiched against each other. There is a stone stairway in the canyon. A little further up, there is a temple, which is where Mr. Luo and Mr. Li visited. There is also a pavilion, which is the Yanggao Pavilion. There is a monument in the pavilion

古文：周亦江西人也。
现代文：周巡按也是江西省人。
English: Zhou Junyan is also from Jiangxi Province.

古文：余前过此，见亭中颓，不及录其文而去，故此来先录之。
现代文：我前此经过这里，见亭中衰落，来不及录其碑文就离去了，所以这次来首先录碑文。
English: I have been here before, saw the decline of the pavilion, and left before I could record its inscription, so this time I came to record the inscription first.

古文：风撼两崖间，寒凛倍于他处，文长字冗，手屡为风所僵。
现代文：风在两面山崖之间摇撼，比其它地方加倍的寒冷，碑文字冗长，手多次被寒风冻僵。
English: The wind shakes between the cliffs on both sides, the cold is twice as cold as in other places, the inscriptions are long, and hands have been frozen by the cold wind many times.

古文：录竟，日色西倾。
现代文：录完时，太阳西斜。
English: At the end of the recording, the sun was setting.

古文：望其上兜率庵，即前所从下，而其东横缘之路出罗汉壁者，前又曾抵此而返，顶头未了之事，未可以余晷尽也。
现代文：望亭上面的兜率庵，就是以前顺着下来之处，而庵东横伸着出到罗汉壁的路，以前也曾走到这里而返，从此路登上罗汉壁的未了之事，这次也未能在剩余的时间实现。
English: The path leading to the hermitage above the watchtower used to go downhill, while the path leading to the Rohan Wall stretched out to the east of the hermitage. In the past, people also walked here and back, and the unfinished business of climbing the Rohan Wall from this path could not be accomplished in the remaining time.

古文：乃返出下，仍过迦叶寺前，见有岐东下壑中，其壑底一庵在圣峰北者，必补处庵也，乃取道峡中随壑下，盖缘脊下经会灯者为正道，随壑东下趋补处者为间道。
现代文：于是返回往下走，仍然经过迎叶寺前，看见有岔路往东下到壑谷中，壑谷底有一座庵在圣峰寺北边，肯定是补处庵，于是取道峡谷中顺壑谷而下，原来沿山脊而下，经过会灯寺的是正路，顺壑谷而下，到补处庵的是小路。
English: So I went back down, still passing in front of Yingye Temple, and saw that there was a winding road going east to the middle of the valley. At the bottom of the valley, there was a hermitage on the north side of the Sacred Peak Temple, which must be the Supplementary Hermitage. So I took the road in the canyon and went down the valley. Originally, I went down along the ridge. The main road passed through the Huiguang Temple, and the small road went down the valley to the Supplementary Hermitage.

古文：下二里，过补处庵。
现代文：下二里，经过补处庵。
English: Down two miles, past the restroom.

古文：亦稍荒落，恐日暮不入。
现代文：周围也渐渐荒凉冷落，担心太阳落山而没有进去。
English: The surroundings also gradually became desolate and cold, and they were worried that the sun would set before they could go inside.

古文：由其前渡峡涧南，遂上坡，过圣峰寺。
现代文：从庵前穿越峡涧往南，于是上坡，经过圣峰寺。
English: From the front of the hermitage, cross the gorge to the south, and then go uphill, passing the St. Peak Temple.

古文：寺东向，前有大坊。
现代文：寺向东，前面有大坊。
English: The temple faces east, with the main hall in front.

古文：由坊外东行里余，冈脊甚狭，南北俱深坑逼之。
现代文：从坊外往东行一里多，冈脊很狭窄，南北两面都有深坑逼近。
English: From the outside of the village, it is more than a mile to the east, the ridge is very narrow, and there are deep pits approaching from the north and south.

古文：度脊又东里余，有寺新构，当坡之中垂，是为白云寺。
现代文：越过冈脊又往东走一里多，有座新建的寺，位于坡的正中，这是白云寺。
English: After crossing the ridge and walking east for more than a mile, there is a newly built temple, located in the middle of the slope, which is Baiyun Temple.

古文：余欲穷此支尽处，遂东下行南涧之上，二里，则慧林庵踞坡尽处。
现代文：我想穷究此支脉的尽头处，就向东往下在南边沟涧之上走，二里，则慧林庵坐落在山坡尽头处。
English: I wanted to get to the bottom of this branch, so I went down to the east on the south side of the ravine. Two miles later, Huilin An was located at the end of the hillside.

古文：缘庵前转下北涧，渡之，始陟中支行，北涧与南涧乃合于路南，其东即大觉蔬圃矣。
现代文：沿庵前转下北边的沟涧，渡过沟涧，才登上中支行走，北涧和南涧于是在路南会合，东边就是大觉寺的菜园。
English: Along the front of the hermitage, turn down the gully on the north side, cross the gully, and then walk up the middle branch. The north branch and the south branch then meet on the south side of the road. To the east is the vegetable garden of Daikokuji Temple.

古文：东半里，过蔬圃北，又东一里，过息阴轩南，又东一里，过瀑布北，遂去中支，北涉西竺寺涧，而行中东二支盘壑中矣。
现代文：往东半里，经过菜园北面，又往东一里，经过息阴轩南面，又往东一里，经过瀑布北面，于是离开中支，往北越过西竺寺涧，然后在中、东二支间盘绕沟壑行走。
English: Half a mile to the east, past the vegetable garden to the north, then one mile to the east, past the south of Xiyin Xuan, then one mile to the east, past the north of the waterfall, then leave the middle branch, go north over the Xidi gully, and then walk around the gully between the middle and east branches.

古文：又二里，薄暮，入悉檀寺。
现代文：又二里，将近傍晚，进入悉檀寺。
English: Another two miles, in the late afternoon, into Siddanji.

