古文：冯子曰：成大事者，争百年，不争一息。
现代文：原文冯梦龙说： 成大事的人争的是百年，不是片刻。
English: Feng Menglong said: People who achieve great things compete for a hundred years, not a moment.

古文：然而一息固百年之始也。
现代文：然而一时的成败，却恰好是千秋成败的开始。
English: However, a momentary success or failure is just the beginning of a thousand years of success or failure.

古文：夫事变之会，如火如风。
现代文：尤其是在事物激变的时候，就会像大火漫天一样瞬间造成无法弥补的损失。
English: Especially when things are in a state of upheaval, it can cause irreparable damage in an instant, like a raging fire.

古文：愚者犯焉，稍觉，则去而违之，贺不害斯已也。
现代文：愚昧的人往往过不了当前的考验，如果这样，哪还有千秋大业的成败可言呢？真正的智者，能马上远离灾祸，并将那漫天大火消弭。
English: Foolish people often can't pass the current test, if so, where is the success or failure of the great cause? A true wise man can immediately stay away from the disaster and extinguish the sky-wide fire.

古文：今有道于此，能返风而灭火，则虽拔木燎原，适足以试其伎而不惊。尝试譬之足力，一里之程，必有先至，所争逾刻耳。
现代文：因此，这样的激变，刚好提供给了智者显示自己才智的机会。以一里的短距离跑步为例，先到后到虽然相差的时间往往很短；但是十里百里的长路累积下来，时间差距就会很大。
English: Therefore, such a drastic change just provides an opportunity for the wise to show their wisdom. Taking a one-mile short-distance running as an example, although the time difference between the first and the last is often very short, the time difference will be very large when the ten-hundred-mile long way is accumulated.

古文：累之而十里百里，则其为刻弥多矣；又况乎智之迟疾，相去不啻千万里者乎!军志有之： 兵闻拙速，未闻巧之久。 
现代文：更何况智慧的人和愚蠢的人的迟速差别，本来就要远远大于人跑步速度的差异。 兵法中说： 只听说用兵打仗时，即便方法笨拙也要速战速决的，没有听说求巧而长久作战的。 
English: What is more, the difference between the running speed of a wise man and a stupid man is far greater than the difference between the running speed of a man.In the Art of War, it is said: It is only said that when soldiers fight, even if the method is clumsy, they should fight quickly and quickly, but it is not said that they should seek skill and fight for a long time.

古文：夫速而无巧者，必久而愈拙者也。
现代文：迅捷而不巧妙的，时间长了肯定更笨拙。
English: What is swift and not skillful becomes more clumsy with time.

古文：今有径尺之樽，置诸通衢，先至者得醉，继至者得尝，最后至则干唇而返矣。
现代文：就像把一壶美酒摆在大街之上，先到的人能畅饮大醉，其次到的人也能够喝几杯，最后到的人就只能是口干舌燥地败兴而返了。
English: It's like placing a pot of wine on the street. The first person to arrive can get drunk, the second can have a few drinks, and the last person to arrive can only return with a dry mouth.

古文：叶叶而摘之，穷日不能髡一树；秋风下霜，一夕零落：此言造化之捷也。
现代文：人力摘树叶，一棵树一天也摘不完，而秋风起霜雪降，树叶一夜之间就全部掉落，天地造化的速捷就是这样。
English: A tree can't be harvested in a single day, but when the autumn wind brings frost and snow, all the leaves will fall overnight. This is how quickly the heavens and earth were created.

古文：人若是其捷也，其灵万变，而不穷于应卒，此唯敏悟者庶几焉。
现代文：人们如果能够掌握天地造化的意境，就能在事物激变的当下灵活应变，而不会在仓促之间束手无策，这便只有真正敏悟智慧的人才可能做到吧！
English: If people can grasp the artistic conception of the creation of heaven and earth, they will be able to flexibly adapt to the moment of things' drastic change, and will not be helpless in the rush. This is only possible for those who are truly perceptive and wise!

古文：呜呼!事变之不能停而俟我也审矣，天下亦乌有智而不捷，不捷而智者哉!
现代文：唉，激变的事物是不会停下来等人想办法去应对它的，这是再明白不过的道理。因此，天底下哪有智慧而不敏捷，敏捷而无智慧这回事呢？
English: Alas, it is abundantly clear that things in upheaval do not wait for someone to come up with a way to deal with them. Therefore, is there such a thing as wisdom without agility, or agility without wisdom?

