古文：十有三年春，公至自晋。
现代文：十三年春季，襄公从晋国回到鲁国。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Prince Xiang returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：夏，取邿。
现代文：夏季，占取邿国。
English: In the summer, they occupy the country.

古文：秋九月庚辰，楚子审卒。
现代文：秋季九月庚辰日，楚共王去世。
English: In the autumn, on the day of Geng Chen in September, the King of Chu died.

古文：冬，城防。
现代文：冬季，在防地筑城。
English: In winter, the city is built on the defensive.

古文：十三年春，公至自晋，孟献子书劳于庙，礼也。
现代文：十三年春季，鲁襄公从晋国回来，孟献子在宗庙里记载功勋，这是合于礼的。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Prince Lu Xiang returned from Jin Province, and Meng Xianzi recorded his exploits in the ancestral temple, which was proper.

古文：夏，邿乱，分为三。
现代文：夏季，邿国发生动乱，一分为三。
English: In the summer, there was turmoil in Shan State, which was divided into three parts.

古文：师救邿，遂取之。
现代文：出兵救援邿国，就乘机占取了它。
English: Troops were dispatched to rescue the country, and they took advantage of the opportunity to occupy it.

古文：凡书 取 ，言易也。
现代文：凡是《春秋》记载说 取 ，就是说事情很容易。
English: Whenever the "Spring and Autumn" records say "take," it means that things are easy.

古文：用大师焉曰 灭 。
现代文：使用了大军叫做 灭 。
English: Using a large army is called annihilation.

古文：弗地曰 入 。
现代文：虽得了国家，并不占有它的土地叫做 入 。
English: Although it has gained a country, the land it does not occupy is called the "entrance."

古文：荀罃、士鲂卒。
现代文：荀罃、士鲂死了。
English: The cormorant and the heron are dead.

古文：晋侯蒐于绵上以治兵，使士匄将中军，辞曰： 伯游长。
现代文：晋悼公在绵上打猎并训练军队。派遣士匄率领中军，他辞谢说： 荀偃比我强。
English: Jin Yue Gong hunted and trained his troops on a shoestring. When he sent Shifu to lead the Chinese army, he declined, saying, "Shifu is better than me."

古文：昔臣习于知伯，是以佐之，非能贤也。
现代文：过去下臣熟悉知伯，因此辅佐他，而不是由于我的贤能啊。
English: In the past, subordinates were familiar with Zhi Bo, so they assisted him, not because of my ability.

古文：请从伯游。 
现代文：请派遣荀偃。 
English: Please send an ambulance.

古文：荀偃将中军，士匄佐之。
现代文：荀偃率领中军，士匄作为辅佐。
English: Zou led the Chinese army, and Shi Zou acted as an assistant.

古文：使韩起将上军，辞以赵武。
现代文：派遣韩起率领上军，他辞让给赵武。
English: Han Qi was sent to lead the army, but he yielded to Zhao Wu.

古文：又使栾黡，辞曰： 臣不如韩起。
现代文：又派遣栾黡，他辞谢说： 下臣不如韩起。
English: When he was sent again, he declined, saying, "A vassal is not as good as a Korean."

古文：韩起愿上赵武，君其听之！ 
现代文：韩起愿意让赵武在上位，君王还是听从他的意见。 
English: Han Qi was willing to let Zhao Wu ascend the throne, but the king still followed his advice.

古文：使赵武将上军，韩起佐之。
现代文：就派遣赵武率领上军，韩起作为辅佐。
English: He dispatched Zhao Wu to lead the army, with Han Qi as his assistant.

古文：栾黡将下军，魏绛佐之。
现代文：栾黡率领下军，魏绛作为辅佐。
English: Yao led the army, and Wei Yao acted as an assistant.

古文：新军无帅，晋侯难其人，使其什吏，率其卒乘官属，以从于下军，礼也。
现代文：新军没有统帅，晋悼公对这个人选感到困难，让新军的十个官吏率领步兵、骑兵和所属官员，附在下军里，这是合于礼的。
English: The new army did not have a commander-in-chief, and the prince of Jin and Wei found it difficult to choose one. It was only proper that the ten officials of the new army, led by infantry, cavalry and their subordinate officials, should be attached to the lower army.

古文：晋国之民，是以大和。诸侯遂睦。
现代文：晋国的百姓因此大大和顺，诸侯也就和睦。
English: As a result, the people of Jin were greatly reconciled, and the lords were also reconciled.

古文：君子曰： 让，礼之主也。
现代文：君子说： 谦让，是礼的主体。
English: The gentleman said, "Humble concession is the main body of etiquette.

古文：范宣子让，其下皆让。
现代文：士匄谦让，他的下属都谦让。
English: His subordinates are all humble.

古文：栾黡为汰，弗敢违也。
现代文：栾黡即使专横，也不敢违背。
English: Even if you are bossy, don't dare to disobey.

古文：晋国以平，数世赖之。刑善也夫！
现代文：晋国因此而团结，几世都受到利益，这是由于取法于善的缘故啊！
English: As a result, Jin Province was united and benefited for several generations. This was due to the adoption of the law for the sake of good!

古文：一人刑善，百姓休和，可不务乎？
现代文：一个人取法于善，各族各姓都美好协调，难道可以不尽力于这一点吗？
English: One person takes the method to the good, all ethnic groups and surnames are well coordinated, can we not try our best to do this?

古文：《书》曰： 一人有庆，兆民赖之，其宁惟永。 其是之谓乎？
现代文：《书》说， 一个人好善，亿万人有利，国家的安宁可以久长 ，说的就是这个吧！
English: "The Book" says, one person is good, hundreds of millions of people are beneficial, and the country's tranquility can last for a long time, that's what it says!

古文：周之兴也，其《诗》曰： 仪刑文王，万邦作孚。 
现代文：周朝兴起的时候，反映它的诗说， 效法文王，万邦信任 ，说的是取法于善。
English: When the Zhou Dynasty arose, the poem that reflected it said, "Follow the example of the King of France, trusted by all nations," saying that it was taking the law to be good.

古文：言刑善也。及其衰也，其《诗》曰： 大夫不均，我从事独贤。 言不让也。
现代文：等到它衰弱的时候，反映它的诗说， 大夫不公平，我所作的独最多 ，说的是不谦让。
English: When it is weak, the poem that reflects it says, the doctor is not fair, I have done the most alone, it is immodest.

古文：世之治也，君子尚能而让其下，小人农力以事其上，是以上下有礼，而谗慝黜远，由不争也。谓之懿德。
现代文：当时世太平的时候，君子崇尚贤能而对下属谦让，小人努力以事奉他的上司，因此上下有礼而奸邪废黜远离，这是由于不争夺的缘故，这叫做美德。
English: When the world was at peace, the gentleman advocated virtue and was humble to his subordinates, the villain tried to serve his superiors, so they were polite and stayed away from evil. This was due to non-competition, which is called virtue.

古文：及其乱也，君子称其功以加小人，小人伐其技以冯君子，是以上下无礼，乱虐并生，由争善也。
现代文：到了天下动乱的时候，君子夸耀他的功劳以凌驾于小人之上，小人夸耀他的技能以凌驾于君子之上，因此上下无礼，动乱和残暴一起发生，这是由于争相自以为是。
English: When the world is in turmoil, the gentleman boasts of his merits over the ruffian, and the ruffian boasts of his skills over the gentleman, so that rudeness and rudeness, turmoil and brutality occur together, this is due to competing self-righteousness.

古文：谓之昏德。
现代文：这叫做昏德。
English: It's called delusion.

古文：国家之敝，恒必由之。 
现代文：国家的败坏，常常是由于这样而来的。 
English: This is often the cause of a country's decline.

古文：楚子疾，告大夫曰： 不穀不德，少主社稷，生十年而丧先君，未及习师保之教训，而应受多福。是以不德，而亡师于鄢，以辱社稷，为大夫忧，其弘多矣。
现代文：楚共王生病，告诉大夫说： 寡人没有德行，年幼的时候就做了一国之主。生下来十年而先君去世，没有来得及学习师保的教训而承受了许多福禄，因此缺乏德行而在鄢陵丧失了军队，让国家蒙受耻辱，让大夫担心，这都够严重的了。
English: When the King of Chu fell ill, he told the doctor: "Some people have no virtue. When he was young, he became the ruler of a country. When he was born ten years ago, his father died. He did not have time to learn the lessons of his tutor and received many blessings. As a result, he lacked virtue and lost the army in Fuling. This brought shame to the country and worried the doctor. This was serious enough.

古文：若以大夫之灵，获保首领以殁于地，唯是春秋窀穸之事，所以从先君于祢庙者，请为 灵 若 厉 。大夫择焉！ 
现代文：如果由于大夫的福气，我得以保全首领而善终，在这些祭祀安葬的事情上，得以在祢庙中追随先君，只能请求谥做 灵 或者 厉 了，请大夫选择吧。 
English: If, thanks to the doctor's good fortune, I am able to preserve my head and die well, and in these matters of sacrifice and burial, I am able to follow my ancestor in Your temple, I can only ask you to be a spirit or a spirit, please ask the doctor to choose.

古文：莫对。
现代文：没有人回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：及五命乃许。
现代文：等到五次命令以后才答应了。
English: It took him five orders before he agreed.

古文：秋，楚共王卒。
现代文：秋季，楚共王去世。
English: In the autumn, the King of Chu died.

古文：子囊谋谥。
现代文：子囊和大家商量谥号。
English: Let's discuss the number of children.

古文：大夫曰： 君有命矣。 
现代文：大夫说： 国君已经有过命令了。 
English: The doctor said: The sovereign has already given the order.

古文：子囊曰： 君命以共，若之何毁之？
现代文：子囊说： 国君是用 恭 来命令的，怎么能不用这个字呢？
English: Zizuku said, "The Emperor uses 恭 to give orders, so how can you not use this character?"

古文：赫赫楚国，而君临之，抚有蛮夷，奄征南海，以属诸夏，而知其过，可不谓共乎？请谥之 共 。 
现代文：声威赫赫的楚国，国君在上边统治，安抚着蛮夷，大征南海，让他们从属于中原诸国，而国君又知道自己的过错，可以不说是恭吗？请谥做 共 。 
English: Chu, the most powerful state, the sovereign reigns above, pacifying the barbarians, conquering the South China Sea, making them subordinate to the Central Plains countries, and the sovereign knows his fault, can it be said to be loyal? Please be together.

古文：大夫从之。
现代文：大夫们都听从了他的意见。
English: The doctors listen to him.

古文：吴侵楚，养由基奔命，子庚以师继之。
现代文：吴国侵袭楚国，养由基迅速奔向敌人，子庚领兵跟着去。
English: The State of Wu invaded the State of Chu. Yaoyuki quickly ran to the enemy, and Zi Geng led the soldiers to follow.

古文：养叔曰： 吴乘我丧，谓我不能师也，必易我而不戒。
现代文：养由基说： 吴国乘我国有丧事，认为我们是不能出兵的，必然轻视我们而不存戒备之心。
English: Yaoyuki said, "Wu Guo Rong took advantage of our country's tragedy and thought that we could not send troops. He must have despised us and did not have a wary heart.

古文：子为三覆以待我，我请诱之。 
现代文：您设置三处伏兵来等我，我去引诱他们。 
English: You set up three ambushes to wait for me. I'll lure them in.

古文：子庚从之。
现代文：子庚听从了。
English: Zi Geng obeyed.

古文：战于庸浦，大败吴师，获公子党。
现代文：在庸浦作战，大败吴军，俘虏了公子党。
English: He fought in Yongpu, defeated the Wu army, and captured the noble party.

古文：君子以吴为不吊。《诗》曰： 不吊昊天，乱靡有定。 
现代文：君子认为吴国不善，《诗》说： 上天认为你不善，国家祸乱就不能安定。 
English: The nobles thought that the state of Wu was not good, and the poem said: If heaven thinks that you are not good, the national calamity will not be stable.

古文：冬，城防，书事时也。
现代文：冬季，在防地筑城。《春秋》所以记载这件事，这是由于合于时令。
English: In winter, the city was built in the fortified area. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it was in accordance with the season.

古文：于是将早城，臧武仲请俟毕农事，礼也。
现代文：当时准备早些时候筑城，臧武仲请求等待农活完了以后再动工，这是合于礼的。
English: At that time, they were preparing to build the city earlier, and Zou Wuzhong requested to wait until the agricultural work was completed before starting construction, which was proper.

古文：郑良霄、大宰石犹在楚。
现代文：郑国的良霄、太宰石毚还在楚国。
English: Liangxiao of Zheng and Dazai Shijie are still in Chu.

古文：石毚言于子囊曰： 先王卜征五年，而岁习其祥，祥习则行。
现代文：石毚对子囊说： 先王为了征伐，要连续占卜五年，每年重复吉兆，就出兵。
English: Shi Yan said to Zizang: In order to conquer, the former king must continuously divination for five years, repeat the auspicious signs every year, and then send troops.

古文：不习则增，修德而改卜。
现代文：如果有一年卜征不吉利，那就更加努力于修养道德而重新占卜。
English: If there is an unlucky year for divination, then more efforts should be made to cultivate morality and re-divine.

古文：今楚实不竞，行人何罪？
现代文：现在楚国实在不能自强，行人有什么罪过？
English: Now the state of Chu really can't stand up for itself. What are pedestrians guilty of?

古文：止郑一卿，以除其偪，使睦而疾楚，以固于晋，焉用之？
现代文：留下郑国一个卿，这就去掉了对郑国君臣的威逼，让他们上下和睦而怨恨楚国，因而坚决顺从晋国，这对楚国有什么好处？
English: Leaving Zheng Guo as a lord, this removed the intimidation of Zheng Guo's princes and ministers, let them be harmonious and resent Chu Guo, and thus firmly obey Jin Guo, what is the benefit of this to Chu Guo?

古文：使归而废其使，怨其君以疾其大夫，而相牵引也，不犹愈乎？ 
现代文：让他回去，使他没有完成出使任务，他会埋怨国君和怀恨大夫，因而互相牵制，这不是好一些吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be better to let him go back, so that he doesn't complete his mission, and he complains about the sovereign and resents the doctor, thus holding each other back?

古文：楚人归之。
现代文：于是楚国人就把良霄放了回去。
English: As a result, the people of Chu put the good earth back.

