古文：八年春，晋侯使韩穿来言汶阳之田，归之于齐。
现代文：八年春季，晋侯派遣韩穿来鲁国谈到关于汶阳土田的事，要把汶阳之田归还给齐国。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, King Jinjing sent Han across the country to Lu to talk about the matter of Wenyang soil, and to return the soil of Wenyang to Qi.

古文：晋栾书帅师侵蔡。
现代文：晋国的栾书率领军队攻打蔡国。
English: Jin's Zishu led an army to attack Cai.

古文：公孙婴齐如莒。
现代文：公孙婴齐去莒国。
English: Grandchildren and great-grandchildren go to Shandong.

古文：宋公使华元来聘。
现代文：宋公派遣华元来鲁国聘问。
English: Emperor Song dispatched Hua Yuan to Lu to ask questions.

古文：夏，宋公使公孙寿来纳币。
现代文：夏季，宋公派遣公孙寿来代宋共公订婚
English: In the summer, Song Gong dispatched Gongsun Shou to get engaged to the future Song Gongguan

古文：晋杀其大夫赵同、赵括。
现代文：晋国杀掉自己的大夫赵同、赵括。
English: Jin killed his own doctors Zhao Tong and Zhao Kuang.

古文：秋七月，天子使召伯来赐公命。
现代文：秋季七月，周卿士召桓公前来向鲁成公颁赐袭爵的命令。
English: In the autumn of July, Zhou's nobles summoned Lord Huan to come and issue an order to bestow a peerage on Lu Chenggong.

古文：冬十月癸卯，杞叔姬卒。
现代文：冬季十月葵卯日，杞国的叔姬去世。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of Aoi, the uncle of the country died.

古文：晋侯使士燮来聘。
现代文：晋侯派遣士燮前来聘问。
English: The prince of Jin dispatched a scholar to come and ask questions.

古文：叔孙侨如会晋士燮、齐人、邾人伐郯。
现代文：叔孙侨与晋国的士燮、齐国人、邾国人一起攻打郯国。
English: The uncles and grandsons of the overseas Chinese fought together with the Shigu, Qi and Qin people of Jin Province against Qin.

古文：卫人来媵。
现代文：卫国人送女子前来鲁国作为共姬的陪嫁。
English: The defenders of the country sent a woman to come to Russia as a common-law wife.

古文：八年春，晋侯使韩穿来言汶阳之田，归之于齐。
现代文：八年春季，晋景公派遣韩穿来鲁国谈到关于汶阳土田的事，要把汶阳之田归还给齐国。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, King Jinjing sent Han across the country to Lu to talk about the matter of Wenyang soil, and to return the soil of Wenyang to Qi.

古文：季文子饯之，私焉，曰： 大国制义以为盟主，是以诸侯怀德畏讨，无有贰心。
现代文：季文子设酒给他饯行，和他私下交谈，说： 大国处理事务合理适宜，凭这个作为盟主，因此诸侯怀念德行而害怕讨伐，没有二心。
English: Ji Wenzi gave him wine to drink and talked with him in private, saying: Great countries handle affairs reasonably and appropriately, with this as the commander-in-chief, so princes are nostalgic for virtue and afraid of crusade, there is no second thoughts.

古文：谓汶阳之田，敝邑之旧也，而用师于齐，使归诸敝邑。
现代文：说到汶阳的土田，那原是敝邑所有，后来对齐国用兵，晋国命令齐国把它还给敝邑。
English: When it comes to the soil of Bunyang, it was originally owned by Yeup, and later used by Qi. Jin ordered Qi to return it to Yeup.

古文：今有二命曰： 归诸齐。 
现代文：现在又有不同的命令，说 归还给齐国 。
English: Now there are different orders, saying "return to Qi."

古文：信以行义，义以成命，小国所望而怀也。
现代文：信用用来推行道义，道义用来完成命令，这是小国所盼望而怀念的。
English: Trust is used to enforce morality, and morality is used to carry out orders, which is what small countries hope for and miss.

古文：信不可知，义无所立，四方诸侯，其谁不解体？
现代文：信用不能得知，道义无所树立，四方的诸侯，谁能不涣散瓦解？
English: Credibility cannot be ascertained, morality cannot be established, and the lords of the four directions cannot but disintegrate and disintegrate.

古文：《诗》曰： 女也不爽，士贰其行。
现代文：《诗》说： 女子毫无过失，男人却有过错。
English: The poem says: A woman is blameless, but a man is at fault.

古文：士也罔极，二三其德。 
现代文：男人没有标准，他的行为前后不一。 
English: A man has no standards, his behavior is inconsistent.

古文：七年之中，一与一夺，二三孰甚焉！
现代文：七年当中，忽而给予忽而夺走，前后不一还有比这更甚的吗？
English: Is there anything worse than this, that in seven years we should give and take away, back and forth, back and forth?

古文：士之二三，犹丧妃耦，而况霸主？
现代文：一个男人前后不一，尚且丧失配偶，何况是霸主？
English: How can a man be so inconsistent and yet lose his spouse, not to mention his overlord?

古文：霸主将德是以，而二三之，其何以长有诸侯乎？
现代文：霸主应该用德，但却前后不一，他怎么能长久得到诸侯的拥护呢？
English: The overlord should use virtue, but it is inconsistent, how can he get the support of the princes for a long time?

古文：《诗》曰： 犹之未远，是用大简。 
现代文：《诗》说： 谋略缺乏远见，因此极力劝谏。 
English: "Poetry" said: The strategy lacks foresight, so it is strongly recommended.

古文：行父惧晋之不远犹而失诸侯也，是以敢私言之。 
现代文：行父害怕晋国不能深谋远虑而失去诸侯，因此敢于和您作私下的交谈。 
English: My father-in-law is afraid that if Jin can't think ahead, it will lose its princes, so he dares to have a private conversation with you.

古文：晋栾书侵蔡，遂侵楚，获申骊。
现代文：晋国栾书率军侵袭蔡国，接着又侵袭楚国，俘虏了申骊。
English: Jin Shushi led the army to invade Cai Province, and then invaded Chu Province, capturing Shen Rong.

古文：楚师之还也，晋侵沈，获沈子揖，初从知、范、韩也。
现代文：楚军回去的时候，晋军侵袭沈国，俘虏了沈子揖初，这是听从了知庄子、范文子、韩献子等人的意见。
English: When the Chu army returned, the Jin army invaded Sheng Province and captured Shen Zi (沈子初), which was in accordance with the opinions of Zhizhuang Zi, Fan Wen Zi, Han Xian Zi and others.

古文：君子曰： 从善如流，宜哉！
现代文：君子说： 听从好主意好像流水一样，这是多么恰当啊！
English: The gentleman said, "How appropriate it is to listen to a good idea as if it were flowing water!"

古文：《诗》曰： 恺悌君子，遐不作人。 
现代文：《诗》说： 恭敬随和的君子，为什么不起用人材？ 
English: "Poetry" said: Respecting the easy-going gentleman, why not use human resources?

古文：求善也夫！
现代文：这就是求取善人啊！
English: This is how to woo a good man!

古文：作人斯有功绩矣。 
现代文：起用人材，这就有功绩了。 
English: If you employ people, you get credit.

古文：是行也，郑伯将会晋师，门于许东门，大获焉。
现代文：这次行动，郑成公准备会合晋军，经过许国，攻打许国的东门，俘获很多。
English: In this operation, Zheng Chenggong was preparing to meet the Jin army, passing through Xu Province, attacking the east gate of Xu Province, and captured a lot.

古文：声伯如莒，逆也。
现代文：声伯去到莒国，这是去迎接妻子。
English: The voice actor went to Shandong Province to meet his wife.

古文：宋华元来聘，聘共姬也。
现代文：宋国华元来鲁国聘问，为宋共公聘共姬为夫人。
English: Song Guohua originally came to Lu Guohua to ask for a wife, and the Song Communist Party publicly invited her to be his wife.

古文：夏，宋公使公孙寿来纳币，礼也。
现代文：夏季，宋共公派公孙寿前来代宋共公订婚，这是合于礼的。
English: In the summer, Sun Shou, a member of the Song Dynasty Communist Party, came to be engaged on behalf of the Song Dynasty Communist Party, which was proper.

古文：晋赵庄姬为赵婴之亡故，谮之于晋侯曰： 原、屏将为乱。 
现代文：晋国的赵庄姬为了赵婴逃亡的缘故，向晋景公诬陷说： 原、屏将要作乱。
English: Zhao Zhuangji of Jin, for the sake of Zhao Ying's escape, slandered Jin Jing Gong, saying: Hara and Ping are going to make trouble.

古文：栾、郤为征。
现代文：栾氏、郤氏可作证。 
English: Mr. Zou, Mr. Zou can testify.

古文：六月，晋讨赵同、赵括。
现代文：六月，晋国讨伐赵同、赵括。
English: In June, Zhaotong and Zhao Kuo fought in Jin Province.

古文：武从姬氏畜于公宫。
现代文：赵武跟随庄姬寄住在晋景公宫里。
English: Zhao Wu stayed with Zhuang Ji in the palace of Jin Jing.

古文：以其田与祁奚。
现代文：晋景公把赵氏的土田赐给祁奚。
English: Lord Jinjing bestowed the Zhao family's farmland to Shao.

古文：韩厥言于晋侯曰： 成季之勋，宣孟之忠，而无后，为善者其惧矣。
现代文：韩厥对晋景公说： 成季的功勋，宣孟的忠诚，但他们却没有后代来继承，做好事的人就要害怕了。
English: Han Jue said to Jin Jing Gong: Cheng Ji's merits, Xuan Meng's loyalty, but they have no descendants to inherit, people who do good things should be afraid.

古文：三代之令王，皆数百年保天之禄。
现代文：三代的贤明君王，都能够几百年保持上天的禄位。
English: Three generations of wise monarchs have been able to maintain the heavenly position for hundreds of years.

古文：夫岂无辟王，赖前哲以免也。
现代文：难道就没有邪恶的君王？这是靠着他祖先的贤明才得以免于亡国。
English: Wasn't there an evil king? It was only thanks to the wisdom of his ancestors that he was able to save his country from ruin.

古文：《周书》曰： 不敢侮鳏寡。 
现代文：《周书》说： 不敢欺侮鳏夫寡妇 ，就是用这样的做法来发扬道德。 
English: "Weekly Shoshu" said: Don't dare to bully widows and widowers, this is how to promote morality.

古文：所以明德也。 
现代文：于是就立赵武为赵氏的继承人，归还了赵氏的土田。
English: Therefore, he appointed Zhao Wu as the heir of the Zhao clan and returned the land of the Zhao clan.

古文：及立武而反其田焉。秋，召桓公来赐公命。
现代文：秋季，周卿士召桓公前来向鲁成公颁赐袭爵的命令。
English: In the autumn, Zhou's courtiers summoned Lord Kuan to come and issue an order to bestow a peerage on Lu Chenggong.

古文：晋侯使申公巫臣如吴。
现代文：晋景公派遣申公巫臣去吴国，向莒国借路。
English: Lord Jinjing sent Shengong, a wizard, to Wu to borrow a route from Shao.

古文：假道于莒，与渠丘公立于池上，曰： 城已恶！ 
现代文：巫臣和渠丘公站在护城河上，说： 城太坏了。 
English: The priest and the duke stood on the moat and said, "The city is so bad.

古文：莒子曰： 辟陋在夷，其孰以我为虞？ 
现代文：渠丘公说： 敝国偏僻简陋，处在蛮夷之地，有谁会把敝国作为觊觎的目的呢？ 
English: Quqiu Gong said: "Yangguo is a remote and simple country, located in a barbaric land. Who would take Yangguo as the goal of conquering?

古文：对曰： 夫狡焉思启封疆以利社稷者，何国蔑有？
现代文：巫臣说： 狡猾的人想开辟疆土以利国家的，哪个国家没有？
English: The sorcerer said, "If a cunning man wants to expand his territory to benefit his country, which country doesn't?

古文：唯然，故多大国矣，唯或思或纵也。
现代文：惟其如此，所以大国就多了。不过受觊觎的小国有的思虑有备，也有的放纵不备。
English: However, this is the case, so there are more big countries. However, the small countries that are attacked have some thoughts prepared, and some are not prepared to indulge.

古文：勇夫重闭，况国乎？ 
现代文：勇敢的人还要层层关闭好内外门户，何况国家？ 
English: Brave people still have to close the internal and external portals layer by layer, let alone the country?

古文：冬，杞叔姬卒。
现代文：冬季，杞国的叔姬死了。
English: In the winter, Zou's aunt died.

古文：来归自杞，故书。
现代文：由于她从杞国被休了回到鲁国来，所以《春秋》加以记载。
English: Because she was dismissed from Shandong and returned to Shandong, "Spring and Autumn" recorded it.

古文：晋士燮来聘，言伐郯也，以其事吴故。
现代文：晋国的士燮来鲁国聘问，声称要进攻郯国，因为郯国奉事吴国的缘故。
English: Shi Yan of Jin came to Lu to ask questions, claiming that he wanted to attack Yan, because Yan served Wu.

古文：公赂之，请缓师。
现代文：鲁成公送给他财礼，请求从缓进兵。
English: Lu Chenggong gave him a gift of money and asked him to delay the entry of soldiers.

古文：文子不可，曰： 君命无贰，失信不立。
现代文：士燮不答应，说： 国君的命令说一不二，失去信义难以自立。
English: Shi Yan did not agree and said, "The Emperor's orders are one and the same. If you lose your loyalty, it will be difficult for you to stand on your own.

古文：礼无加货，事无二成。
现代文：除规定的礼物外，不应该增加财币，公事私事不能两全其美。
English: In addition to the prescribed gifts, there should be no increase in financial resources. Business and personal affairs cannot have the best of both worlds.

古文：君后诸侯，是寡君不得事君也。
现代文：君王后于诸侯出兵，这样寡君就不能事奉君王了。
English: The empress sent troops to the lords, so that the vassals could not serve the king.

古文：燮将复之。 
现代文：燮打算就这样向寡君回报。 
English: That's how he plans to repay his benefactor.

古文：季孙惧，使宣伯帅师会伐郯。
现代文：季孙听了这话很害怕，派宣伯率兵会合进攻郯国。
English: When Ji Sun heard this, he was very scared and sent Xuan Bo to lead an army to attack Min.

古文：卫人来媵共姬，礼也。
现代文：卫国人送女子前来鲁国作为共姬的陪嫁，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the guardian of the country to send a woman to come to Russia as a common-law wife.

古文：凡诸侯嫁女，同姓媵之，异姓则否。
现代文：凡是诸侯女儿出嫁，同姓的国家送女作为陪嫁，异姓就不送。
English: Whenever the daughter of a vassal marries, the country with the same surname sends a daughter as a bridesmaid, but not with a different surname.

