古文：禽子再拜再拜曰： 敢问适人积土为高，以临吾城，薪土俱上，以为羊黔，蒙橹俱前，遂属之城，兵弩俱上，为之奈何？ 子墨子曰：子问羊黔之守邪？
现代文：译文禽滑厘一再谦拜后说： 请问：如果敌人堆积土古筑成高台，对我城造成居高临下之势，木头土石一齐上，构筑成名叫羊黔的土山，兵士以大盾牌做掩护从高台土山上一齐攻来，一下子就接近了我方的城头，刀箭齐用，该怎么对付呢？ 
English: After bowing humbly again and again, he said: Excuse me: if the enemy piles up earth and stones to build a hill, creating a domineering effect on our city, and the wood, earth and stones are piled up together to form a hill called the Sheep's Throat, and the soldiers attack from the hill and the hill with a large shield as a cover, suddenly approaching our city, and using both swords and arrows, how should we deal with it?

古文：羊黔者，将之拙者也，足以劳卒，不足以害城。守为台城，以临羊黔，左右出巨，各二十尺，行城三十尺，强弩之，技机藉之，奇器口口之，然则羊黔之攻败矣。
现代文：墨子先生回答说：你问的是对付 羊黔 进攻的防守办法么？ 羊黔 这种攻城办法，是带兵打仗者的蠢办法，只会将自己的士兵弄得疲劳不堪，不足以给守城一方造成危胁。守城的一方只要在城头上继续加高做所谓 台城 ，依然对羊黔保持居高临下之势，台城左右用大木编连起来，两旁各横出二十尺。这种临时做成的台城又叫行城，高度为三十尺。在上面用强劲的弓箭射击敌人，凭借 技机 和精妙的武器对付敌人，这样一来，用羊黔之法进攻就失败了。
English: Mr. Mozi replied, "Are you asking about the defensive measures to deal with the attack of the Sheep Herdsmen? The Sheep Herdsmen's method of attacking the city is a stupid way of leading soldiers to fight. It will only make their soldiers tired and not enough to pose a threat to the defending side. As long as the defending side continues to raise the so-called Taicheng at the top of the city, it will still remain superior to the Sheep Herdsmen. The Taicheng is connected on the left and right with large trees, with twenty feet on each side. This temporarily made Taicheng is also called the marching city, with a height of thirty feet.

古文：备临以连弩之车，材大方一方一尺，长称城之薄厚。
现代文：对付筑台居高临下的进攻，还可以使用一种连弩车。造这种车的木材，要大小一尺见方，长度与城墙厚度相等。
English: To deal with the high-handed attack of the Zongtai, you can also use a chariot. The wood used to make this kind of car should be one foot square in size, and the length should be equal to the thickness of the city wall.

古文：两轴三轮，轮居筐中，重下上筐。左右旁二植，左右有衡植，衡植左右皆圜内，内径四寸。左右缚弩皆于植，以弦钩弦，至于大弦。
现代文：两根车轴，三个轮子，轮子装在车箱当中，车箱上下两个，左右各做两根立柱，还有横梁两根，横梁的左右两头都是圆榫头，榫头直径四寸，把有把的箭都捆在左右两边的柱子上，弓弦相钩，连到大弦上。
English: Two axles, three wheels, the wheels are mounted in the middle of the box, the box is two up and down, two columns are made on the left and right, and there are two beams. The two ends of the beam are round hoes, the hoes are four inches in diameter, and the arrows with the handle are tied to the pillars on the left and right sides. The bow strings are hooked and connected to the big strings.

古文：弩臂前后与筐齐，筐高八尺，弩轴去下筐三尺五寸。
现代文：弓把前后与车箱齐平，车箱高度为八尺，弓轴距下面的车箱三尺五寸。
English: The front and rear of the bow are flush with the box, the height of the box is eight feet, and the box below the bow wheelbase is three feet and five inches.

古文：连弩机郭同铜，一石三十钧。
现代文：连弩的 机括 用铜做成，重一百五十斤。
English: Lian Ye's machine bracket is made of copper and weighs one hundred and fifty pounds.

古文：引弦鹿长奴。
现代文：用辘轳收引弓弦。
English: Use the hoe to tighten the bowstring.

古文：筐大三围半，左右有钩距，方三寸，轮厚尺二寸，钩距臂博尺四寸，厚七寸，长六尺。
现代文：车箱周长为三围半，左右两边装有 钩距 ， 钩距 三寸见方，车轮厚一尺二寸，钩距臂宽一尺四寸，厚七寸，长六尺。
English: The circumference of the car box is three and a half, and the left and right sides are equipped with hook spacing, hook spacing three inches square, the wheel is one foot two inches thick, the hook spacing arm is one foot four inches wide, seven inches thick, and six feet long.

古文：横臂齐筐外，蚤尺五寸，有距，搏六寸，厚三寸，长如筐有仪，有诎胜，可上下，为武重一石，以材大围五寸。矢长十尺，以绳□□矢端，如如戈射，以磨■卷收。
现代文：主要阐述如何对付敌人采用居高临下攻城方法的战术。 强弩 后应加 射 字。 尺 字前疑重 方一 二字。 缚 字应作 缚 。 同 字应作 用 。 长奴 应作 卢收 。 戈 应作 弋 。 磨 应作 磿 。 人 应作 入 。 道 应作 适 。
English: It mainly expounds the tactics of how to deal with the enemy by using the method of attacking the city from a high position. The word "shooting" should be added after the word "strong"; the word "doubt" should be added before the word "shaku"; the word "binding" should be "binding"; the word "same" should be used; the word "elder" should be "luke"; the word "go" should be "go"; the word "mill" should be "mill"; the word "person" should be "entering"; and the word "road" should be "suitable."

