古文：彭乘，字利建，益州华阳人。
现代文：彭乘，字利建，益州华阳人。
English: Peng Rong, also known as Li Jian, was born in Huayang, Yizhou.

古文：少以好学称州里，进士及第。
现代文：年青时即以好学被州里称颂，后考中进士及第。
English: When he was young, he was praised by the state for his good study, and he was promoted to the first and second place in the post-examination.

古文：尝与同年生登相国寺阁，皆瞻顾乡关，有从宦之乐，乘独西望，怅然曰： 亲长矣，安敢舍晨昏之奉，而图一身之荣乎！ 翌日，奏乞侍养。
现代文：曾经和同届进士登玩相国寺阁楼，大家都瞻看乡里要塞，颇有官宦之人的乐趣。独彭乘眺望西方，怅然说： 父亲老了，我怎么能够放弃早晚侍奉的本份，去贪图自己一个人的荣乐呢？ 第二天，即上奏皇帝请求准其回家侍奉父亲。
English: Once, he and his classmates went to play in the attic of the Shokoku-ji Temple. Everyone looked at the fortress in the countryside, which was quite fun for officials. Du Peng Rong looked westward and said, "My father is old, how can I give up the duty of serving in the morning and evening, and yearn for my own personal glory?" The next day, the emperor requested to be allowed to go home to serve his father.

古文：居数日，授汉阳军判官，遂得请以归。
现代文：数日后，被授以汉阳军判官，终于得到允许回家。
English: A few days later, he was awarded the title of Hanyang Military Judge and was finally allowed to return home.

古文：久之，有荐其文行者，召试，为馆阁校勘。
现代文：时间久后，有人向皇帝推荐他的文行，皇帝乃召彭乘来考试，授馆阁校勘。
English: After a long time, someone recommended his writing to the emperor, and the emperor summoned Peng to take the exam and give him the examination.

古文：固辞还家，后复除凤州团练推官。
现代文：又坚决辞谢回家，后又再任凤州团练推官。
English: He also resolutely resigned to return home, and later he was appointed as the representative of Fengzhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：天禧初，用寇准荐，为馆阁校勘，改天平军节度推官。
现代文：宋真宗天禧初年，因寇准的引荐，做馆阁校勘。改任天平军节度推官。
English: In the first year of Song Zhenzong's heavenly jubilee, he was recommended by Guo Jun to do the inspection of the pavilion. He was reappointed as the festival inspector of the Tianping Army.

古文：预校正南、北《史》、《隋书》，改秘书省著作佐郎，迁本省丞、集贤校理。
现代文：参与校对《南北史》、《隋书》，再改任秘书省著作佐郎，迁秘书省丞、集贤校理。
English: He participated in the proofreading of the "History of the North and South" and the "Book of the Sui Dynasty," and was then reassigned as the secretary of the Ministry of Literature and Literature, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, and the proofreader of the Collection of Virtues.

古文：恳求便亲，得知普州，蜀人得守乡郡自乘始。
现代文：恳求就便养亲，被任命为普州知州。蜀人做自己乡郡的太守就是从彭乘开始的。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Puzhou and Shuzhou, and became the governor of his hometown and county from the time of Peng Rong.

古文：普人鲜知学，乘为兴学，召其子弟为生员教育之。
现代文：当时普州人很少有文化的，彭乘在此兴学，将当地的子弟召集起来上学受教育。
English: At that time, the people of Puzhou had little culture. Peng Rong went to school here and gathered the local children to go to school for education.

古文：乘父卒，既葬，有甘露降于墓柏，人以为孝感。
现代文：彭乘父亲死，下葬后，有甘露降于墓地的松柏之上。
English: When Peng Rong's father died and was buried, there was nectar falling on the pines in the cemetery.

古文：服除，知荆门军，改太常博士。
现代文：时人认为这是因为彭乘至孝的缘故。服丧完毕后，任荆门军知事，改太常博士。
English: At the time, it was thought that this was due to Peng Rong's filial piety. After the funeral, he was appointed the military governor of Jingmen and changed his title to the doctor of the imperial court.

古文：召还，同判尚书刑部，出知安州，徙提点京西刑狱，改夔州路转运使。
现代文：后又召回朝廷，为同判尚书刑部，出任安州知州。升提点京西刑狱，再改夔州路转运使。
English: Later, he was recalled to the imperial court, and was assigned to Anzhou Chizhou as a member of the same sentence Shangshu Penal Department. He was promoted to the point of Beijing West Penal Prison, and then changed to Bozhou Road Transfer Envoy.

古文：会土贼田忠霸诱下溪州蛮将内寇，乘适按郡至境，大集边吏，勒兵下山以备贼，贼遁去。
现代文：赴任后正碰上当地强盗田忠霸引诱下溪州蛮准备内侵，彭乘正好巡视到此。于是他召集边区官吏，率领部队下山以对付叛贼，贼迅速离去。
English: After taking office, Peng Rong happened to be on a tour when he encountered a local bandit, Tian Zhongba, who was luring the Lower Xizhou Barbarians to prepare for an invasion. So he called together officials from the border region and led the troops down the mountain to deal with the traitors. The thieves quickly left.

古文：因遣人间之，其党斩忠霸，夷其家。
现代文：于是又派人去瓦解他们内部，田忠霸果为其同党斩杀，并全家灭族。
English: As a result, he also sent someone to disrupt them from within, and Tian Zhongba was killed for being a member of the same party, and the whole family was exterminated.

古文：召修起居注，擢知制诰，累迁工部郎中，入翰林为学士，领吏部流内铨、三班院，为群牧使。
现代文：彭乘应召修起居注，升知制诰，累迁工部郎中，入翰林为学士，并领吏部流内铨、三班院，为群牧使。
English: Peng Rong was called to study and lived in Zhu, and he was promoted to the rank of Shizhen, and successively moved to the junior middle school of the engineering department, and entered the Hanlin as a bachelor, and led the department to the stream of the inner school and the three-class hospital, and was a herd herder.

古文：既病，仁宗敕太医诊视，赐以禁中珍剂。
现代文：生病后，宋仁宗下诏让太医去给他诊视，并赐以宫中珍贵的药剂。
English: After he fell ill, Song Renzong issued an edict to have the imperial physician examine him, and gave him a precious potion from the imperial court.

古文：卒，赐白金三百两。
现代文：死后，赐白金三百两。
English: After his death, he bequeathed three hundred taels of platinum.

古文：御史知杂何郯论请赠官，不许，诏一子给奉终丧。
现代文：御史知杂何郯上奏请求给他赠官，没有应允。只下诏让彭乘的一个儿子领取俸养办丧事。
English: There was no response to his request to be given an official post. He only issued an edict to let one of Peng Rong's sons receive a salary for handling the funeral.

古文：初，修起居注缺中书舍人，而乘在选中，帝指乘曰： 此老儒也，雅有恬退名，无以易之。 及召见，谕曰： 卿先朝旧臣，久补外，而未尝自言。 对曰： 臣生孤远，自量其分，安敢过有所望。 帝颇嘉之。
现代文：当初，修起居注缺中书舍人，彭乘在待选之中，皇帝指着彭乘说： 这是一个老儒，素有恬退的雅名，没有什么人能取代他。 等召见他时，皇帝问他： 你是前朝旧臣，长期任地方官，但自己却从没请求调进京。 彭乘回答说： 我生性孤远，自己能够估量自己的份量，怎么敢有过多的奢望呢？ 皇帝颇为欣赏他。
English: At first, the emperor pointed at Peng Reng, who was among the candidates, and said, "This is an old man, who has a reputation for retreating, and no one can replace him." When he summoned him, the emperor asked him, "You are a former courtier, a long-serving local official, but you have never asked to be transferred to Beijing." Peng Reng replied, "I am a loner by nature, I can measure my weight, how dare I have too much luxury? The emperor quite admired him.

古文：卒。挚性淳静，不为矫厉之行，政迹如其为人。
现代文：彭乘质朴少言，性纯孝，不喜欢惹是生非，著书万余卷，都是他自己校刊的。
English: Peng Rong is a simple man with few words. He is a pure filial son. He does not like to stir up trouble. He has written more than 10,000 volumes of books, all of which are his own school publications.

古文：平居未尝问生业，喜为诗，多警句。
现代文：蜀中所传之书，大多出自彭乘之手。
English: Most of the books handed down in Shu were written by Peng Rong.

古文：有奏议四十余篇。
现代文：晚年，多次辅助皇帝起草赞命，但文辞就不精巧了。
English: In his later years, he assisted the emperor in drafting the imperial edict many times, but the wording was not exquisite.

古文：司马池，字和中，自言晋安平献王孚后，征东大将军阳葬安邑澜洄曲，后魏析安邑置夏县，遂为县人。
现代文：司马池，字和中。自己说是晋安平献王司马孚的后裔。因征东大将军司马阳葬于安邑澜洄曲，后魏分安邑置夏县，司马池即为夏县人。
English: Sima Chi, middle initial and middle name. He said that he was a descendant of the Jin Anping King Sima Fu. Because of the East Conquest, the general Sima Yang was buried in Anyi Lanqu, and after the Wei Dynasty, Anyi was placed in Xia County. Sima Chi was a native of Xia County.

古文：池少丧父，家赀数十万，悉推诸父，而自力读书。
现代文：司马池早年丧父，家资数十万，他全部让给各位叔伯，而自己则奋力读书。
English: Sima Chi lost his father at an early age, and the family fortune was several hundred thousand. He left everything to his uncles, while he worked hard at his studies.

古文：时议者以蒲坂、窦津、大阳路官运盐回远闻，乃开〈山含〉口道，自闻喜逾山而抵垣曲，咸以为便。
现代文：当时有人报告皇上说蒲坂、窦津、大阳路官运盐来回路程太远，朝廷于是开辟山含口道，从闻喜越山抵达垣曲，大家都认为山含口道开通后方便了。
English: At that time, someone reported to the emperor that it was too far for the officials to transport salt from the government offices to the villages of Pusaka, Doujin and Dayang, so the imperial court opened the Yamaguchi-guchi Road, from Wenshiyue Mountain to Kakiku. Everyone thought that it was convenient after the opening of the Yamaguchi-guchi Road.

古文：池谓人曰： 昔人何为舍迳而就迂，殆必有未便者。 众不以为然。
现代文：唯司马池对人说 ：以前的人为什么舍近求远走迂回之路，一定是走现在这条路有不方便的地方。 众人听后大不以为然。
English: Wei Simachi said to people: Why did people in the past stay away and take a roundabout route, they must have taken it, but now this route has inconvenient places.

古文：未几，山水暴至，盐车人牛尽没入河，众乃服。
现代文：不久，山洪暴发，盐车人马全部都被淹入河中，于是大家都很佩服司马池。
English: Soon, a flash flood occurred, and all the salt wagons and horses were submerged in the river, so everyone admired Sima Pond.

古文：举进士，当试殿庭而报母亡，友匿其书。
现代文：考进士，正当要举行殿试时，突然有信报司马池母亲死了。
English: When the entrance examination was about to be held, it was suddenly reported that Sima's mother had died.

古文：池心动，夜不能寐，曰： 吾母素多疾，家岂无有异乎？ 行至宫城门，徘徊不能入。
现代文：朋友为了不影响他的考试，将报丧信藏起来没有告诉他。司马池心里十分不安，晚上也睡不着。说 ：我的母亲素来多病，家里怎么会没有异常之事呢？ 走到宫城门边，徘徊着不想进去。
English: In order not to affect his exams, his friend hid the funeral notice and did not tell him. Sima Chi was very uneasy and could not sleep at night. He said: My mother has always been ill, how can there be nothing unusual at home? He walked to the Miyagi gate and lingered, not wanting to go in.

古文：因语其友，而友止以母疾告，遂号恸而归。
现代文：于是就与自己的朋友谈，朋友只告诉他母亲病了，司马池闻言号恸大哭着跑回去了。
English: So he talked to his friend, who only told him that his mother was ill, and Sima Chi ran back crying loudly.

古文：后中第，授永宁主簿。
现代文：后来考中进士第，授永宁主簿。
English: Later, he was awarded the first place in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：出入乘驴。
现代文：出入乘驴。
English: Access is by donkey.

古文：与令相恶，池以公事谒令，令南向踞坐不起，池挽令西向偶坐论事，不为少屈。
现代文：与县令关系不好，司马池因为有公事去见县令，县令向南盘坐不起身，于是司马池挽着县令向西并排坐在一起讨论公事，没有一点屈服。
English: The relationship with the county magistrate was not good. Sima Chi went to see the county magistrate because he had business. The county magistrate sat facing south and did not stand up, so Sima Chi sat side by side with the county magistrate facing west to discuss business, and did not give in at all.

古文：历建德、郫县尉。
现代文：历任建德、郫县县尉。
English: Successively held the posts of Jiande and Jixian County Lieutenant.

古文：蜀人妄言戍兵叛，蛮将入寇，富人争瘗金银逃山谷间。
现代文：蜀人妄传戍兵叛乱，蛮族将会入侵。于是富人争相将金银埋藏后逃到山谷间躲起来。
English: The Shu people falsely preached that the barbarians would invade, so the rich buried their gold and silver and fled to hide in the valleys.

古文：令闾丘梦松假他事上府，主簿称疾不出，池摄县事。
现代文：县令闾丘梦松亦假借有别的事情不去县府上班，主簿也有病不出门。留下司马池管理县中事务。
English: Meng Song, the county magistrate of Mengqiu, also did not go to work at the county government on the pretext that he had other things to do, and the chief secretary was also sick and did not go out. He left Sima Chi to manage the affairs of the county middle school.

古文：会上元张灯，乃纵民游观，凡三夕，民心遂安。
现代文：在元宵灯会，司马池让老百姓尽情游观，一连进行了三个晚上，于是民心安定下来。
English: In the Lantern Festival, Sima Lake allowed the people to enjoy the tour, and it lasted for three nights in a row, so the people's hearts settled down.

古文：调郑州防御判官、知光山县。
现代文：后调任郑州防御判官、知光山县。
English: Later, he was transferred to Zhengzhou Defense Judge, Zhiguangshan County.

古文：禁中营造，诏诸州调竹木，州符期三日毕输。
现代文：当时皇帝营造宫殿，下诏从各州调集竹木，州里限期各县三日之内运送完。
English: At that time, the emperor was building a palace, and issued an edict to collect bamboo and wood from all prefectures. The prefectures were given a deadline of three days to complete the delivery.

古文：池以土不产大竹，转市蕲、黄，非三日可致，乃更与民自为期，约过不输者罪之，既而输竹先诸县。
现代文：司马池以光山县本地不产大竹，要从蕲、黄两地转买为由，认为三日之期不可能做到。于是同老百姓另行约定时间，并宣布过约期不送者即治罪。最后光山县完成送竹任务比其他县要早。
English: On the grounds that large bamboos are not produced locally in Gwangsan County and have to be bought from the provinces of Gwangju and Hwanghae, Sima Ike believed that the three-day deadline was impossible to meet. Therefore, he agreed on a different time with the people and announced that anyone who did not deliver after the deadline would be punished. In the end, Gwangsan County completed the bamboo delivery task earlier than other counties.

古文：盛度荐于朝，改秘书省著作佐郎、监安丰酒税，徙知小溪县。
现代文：盛度将他推荐到朝廷，改任秘书省著作佐郎，监安丰酒税，调知小溪县。
English: He recommended him to the Imperial Court, and he was appointed as the secretary of the provincial government, the overseer of Anfeng liquor tax, and the governor of Xiaoxi County.

古文：刘烨知河南府，辟知司录参军事，岁余，通判留守司。
现代文：刘烨任河南知府时，召司马池为司录参军事。一年后，通判留守司。
English: When Liu Wei was the governor of Henan Province, he called Sima Chi to join the military as a registrar. A year later, he was sentenced to remain as a registrar.

古文：枢密使曹利用奏为群牧判官，辞不就，朝廷固授之。
现代文：枢密使曹利用上奏要司马池任群牧判官，司马池辞谢不就，但朝廷还是授给了他。
English: The confidential envoy Cao used the report to ask Sima Qi to serve as the judge of the herd. Sima Qi's resignation was not enough, but the court still awarded him.

古文：利用尝委括大臣所负进马价，池曰： 令之不行，由上犯之。
现代文：曹利用曾经委托他负责征大臣们所欠的进马费用。司马池说： 命令不实行，是因为上级违犯了它。
English: Cao Rong once entrusted him with the responsibility of collecting the entry fees owed by the ministers. Sima Chi said: The order is not implemented because the superior violated it.

古文：公所负尚多，不先输，何以趣他人。 利用惊曰： 吏绐我已输矣。 亟命送官，数日而诸负者皆入。
现代文：你所欠的马费还很多，不先送，怎么去催促他人呢？ 曹利用惊讶地说 ：官员骗我说已给我送了。 于是赶紧下令将其送给朝廷。数日之中各位负责者都完成了任务。
English: You still owe a lot of horse fees. If you don't send them first, how can you urge others to do so? Cao Rong said in surprise, "The officials lied to me and said that they had already sent them to me." He then quickly ordered that they be sent to the imperial court. Within a few days, all those in charge had completed their tasks.

古文：利用贬，其党畏罪，徒而毁短者甚众，池独扬言于朝，称利用枉，朝廷卒不问。
现代文：后来曹利用被贬官，他的同党害怕治罪，因而反过来又讲他坏话的人很多，唯独司马池在朝廷赞扬他，并说曹利用是冤枉的，朝廷最终没有问罪。
English: Later, Cao Rongji was demoted, and his fellow party members were afraid to punish him, so there were many people who spoke ill of him in turn. However, Sima Qi praised him in the court and said that Cao Rongji was innocent, and the court did not find him guilty in the end.

古文：会诏百官转对，池言： 唐制门下省，诏书之出，有不便者得以封还。
现代文：正值皇帝下诏百官轮流应对。司马池说 ：唐朝之制，凡皇帝诏书制定以后如有不方便的地方，门下省即负责封还不下发。
English: It was the time when hundreds of officials took turns to respond to the imperial edict issued by the emperor. Sima Chi said: In the Tang Dynasty system, if there were any inconvenient places after the imperial edict was issued, the subordinate province would be responsible for sealing and not issuing it.

古文：今门下虽有封驳之名，而诏书一切自中书以下，非所以防过举也。 内侍皇甫继明给事章献太后阁，兼领估马司，自言估马有羡利，乞迁官。事下群牧司，阅无羡利。
现代文：现在门下省虽仍有封驳之名，但一有诏书出来中书省一律下达。
English: Now, although the subordinate provinces still have the name of the seal, but as soon as an edict comes out, the central book province will issue it.

古文：继明方用事，自制置使以下皆欲附会为奏，池独不可。
现代文：皇甫继明正在得势之时，从制置使以下都想附名上奏，司马池独不做。
English: When Empress Dowager Jiming was on the rise, she wanted to add the names of the following people to the imperial edict, and Sima Chi was not the only one to do so.

古文：除开封府推官，敕至阁门，为继明党所沮，罢知耀州。
现代文：出任开封府推官，敕令下到阁门，但被皇甫继明同党所阻止。降职耀州知州。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Kaifeng, and was ordered to go to the Imperial Palace, but was prevented by the Emperor Jimin and his party. He was demoted to Yaozhou and Zhizhou.

古文：擢利州路转运使、知凤翔府。
现代文：升利州路转运使、知凤翔府。
English: Shenglizhou Road Transfer Envoy, Zhifeng Xiangfu.

古文：召知谏院，上表恳辞。
现代文：后被召回朝廷任知谏院，司马池上书恳切推辞此官。
English: After that, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to serve as Chihiroin, but Sima Ike wrote a letter to earnestly decline the post.

古文：仁宗谓宰相曰： 人皆嗜进，而池独嗜退，亦难能也。 加直史馆，复知凤翔。
现代文：宋仁宗对宰相说 ：别人都喜欢进升，然而司马池却独爱退官，也真难能可贵也。 遂加直史馆，复知凤翔。
English: Song Renzong said to the prime minister, "Other people like to be promoted, but Sima Chi only likes to retire, and it's really hard to be valuable.

古文：有疑狱上谳，大理辄复下，掾属惶遽引咎。
现代文：在任期间曾有疑案上诉，刑官大理立即下来复查。属官十分担心，便引咎辞职。
English: During his term of office, there was an appeal of a doubtful case, and the criminal officer Dali immediately came down to review it. The subordinate officer was very worried and resigned.

古文：池曰： 长吏者政事所繇，非诸君过。 乃独承其罪，有诏勿劾。
现代文：司马池说 ：长吏是政事的主要负责人，不是你们的过失。 于是单独去承担了责任。皇帝下诏不要弹劾他。
English: Sima Chi said: "The chief official is the main person in charge of political affairs, not your fault, so he took the responsibility alone. The emperor issued an edict not to impeach him.

古文：岐阳镇巡检夜饮富民家，所部卒执之，俾为约，不敢复督士卒，而后释其缚；池捕首恶诛之，巡检亦坐废。
现代文：岐阳镇巡检晚上去富民家饮酒，被所部士兵捉住。双方达成协议，巡检先答应以后不再管束士卒，才将其释放。司马池了解此事后，将为首的士卒抓来杀了。巡检也因此被废。
English: In the evening, a patrol inspector from Qiyang Town went to a rich family's house to drink alcohol. He was caught by soldiers from the headquarters. The two sides reached an agreement that the patrol inspector would first promise not to restrain the officer before releasing him. After Sima Chi understood the matter, he caught and killed the first officer. The patrol inspection was therefore abolished.

古文：累迁尚书兵部员外郎，遂兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：累迁至尚书兵部员外郎，遂兼侍御史知杂事。
English: He was successively moved to the position of Shoshoheibu member, and eventually became a chamberlain.

古文：尝言： 陕西用兵无宿将，刘平好自用而少智谋，必误大事。 后平果败。
现代文：曾经说： 陕西用兵无宿将，刘平刚愎自用缺少智谋，一定会误大事。 后刘平果然失败。
English: He once said: "If you use soldiers from Shaanxi, you will have no place to stay; if you use Liu Ping as a strongman, but lack wisdom and strategy, you will surely make a big mistake." Later, Liu Ping finally failed.

古文：更户部度支、盐铁副使。
现代文：改做户部度支、盐铁副使。
English: He was appointed to the post of the Household Division of the Ministry of Public Security and Vice-Minister of Salt and Iron.

古文：岁满，中书进名，帝曰： 是固辞谏官者。 擢天章阁待制、知河中府，徙同州，又徙杭州。
现代文：年满后，中书提名升职。
English: After the end of the year, the nomination of the Chinese book is promoted.

古文：池性质易，不饰厨传，剸剧非所长，又不知吴俗，以是谤讥闻朝廷。
现代文：司马池性情质朴平和，吃住都不讲究。不善于独挡一面，又不知晓吴人风俗，正因此对他的谤讥之言在朝廷时有所闻。
English: Sima Qi's nature was simple and peaceful, and he did not care about food and lodging. He was not good at keeping to himself, and he did not know the customs of the Wu people, which is why his slanderous words were heard in the imperial court.

古文：转运使江钧、张从革劾池决事不当十余条，及稽留德音，降知虢州。
现代文：转运使江钧、张从革弹劾司马池处事不当有十余条，以及他不将皇帝的命令传达下去的过错。遂降知虢州。
English: The transfer caused Jiang Chen and Zhang Congge to impeach Sima Chi on more than ten counts of improper conduct, as well as his fault of not conveying the emperor's order. He was then demoted to Zhisheng.

古文：初，转运使既奏池，会吏有盗官银器，械州狱，自陈为钧掌私厨，出所卖过半；又越州通判载私物盗税，乃从革之姻，遣人私请。
现代文：当初，转运使已经上奏弹劾司马池时，正碰上有个官吏偷盗官府银器案，犯人被带上镣铐投进州监狱，审讯时犯人自己陈述是为江钧掌管私人钱柜的。官府银器已经被他拿出卖掉的超过了半数。后又发现有越州通判私载个人货物、偷税之事。因与张从革有姻亲关系，曾派人私下去拜见他。
English: At the time of impeachment of Sima Chi, there was a case of theft of government silverware by a government official. The offender was taken to the state prison in shackles. At the trial, the offender himself stated that he was in charge of a private money box for Jiang Wei. He had already taken out and sold more than half of the government silverware. Later, it was discovered that there was a case of smuggling personal goods and tax evasion by the Yuezhou Consul. Because he was related to Zhang Congge by marriage, he had sent someone to visit him privately.

古文：或谓池可举劾以报仇，池曰： 吾不为也。 人称其长者。
现代文：有人说这下司马池可以弹劾江钧，向张从革报仇了。但司马池说： 我不做。 故大家都称赞他有长者风度。
English: Some people said that now Sima Chi could impeach Jiang Chen and take revenge on Zhang Congke. But Sima Chi said: I won't do it. Therefore, everyone praised him for having the demeanor of an elder.

古文：徙知晋州，卒。
现代文：后升任知晋州。
English: He was later promoted to Chishin State.

古文：子旦、光，光自有传。
现代文：死于此任。有子司马旦、司马光。司马光自己另有传。
English: He died in this position. He had two sons, Sima Dan and Sima Guang. Sima Guang himself is another story.

古文：从子里。
现代文：另有养子司马里。
English: He also has an adopted son, Sima Mali.

古文：旦字伯康。
现代文：陈希亮，字公弼，他的祖先是京兆人。
English: Chen Xiliang, also known as Gongzheng, is a descendant of the Jingzhao people.

古文：清直敏强，虽小事必审思，度不中不释。
现代文：唐朝广明年间，避难迁居眉州青神县的东山。
English: During the Guangyi era of the Tang Dynasty, refugees moved to Dongshan in Meizhou's Qingjin County.

古文：以父任，为秘书省校书郎，历郑县主簿。郑有妇蔺讼夺人田者，家多金钱，市党买吏，合为奸谩，十年不决。
现代文：陈希亮幼年丧父，但很好学，十六岁，将要拜师求学时，他哥哥为难阻止他，派他去将三十多万放出的息钱收回，陈希亮把借钱的人都叫来，烧毁借据然后走了。
English: Chen Xiliang lost his father at a young age, but he was very good at learning. At the age of 16, when he was about to study with his teacher, his brother had difficulty stopping him and sent him to recover the interest of more than 300,000 yuan. Chen Xiliang called the borrowers, burned the IOUs and then left.

古文：旦取案一阅，情伪立见，黜吏十数辈，冤者以直。又井元庆豪欺乡里，莫敢谁何，旦擒致于法。
现代文：事业有成就后，便将哥哥的儿子陈庸、陈谕召去读书，他们终于都中了天圣八年的进士，家乡人在他们家门题匾叫 三俊 。
English: After achieving success in his career, he summoned his brother's sons, Chen Yong and Chen Zuo, to study. They finally both received the title of Heaven's Eight-Year-Old Scholar, and the people in their hometown shouted "Sanjun" at their door.

古文：时旦年尚少，上下易之，自是惊服。吏捕蝗，因缘搔民。旦言： 蝗，民之仇，宜听自捕，输之官。 后著为令。
现代文：陈希亮初任大理评事、长沙知县。当地有个叫海印国师的和尚，出入章献皇后家，与权贵们相往来，仗势侵占民众土地，人们没哪个敢正视他，陈希亮把他逮捕依法治罪，全县震惊。
English: Chen Xiliang was the first critic of Dali, and he came from Changsha Zhixian County. There was a local monk named Haiyin Guoshi, who went in and out of the queen's house, socialized with dignitaries, and occupied the land of the people. No one dared to face him. Chen Xiliang arrested him according to the law, and the whole county was shocked.

古文：丁内外艰，服除，监饶州永平铸钱监。知祁县，天大旱，人乏食，群盗剽敓，富家巨室至以兵自备。
现代文：郴州竹场有人伪造证券给输粮户送到官府充当税粮，事情被发觉，输粮户将被处死，陈希亮查出输粮户是无辜的，便将他放出来，后来果真找到了伪造证券的人。陈希亮再升做殿中丞，调任县知县。该县有个老官吏曹腆犯法，认为陈希亮年轻，轻慢他。
English: In Zhangzhou Bamboo Farm, someone forged securities for grain exporting households and sent them to the government to be used as tax grain. The matter was discovered, and the grain exporting households would be executed. Chen Xiliang found out that the grain exporting households were innocent and released him. Later, the person who forged the securities was found. Chen Xiliang was promoted to vice-chairman of the palace and transferred to the post of county magistrate. There was an old official in the county, Cao Wei, who broke the law, thought that Chen Xiliang was young, and scorned him.

古文：旦召富者开以祸福，于是争出粟，减直以粜，犹不失其赢，饥者获济，盗患亦弭。
现代文：陈希亮上任后，首先得到他的罪证将他惩治。曹腆叩头出血，愿意改过自新，陈希亮警告以后将他放了，曹腆后来终于成了一个好官吏。
English: After Chen Xiliang took office, he was the first to get his criminal evidence and punish him. Cao Gan kowtowed and was willing to reform. After Chen Xiliang's warning, he was released. Cao Gan eventually became a good official.

古文：举监在京百万仓，时祁隶太原，以太原留，不召。
现代文：当地巫师每年勒索百姓财物祭鬼，叫作春斋，说不这样就会有火灾；民间谣传有三个红衣老人放火。陈希亮就下令禁止，百姓不敢违犯，而火灾也没有发生。
English: Every year, the local sorcerer blackmails the people to sacrifice their wealth and property to the ghosts, known as the Spring Festival, saying that otherwise there will be a fire; folk tales say that three old men dressed in red set fires. Chen Xiliang ordered a ban, the people did not dare to violate it, and the fire did not occur.

古文：通判乾州，未行，举监在京杂物库。
现代文：又毁掉淫祠数百座，勒令回家做农民的巫师七十多家。
English: He also destroyed hundreds of temples and ordered more than 70 wizards to return home and become farmers.

古文：知宜兴县，其民嚣讼，旦每狱必穷根株，痛绳之，校系县门，民稍以诋冒为耻。
现代文：到他被免职离开县时，父老乡亲送他出境，哭泣说： 公离开我们，红衣老人又会出现了。 后进升为太常博士。
English: When he was dismissed from his post and left the county, his father and fellow villagers sent him out of the country, crying: "If you leave us, the old man in red will appear again.

古文：市贯大溪，贾昌朝所作长桥，坏废岁久，旦劝民葺复，不劳而成。
现代文：有人说他处理郴州一案把枉判为死罪的人救活了，朝廷因此赏赐给他五品官服。起初，蜀人在蜀地做官，不能通判州事。
English: Some people said that he saved the life of a man who was unjustly sentenced to death in the Bozhou case, and the court therefore awarded him five official uniforms. At first, Shu people worked as officials in Shu, and could not pass judgment on state affairs.

古文：时王安石守常州，开运河，调夫诸县。
现代文：陈希亮因为母亲年老，愿意降级做知县以便侍养老母，于是任临津知县。
English: Chen Xiliang, because his mother was old, was willing to downgrade to Zhixian in order to serve his elderly mother, so he was appointed to Linjin Zhixian.

古文：旦言： 役大而亟，民有不胜，则其患非徒不可就而已。
现代文：母亲死后，陈希亮服完丧，任开封府司录司事。福胜塔被火烧后，官府计划重建，估计费用要三万钱，陈希亮说： 陕西用兵打仗，希望用这钱馈赠给军队。 
English: After his mother's death, Chen Xiliang went into mourning and served as the secretary of the Kaifeng government. After the Fu Sheng Tower was burned, the government planned to rebuild it, with an estimated cost of 30,000 yuan. Chen Xiliang said: Shaanxi uses soldiers to fight wars, and hopes to use this money to donate to the army.

古文：请令诸县岁递一役，虽缓必成。 安石不听。
现代文：朝廷因此下令不再重建。青州平民赵禹上书，说西夏赵元昊必反，宰相认为赵禹狂言，将他流放到建州，赵元昊果然反叛。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered that it not be rebuilt. A Qingzhou citizen, Zhao Yu, submitted a letter saying that Western Xia's Zhao Yuanhao would rebel. The prime minister thought Zhao Yu was crazy and exiled him to Jianzhou. Zhao Yuanhao did indeed rebel.

古文：秋，大霖雨，民苦之，多自经死，役竟罢。
现代文：赵禹向当地官府上诉，没有受理，于是逃到京城自己向宰相理论，宰相发怒，将他关入开封监狱。
English: Zhao Yu appealed to the local government, but it was not accepted, so he fled to Beijing to argue with the prime minister himself. The prime minister was angry and put him in Kaifeng Prison.

古文：历知梁山军、安州。
现代文：陈希亮说赵禹该重赏不该治罪，争论不已。
English: Chen Xiliang said that Zhao Yu should be rewarded or punished, and the debate continued.

古文：旦治郡有大体，所施设，取于适理便事。
现代文：皇上释放赵禹，赏他做徐州推官，并且想要陈希亮做御史。
English: The emperor released Zhao Yu, rewarded him with the post of Xuzhou magistrate, and wanted Chen Xiliang to serve as imperial historian.

古文：再监凤翔太平宫，以熙宁八年致仕。历官十七，迁至太中大夫。
现代文：碰巧外戚沈元吉因奸盗杀人，陈希亮查得实情，沈元吉自惊仆地而死，沈家上诉控告陈希亮，皇上下诏御史给陈希亮及所有狱吏治罪。陈希亮说 ：杀此贼者独我一人而已。 
English: It so happened that Chen Xiliang's maternal relative, Shen Yuanji, was convicted of treason and murder, Chen Xiliang investigated the facts, and Shen Yuanji died of shock. The Shen family appealed and sued Chen Xiliang, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to punish Chen Xiliang and all the prison officials. Chen Xiliang said, "I am the only one who killed this thief."

古文：元祐二年，卒，年八十二。
现代文：因此被治罪免官废为平民。
English: As a result, he was exonerated and demoted to a civilian.

古文：旦澹薄无欲，奉养苟完，人不见其贵。
现代文：一年后，京西兴起强盗，杀害当地郡守县令，富弼推荐说陈希亮可以起用，于是陈希亮复出做房州知州。
English: A year later, robbers arose in West Beijing and killed the local county magistrate. Fuxi recommended that Chen Xiliang could be used, so Chen Xiliang returned to Fangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：与弟光尤友爱终始，人无间言。
现代文：该州素来无兵守备，民众惊恐万分，只想逃亡，陈希亮用守城和牢狱的士兵再杂用山河户，共得数百人。
English: The state has never been guarded by soldiers, and the people were terrified and only wanted to escape. Chen Xiliang used soldiers to guard the city and the prison, and then mixed them with the mountains and rivers, a total of hundreds of people.

古文：光居洛，旦居夏县，皆有园沼胜概。
现代文：日夜部署守卫，声振山南，人民依恃他们才得到安宁。
English: Day and night, guards are deployed to keep watch over Shannan, and the people rely on them for peace.

古文：光岁一往省旦，旦亦间至洛视光。凡光平时所与论天下事，旦有助焉。
现代文：殿侍雷甲带兵百多人追强盗到竹山，雷甲不能约束部队，所到之处，士兵暴虐百姓。
English: The palace attendant Lei Jia led more than a hundred soldiers to chase the robbers to Zhushan. Lei Jia could not restrain the troops, and wherever they went, the soldiers brutalized the people.

古文：及光被门下侍郎召，固辞不拜。
现代文：有人怀疑他们是强盗，报告陈希亮说强盗入境，将到城门。
English: Some people suspected that they were robbers, and reported to Chen Xiliang that the robbers had entered the country and were going to the city gate.

古文：旦引大义语之曰： 生平诵尧、舜之道，思致其君，今时可而违，非进退之正也。 光幡然就位。
现代文：陈希亮立即集合士兵依阻河边拒抗他们，下令士兵手拉满弓但不可发射，士兵都直立就像木偶人。雷甲用箭射他们，士兵也不动，雷甲于是下马拜地请求死罪，说： 当初不知您是官军。 
English: Chen Xiliang immediately gathered soldiers along the river bank to resist them, ordered the soldiers to draw their hands full of bows but not to fire, and the soldiers all stood upright like puppets. Lei Jia shot them with arrows, and the soldiers did not move. Lei Jia then came down and pleaded for the death penalty, saying: At first, I did not know you were the official army.

古文：希亮即勒兵阻水拒之，命持满无得发，士皆植立如偶人。甲射之，不动，乃下马拜请死，曰： 初不知公官军也。 吏士皆欲斩甲以徇，希亮独治为暴者十余人，使甲以捕盗自赎。时剧贼党军子方张，转运使使供奉官崔德赟捕之。德赟既失党军子，遂围竹山民贼所尝舍者曰向氏，杀父子三人，枭首南阳市。曰： 此党军子也。 希亮察其冤，下德赟狱，未服。
现代文：将士们都要求将雷甲斩首示众，陈希亮独只将横暴百姓的十多人治罪，而让雷甲搜捕强盗为自己赎罪。当时大盗贼头子党军子正嚣张一时，转运使派供奉官崔德斌贝去捕杀他。崔德斌贝没抓到党军子，便将贼军曾落脚过的一家竹山平民向氏包围，杀了向家父子三人，将头砍下挂在南阳市示众。他说 ：这就是党军子。 陈希亮察觉向氏是被冤枉的，便将崔德斌贝关入监狱，崔不服。
English: The generals all demanded that Lei Jia be beheaded in public. Chen Xiliang only punished more than ten people who were violent against the people, and let Lei Jia search for and arrest the robbers to atone for his sins. At that time, the leader of the great thieves, the party soldier, was in full swing, and the transit envoy sent the offering officer, Cui Debin Bei, to catch and kill him. Cui Debin Bei did not catch the party soldier, so he surrounded a civilian family in Zhushan, where the thief army had landed, and killed three of the father and son of Xiang Jia, and cut off the head and hung it in Nany

古文：党军子获于商州，诏赐向氏帛，复其家，流德赟通州。
现代文：后党军子在商州被抓获，皇帝下诏赐给向家绢帛，免除向家的徭役，又将崔德斌贝流放到通州。
English: After the party's soldiers were captured in Shangzhou, the emperor issued an edict to grant Xiang Jiaxuan, exempt Xiang Jiaxuan from military service, and exiled Cui Debinbei to Tongzhou.

古文：或言华阴人张元走夏州，为元昊谋臣。
现代文：有人说华阴人张元逃到夏州，做了赵元昊的谋臣。
English: Some people say that Zhang Yuan, a Hua Yin, fled to Xiazhou and became Zhao Yuanhao's adviser.

古文：诏徙其族百余口于房，几察出入，饥寒且死。
现代文：皇帝下诏将张元全族百余人迁到房地，检查监视他们的出入，张家人饥寒交迫，面临死亡。
English: The emperor decreed that more than a hundred people of Zhangyuan's entire family should be moved to the premises, and their entry and exit should be checked and monitored. The Zhang family was starving and cold, and faced death.

古文：希亮曰： 元事虚实不可知，使诚有之，为国者终不顾家，徒坚其为贼耳。
现代文：陈希亮说： 张元的事真相未明，即使真有此事，那为国家做事的人最终也不会顾虑家庭，现在这样做徒然只会坚定他为敌人卖力的决心。
English: Chen Xiliang said: The truth of Zhang Yuan's case is not clear. Even if there is a real case, those who work for the country will not worry about their families in the end. Doing so in vain now will only strengthen his determination to work for the enemy.

古文：此又皆其疏属，无罪。 乃密以闻，诏释之。
现代文：况且这些人都是他的远亲，他们是无罪的。 于是密奏告诉皇上，皇上下诏将他们释放。
English: Moreover, these people were his distant relatives, they were not guilty, so Mithra told the emperor that the emperor would release them.

古文：老幼哭希亮庭下曰： 今当还故乡，然奈何去父母乎？ 遂画希亮像祠焉。
现代文：张家老少在陈希亮庭中哭泣道 ：我们可以回故乡去了，可又要离开您这位再生父母，怎么办呢？ 于是画了陈希亮的肖像带回家立祠祭祀。
English: In Chen Xiliang's yard, the Zhang family members cried and said, "We can go back to our hometown, but what should we do if we have to leave you, our reincarnated parent?" So they painted Chen Xiliang's portrait and brought it home to build a shrine.

古文：代还，执政欲以为大理少卿，希亮曰： 法吏守文，非所愿，愿得一郡以自效。 乃以为宿州。
现代文：任职期满回朝，执政者要陈希亮做大理少卿，陈希亮说： 做法官守文书，不是我的理想，希望管理一郡来为皇上效力。 于是任命他为宿州知州。
English: When he returned to the imperial court at the end of his term of office, the ruler wanted Chen Xiliang to become the junior minister of justice. Chen Xiliang said, "It is not my ideal to be a bureaucratic official, I hope to manage a county to serve the emperor." So he was appointed as the governor of Shuzhou.

古文：州跨汴为桥，水与桥争，常坏舟。
现代文：当时宿州在汴水上造桥，河水涨后接近桥面，常损坏过往舟船。
English: At that time, Shuzhou built a bridge over the Surabaya River. After the river rose, it approached the bridge surface, often damaging passing boats.

古文：希亮始作飞桥，无柱，以便往来。
现代文：陈希亮开始首创飞桥，不要墩柱，以方便船只往来。
English: Chen Xiliang began to create the first flying bridge, do not climb the pillar, in order to facilitate ship traffic.

古文：诏赐缣以褒之，仍下其法，自畿邑至于泗州，皆为飞桥。
现代文：皇上下诏赏赐细绢褒奖他，并且推广他的方法，从京城到泗州，都修建飞桥。
English: Emperors and empresses rewarded him with high praise, and promoted his method, building a flying bridge from Beijing to Zhangzhou.

古文：皇祐元年，移滑州。
现代文：皇元年，调任滑州知州。
English: In the first year of the reign of the emperor, he was transferred to Chishu in Nanzhou.

古文：奏事殿上，仁宗劳之曰： 知卿疾恶，无惩沈氏子事。 未行，诏提举河北便籴。
现代文：上殿奏事时，宋仁宗慰劳他说： 朕知卿疾恶如仇，没有杀外戚沈元吉的事。 还没出发赴任，下诏令他做提举河北便籴。
English: When reporting the matter to the upper court, Song Renzong consoled him, saying: I know that you are evil and vengeful, and that you did not kill your foreign relative, Shen Yuanji. He had not yet set out to take office, so I ordered him to do the promotion of Hebei Province.

古文：都转运使魏瓘劾希亮擅增损物价。
现代文：都转运使魏馞弹劾他擅自增减物价。
English: Both transshipments caused Wei Wei to impeach him for arbitrarily increasing or decreasing prices.

古文：已而瓘除龙图阁学士、知开封府，希亮乞廷辨。
现代文：不久魏馞任龙图阁学士、开封府知府，陈希亮请求上朝辩白。
English: Soon after, Wei Xuan was appointed as a scholar of Longtu Pavilion and the governor of Kaifeng Prefecture. Chen Xiliang asked the Shang Dynasty for an explanation.

古文：既对，仁宗直希亮，夺瓘职知越州，且欲用希亮。
现代文：奏对完后，仁宗认为陈希亮有理，免了魏馞的职，降职做越州知州，并且要重用陈希亮。
English: After the match, Rinzong thought that Chen Xiliang was right, and dismissed Wei Xuan from his post, demoted him to the position of Yuezhou Zhizhou, and re-appointed Chen Xiliang.

古文：希亮言： 臣与转运使不和，不得为无罪。 力请还滑。
现代文：陈希亮说： 臣与转运使不和，不能说臣没错。 坚决请求回滑州。
English: Chen Xiliang said: "There is a discord between the minister and the transshipment company, and it cannot be said that the minister is right.

古文：会河溢鱼池埽，且决，希亮悉召河上使者，发禁兵捍之。
现代文：遇上黄河在鱼池埽涨水，快要冲垮河堤，陈希亮召集全部河上使者，派出禁卫部队抗灾。
English: When the Yellow River was surging in the fish pond and was about to burst its banks, Chen Xiliang called together all the emissaries on the river and sent a guard force to resist the disaster.

古文：庐于所当决，吏民涕泣更谏，希亮坚卧不动，水亦去，人比之王尊。
现代文：他住在河水缺口下极易冲倒的房子里，官吏民众都哭泣着多次劝谏他撤走，陈希亮坚决卧在那里不动，而河水也退去了，人们把他比作王尊。
English: He lived in a house that was extremely vulnerable to being washed away under a gap in the river, and the officials and people all cried and repeatedly urged him to move away. Chen Xiliang resolutely lay there without moving, and the river had receded, and people compared him to a king.

古文：是岁，盗起宛句，昼劫张郭镇，执濮州通判井渊。
现代文：这年，盗贼从宛句兴起，白天洗劫张郭镇，抓了濮州通判井渊。
English: This year, thieves from Wanzhu rioted, ransacked Zhang Guo Town during the day, and arrested Zhangzhou Tongzhan Jiyuan.

古文：仁宗以为忧，问执政可用者。
现代文：仁宗很忧虑，询问执政者谁可任用来平贼。
English: Concerned, Rinzong asked the governor who could be appointed to deal with the bandits.

古文：未及对，仁宗曰： 朕得之矣。 乃以希亮为曹州。
现代文：未等回答，仁宗又说： 朕已有了。 于是任命陈希亮为曹州知州。
English: Without waiting for an answer, Rinzong said, "I already have," and appointed Chen Xiliang as Caozhou Chizhou.

古文：不逾月，悉擒其党。
现代文：不出一个月，陈希亮全部擒住了盗贼。
English: In less than a month, Chen Xiliang caught all the thieves.

古文：淮南饥，安抚、转运使皆言寿春守王正民不任职，正民坐免，诏希亮乘传代之。
现代文：淮南饥荒，安抚使、转运使都说是寿春知州王正民没有尽职，王正民因此被免官，朝廷令陈希亮乘驿站专车前往代替他。
English: During the famine in Huainan, both the pacifying envoy and the transit envoy said that Wang Zhengmin of Shouchun Chizhou did not do his duty. Wang Zhengmin was dismissed as a result, and the imperial court ordered Chen Xiliang to take a special train to replace him.

古文：转运使调里胥米而蠲其役，凡十三万石，谓之拆役米。
现代文：转运使调进里胥的米而免除他们的徭役，共收十三万石，叫作折役米。
English: The rice that was transferred from the transshipment agents to the rice mills in Linyi was exempted from the corvee, and a total of 130,000 koku was collected, which is called the corvee rice.

古文：米翔贵，民益饥。
现代文：米价飞涨，人民更加饥荒。
English: The price of rice has skyrocketed, and people are even more hungry.

古文：希亮至，除之，且表其事，旁郡皆得除。
现代文：陈希亮来后，废除这一做法，并且将此事上奏，因此邻郡也都停止了这一做法。
English: After Chen Xiliang came, this practice was abolished and the matter was reported, so the neighboring counties also stopped this practice.

古文：又言正民无罪，职事办治。
现代文：陈希亮又说王正民无罪，他任职办事努力有成绩。
English: Chen Xiliang also said that Wang Zhengmin is not guilty, and his efforts in his duties have achieved results.

古文：诏复以正民为鄂州。
现代文：皇上下诏又任命王正民为鄂州知州。
English: The imperial edict also appointed Wang Zhengmin as the governor of Ezhou.

古文：久之，徙知庐州。
现代文：后来，调任庐州知州。
English: Later, he was transferred to Ganzhou Chizhou.

古文：虎翼军士屯寿春者，以谋反诛，迁其余不反者数百人于庐，皆自疑不安。
现代文：驻守寿春的虎翼军士兵，因谋反被诛杀，其余没谋反的数百人被迁到庐州，都惶惑不安。
English: The soldiers of the Tiger Wing Army stationed in Shuchun were killed for plotting a rebellion, and the remaining hundreds of people who did not plot a rebellion were moved to Zhangzhou. They were all confused and uneasy.

古文：一日，有窃入府舍将为不利者。
现代文：一天，有一个士兵偷入官府将要做不利的事。
English: One day, a soldier sneaks into the government office and is about to do something bad.

古文：希亮笑曰： 此必醉耳。 贷而流之，尽以其余给左右使令，且以守仓库。
现代文：陈希亮笑着说 ：这一定是个醉汉。 于是减罪将他流放，再将其余士兵全部交给左右使令，而且要派他们守仓库。
English: Chen Xiliang said with a smile, "This must be a drunkard," so he commuted his sentence to exile, and then handed over all his remaining soldiers to the left and right envoys, and sent them to guard the warehouse.

古文：人为之惧，希亮益加亲信，皆感德，指心誓为希亮死。
现代文：有人为此担心，陈希亮却对士兵更加亲信，士兵都感激他的大德，指心发誓要为陈希亮而死。
English: Some people were worried about this, but Chen Xiliang was more loyal to the soldiers. The soldiers were grateful for his great virtue and swore to die for Chen Xiliang.

古文：改提点刑狱江东，迁度支郎中，徙河北。
现代文：后改任江东提点刑狱，升度支郎中，调任河北提点刑狱。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Jiangdong Provincial Detention Center, promoted to Zhirong Middle School, and transferred to the Hebei Provincial Detention Center.

古文：嘉祐二年，入为开封府判官，改判三司户部勾院。
现代文：嘉二年，进京任开封府判官，改任判三司户部勾院。
English: In the second year of the Jia, he went to Beijing to serve as a judge of Kaifeng Prefecture, and was reassigned to judge the Third Division of the Household Court.

古文：朝廷以三司事冗，簿书留滞，乃命希亮又兼开拆司。
现代文：朝廷因为三司的事情繁多，公文被滞留不能迅速传递，于是命陈希亮又兼官开拆司。
English: The imperial court ordered Chen Xiliang to take on the additional duties of opening and dismantling the three departments, because the three departments were involved in a wide range of matters and the official documents were delayed and could not be passed on quickly.

古文：荣州鬻盐凡十八井，岁久澹竭，有司责课如初，民破产籍没者三百余家。
现代文：荣州出产盐的井共十八口，年久枯竭，但官府仍如当初一样催收课赋，盐民破产被没收户籍的有三百多家。
English: A total of eighteen wells producing salt in Rongzhou have been exhausted for many years, but the government is still collecting taxes as it did in the beginning. More than three hundred salt-producing people have been bankrupt and had their household registration confiscated.

古文：希亮为言，还其所籍，岁蠲三十余万斤。
现代文：陈希亮为他们请求朝廷，恢复他们被籍没的财产，每年减免三十余万斤。
English: Chen Xiliang asked the imperial court to restore their property that had been confiscated, and to reduce and exempt more than three hundred thousand pounds per year.

古文：三司簿书滞留者，自天禧以来，末帐六百有四，明道以来，生事二百一十二万，希亮日夜课吏，凡九月，去其三之二。
现代文：三司公文被滞留的，自天禧以来，未登记处理完的有六百零四件，明道以来新增加的有二百一十二万，陈希亮日夜督促官吏，共用九个月，处理了其中三分之二。
English: Of the documents withheld by the three departments, since the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, only 604 have not been registered and processed. Of the newly added 2.12 million, Chen Xiliang has been supervising officials day and night for nine months, and has processed two-thirds of them.

古文：度支吏不时勾，希亮杖之。
现代文：度支官员有时不办公，陈希亮便杖打他们。
English: Sometimes the relief and development officials did not work, and Chen Xiliang beat them with a cane.

古文：副使以希亮擅决罚，由是事复滞。
现代文：副使认为陈希亮擅自决定刑罚，三司的事因此又停滞下来。
English: The deputy envoy believed that Chen Xiliang had arbitrarily decided on the punishment, and the matter of the three departments had therefore stalled.

古文：会接伴契丹使还，自请补外，乃以为京西转运使，赐三品服。
现代文：当他迎接陪伴契丹使节回朝后，自己请求到外地任职，朝廷于是以他做京西转运使，赏赐三品官服。
English: When he received the envoy of the Khitan Empire who accompanied him back to the imperial court, he requested to serve in a foreign country, so the imperial court made him the envoy of transportation between Beijing and the West and rewarded him with three official uniforms.

古文：石塘河役兵叛，其首周元自称周大王，震动汝、洛间。
现代文：石塘河服役的士兵叛乱，首领周元自称周大王，震动了汝、洛间。
English: The soldiers serving in Shitanghe rebelled, and the leader Zhou Yuan called himself Zhou Da Wang, which shook Ru and Luo.

古文：希亮闻之，即日轻骑出按，吏请以兵从，希亮不许。
现代文：陈希亮闻信，当天便独自轻骑前往巡察，官吏请求他带兵随同，陈希亮不许。
English: Chen Xiliang heard the letter, and on the same day he rode alone to the inspection. The officials asked him to take soldiers with him, but Chen Xiliang was not allowed to do so.

古文：其贼二十四人道遇希亮，以希亮轻出，意色闲和，不能测，遂相与列诉道周。
现代文：叛贼二十四人在道路中遇到陈希亮，因为陈希亮轻身出来，面色看上去悠闲平和，不能推测，于是互相排列在路周诉说。
English: Twenty-four traitors met Chen Xiliang on the road, because Chen Xiliang came out lightly, his face looked leisurely and peaceful, and could not be speculated, so they lined up on the roadside to tell each other.

古文：希亮徐问其所苦，命一老兵押之，曰： 以是付叶县，听吾命。 既至，令曰： 汝以自首，皆无罪，然必有首谋者。 众不敢隐，乃斩元以徇，流军校一人，余悉遣赴役如初。
现代文：陈希亮缓缓地问他们有什么困苦，再命一老兵押着他们，并说 ：把他们交送到叶县，听我的命令。 到了叶县后，下令说 ：你们因为自首，都无罪，但一定有个首谋。 众人不敢隐瞒，于是斩周元示众，将一个军校流放，其余都遣派服役如同从前一样。
English: Chen Xiliang slowly asked them what their hardships were, and then ordered a veteran to hold them, and said, "Send them to Ye County to listen to my orders." After arriving in Ye County, he gave the order: "You are not guilty because you surrendered, but there must be a mastermind. People did not dare to hide, so they cut off Zhou Yuan to show the public, exiled a military school, and sent the rest to serve as before.

古文：迁京东转运使。
现代文：迁京东转运使。
English: Relocation of the Jingdong Transfer Station.

古文：濰州参军王康赴官，道博平，大猾有号 截道虎 者，殴康及其女几死，吏不敢问。
现代文：潍州参军王康前来赴任，途经博平时，有个外号叫 截道虎 的大强盗，将王康及其女儿殴打几乎至死，官吏不敢过问。
English: When Wang Kang, a member of the Zhangzhou Army, came to take up his post and passed through Boping, there was a big robber nicknamed "Jie Daohu," who beat Wang Kang and his daughter almost to death. Officials did not dare to question him.

古文：希亮移捕甚急，卒流海岛；又劾吏故纵，坐免者数人。
现代文：陈希亮下令追捕很急，终于将他流放到海岛；又弹劾官吏故意放纵之过，官吏因此被免官的有好几个。
English: Chen Xiliang ordered a very urgent pursuit, and finally exiled him to the island; he also impeached officials for deliberately indulging in misconduct, and several officials were removed from office as a result.

古文：除州守暴苛，以细过籍民产数十家，获小盗，使必自诬抵死。
现代文：徐州知州暴虐苛征，因为犯小过错便没收了十多户人家的财产，抓了小偷，一定让他诬枉自己再将他处死。
English: Xuzhou Zhizhou tyrannical taxation, because of committing a minor fault, he confiscated the property of more than ten households, caught the thief, and must have him falsify himself and then execute him.

古文：希亮言其状，卒以废去。
现代文：陈希亮向朝廷揭发他的罪状，他终于被撤职罢去。
English: Chen Xiliang exposed his crimes to the imperial court, and he was finally dismissed.

古文：数上章请老，不允，移知凤翔。
现代文：陈希亮多次上书请求退休，朝廷不同意，调他做凤翔知府。
English: Chen Xiliang repeatedly sent letters requesting retirement, but the imperial court disagreed and transferred him to Fengxiang Prefecture.

古文：仓粟支十二年，主者以腐败为忧，岁饥，希亮发十二万石贷民。
现代文：凤翔粮仓储粮可支十二年，主管者担心会腐败变质，闹饥荒的年份，陈希亮将十二万石借贷给百姓。
English: Fengxiang granary grain storage can support 12 years, the supervisor is worried about corruption and deterioration, famine years, Chen Xiliang will lend 120,000 kilos to the people.

古文：有司惧为擅发，希亮身任之。
现代文：官吏害怕做擅自发放的事，陈希亮便一个人承担责任。
English: Officials are afraid to do anything without authorization, so Chen Xiliang is the only one to take responsibility.

古文：是秋大熟，以新易旧，官民皆便。
现代文：这年秋天大丰收，老百姓用新粮还陈谷，官府民众都方便。
English: This autumn, there was a bumper harvest, and the people used the new grain to replace the old grain, which was convenient for the government.

古文：于阗使者入朝，过秦州，经略使以客礼享之。
现代文：于阗使者入朝，经过秦州，经略使用客礼招待他。
English: When the emissary from Yunnan entered the imperial court and passed through Qin State, he was invited with a courtesy call.

古文：使者骄甚，留月余，坏传舍什器，纵其徒入市掠饮食，民户皆昼闭。
现代文：使者很傲慢，留住一个多月，损坏驿站中的家什器物，放纵他的随从到市上抢夺食物，居民都白天关门。
English: The emissary was arrogant, stayed for more than a month, damaged household items in the station, indulged his entourage to go to the market to snatch food, and residents closed their doors during the day.

古文：希亮闻之曰： 吾尝主契丹使，得其情。
现代文：陈希亮说： 我曾负责接待契丹使节，了解这种事情。
English: Chen Xiliang said, "I was in charge of receiving the Khitan envoys and I know about this kind of thing.

古文：使者初不敢暴横，皆译者教之，吾痛绳以法，译者惧，其使不敢动矣。
现代文：使者起初不敢横暴，都是翻译教的，我狠狠的绳之以法，翻译恐惧，使者就不敢乱动了。
English: At first, the messenger did not dare to be violent. All of them were taught by the translator. I brought them to justice. The translator was afraid, and the messenger did not dare to move.

古文：况此小国乎？ 乃使教练使持符告译者曰： 入吾境，有秋毫不如法，吾且斩若。 取军令状以还。
现代文：何况是于阗小国家的使者呢？ 于是派教练使拿着令符告诉翻译说： 进入我国家内，若有丝毫不合法，我将斩了你们。 教练使取得他们立下的军令状回来。
English: How much more the envoy of a small country? So the coach sent a messenger with a warrant to tell the translator: "If you enter our country, if there is anything illegal, I will behead you." The coach returned with a military warrant issued by them.

古文：使者至，罗拜庭下，希亮命坐两廊饮食之，护出其境，无一人哗者。
现代文：使者到后，在庭下列坐四周下拜，陈希亮下令他们坐在两边回廊上，给他们饮食，再护送出境，无一人敢喧哗。
English: After the envoys arrived, they sat around and bowed down under the court. Chen Xiliang ordered them to sit on both sides of the corridor, gave them food, and then escorted them out of the country. No one dared to make a noise.

古文：英宗即位，迁太常少卿。
现代文：宋英宗即位，陈希亮升任太常少卿。
English: Song Yingzong ascended to the throne, and Chen Xiliang was promoted to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：狱有盗，法当死，僚官持不可。
现代文：狱中有个强盗，依法当处死，同僚官员认为不应判死刑。
English: There is a robber in prison who should be put to death according to the law, but his fellow officers do not think he should be sentenced to death.

古文：久之，盗杀守吏遁去。
现代文：后来，强盗杀死守卫的官吏逃跑了。
English: The robbers then killed the guard and fled.

古文：希亮以前议谳于朝，而希亮之议是。
现代文：陈希亮将从前的议论交给朝廷审判裁定，而朝廷认为陈希亮的意见是正确的。
English: Chen Xiliang submitted the previous discussion to the court for adjudication, and the court believed that Chen Xiliang's opinion was correct.

古文：僚官惧，欲以事中希亮，希亮自顾无有其事。
现代文：同僚官员恐惧，要借事来中伤陈希亮，陈希亮自认为没有其事。
English: The fellow officials were afraid and wanted to use the incident to slander Chen Xiliang, but Chen Xiliang thought nothing of it.

古文：始，州郡以酒相饷，例皆私有之，而法不可。
现代文：开始时，州郡官员都用酒来互相赠送，习惯上都由私人得了这些酒，而按法律是不许可的。
English: At first, state and county officials gave each other liquor, which was customarily obtained privately and not allowed by law.

古文：希亮以遗游士之贫者，既而曰： 此亦私也。 以家财偿之。
现代文：陈希亮用酒赠送贫寒的游士，随后又说： 这也是私用公物。 便改用自家财产来赔偿酒钱。
English: Chen Xiliang gave away wine to poor wanderers, and then said, "This is also private property," and then used his own property to compensate for the wine money.

古文：遂借此上书自劾，求去不已，坐是分司西京。
现代文：于是他借此事上书弹劾自己，坚持请求辞职，因此任西京分司。
English: As a result, he used the matter to write a letter of impeachment against himself, insisted on requesting his resignation, and therefore resigned from the West Beijing Branch.

古文：未几致仕，卒，年六十四。
现代文：不久退休，后去世，终年六十四岁。
English: He retired shortly afterwards and died at the age of 64.

古文：希亮尝梦异人按图而告之年，至是果然。
现代文：陈希亮曾梦见有个异人查图后告诉他的年寿，至此果然是六十四岁。
English: Chen Xiliang had a dream that a stranger told him his age after looking at his chart. He was indeed 64 years old.

古文：赠工部侍郎。
现代文：被追赠为工部侍郎。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Samurai of the Ministry of Works.

古文：希亮为人清劲寡欲，不假人以色，自王公贵人，皆严惮之。
现代文：陈希亮为人清廉、刚直、寡欲，不给人好颜色，自王公贵人以下，都很忌惮他。
English: Chen Xiliang is a man of integrity, uprightness, and lack of desire. He does not give people a good color. From the king to the nobles, they are all afraid of him.

古文：见义勇发，不计祸福。
现代文：他见义勇为，不考虑后果。
English: He did the right thing, regardless of the consequences.

古文：所至，奸民猾吏，易心改行，不改者必诛。
现代文：所到之处，奸民劣官，都革心换面，不改的一定被杀。
English: Wherever they go, the traitors and inferior officials have changed their minds. If they do not change, they will surely be killed.

古文：然出于仁恕，故严而不残。
现代文：但他内心仁爱宽恕，所以严格而不残忍。
English: But his heart is merciful and forgiving, so he is strict but not cruel.

古文：少与蜀人宋辅游，辅卒于京，母老，子端平幼，希亮养其母终身，以女妻端平，使同诸子学，卒登进士第。
现代文：年轻时与蜀人宋辅交游，宋辅死于京城，他母亲年老，儿子宋端平还年幼，陈希亮抚养他母亲终身，又将女儿嫁给宋端平，让他同自己的儿子们一同学习，宋端平终于考中了进士。
English: When he was young, he traveled with Song Shu, Song Shu died in Beijing, his mother was old, his son Song Duanping was still young, Chen Xiliang raised his mother for life, married his daughter to Song Duanping, and let him study with his sons. Song Duanping finally passed the entrance examination.

古文：四子。
现代文：陈希亮有四个儿子。
English: Chen Xiliang has four sons.

古文：忱，度支郎中。
现代文：陈忱，任度支郎中。
English: Chen Zhen, a middle school student of Rendu Shiro.

古文：恪，滑州推官。
现代文：陈恪，任滑州推官。
English: Chen Ke, appointed as the governor of Nanzhou.

古文：恂，大理寺丞。
现代文：陈恂，任大理寺丞。
English: Chen Yao, appointed as the vice-president of Dali Temple.

古文：慥字季常，少时使酒好剑，用财如粪土，慕朱家、郭解为人，闾里之侠皆宗之。
现代文：陈忄造，字季常，年轻时好饮酒击剑，用财如粪土，仰慕汉代朱家、郭解的为人，当地侠士都尊奉他。
English: Chen Xizhong, the character of the season, when he was young, he was good at drinking and fencing, he used money like dung, he admired the Zhu family and Guo Jie in the Han Dynasty, and the local knights all respected him.

古文：在岐下，尝从两骑挟二矢与苏轼游西山。
现代文：在岐山下，带了两随从骑士和两副弓箭与苏轼同游西山。
English: At the foot of Qishan Mountain, he took two attendant knights and two pairs of bows and arrows to travel with Su Shi to the West Mountain.

古文：鹊起于前，使骑逐而射之，不获，乃怒马独出，一发得之。
现代文：有喜鹊在前面飞起，他派骑士追去射击，没射到，于是打马独自驰出，一发就射到了鹊鸟。
English: A magpie flew up in front of him, and he sent his knight to chase it and shoot it, but he couldn't, so the draught horse galloped out on its own and shot an ostrich.

古文：因与轼马上论用兵及古今成败，自谓一世豪士。
现代文：因而与苏轼在马上谈论用兵打仗以及古今成败，自称是一世豪士。
English: Therefore, he immediately talked with Su Shi about the use of soldiers to fight wars and the past and present successes and failures, claiming to be a first-generation hero.

古文：稍壮，折节读书，欲以此驰骋当世，然终不遇。
现代文：稍长大后，改变平日志节行为转而读书，想通过读书来在当世驰骋一番，然而终生怀才不遇。
English: After growing up a bit, he changed his daily routine to reading. He wanted to use reading to get ahead in the world, but he couldn't find it in his heart.

古文：洛阳园宅壮丽与公侯等，河北有田岁得帛千匹，晚年皆弃不取。
现代文：他在洛阳的花园住宅的壮丽可与公侯相比，在河北有田每年可收一千匹帛，晚年都放弃不收。
English: The magnificence of his garden residence in Luoyang can be compared to that of a prince. In Arita, Hebei Province, he could collect a thousand roe deer a year, but in his later years he refused to do so.

古文：遁于光、黄间，曰岐亭。
现代文：隐居在光州、黄州之间，地名叫岐亭。
English: He lived in seclusion between Gwangju and Hwangju, in a place called Kitei.

古文：见其所著帽方屋而高，曰： 此岂古方山冠之遣像乎？ 因谓之 方山子。 及苏轼谪黄，过岐亭，识之，人始知为慥云。
现代文：居住庵中吃素，徒步在山中往来，妻儿女奴婢都怡然自得，不与外世通消息，没人认识他们。人们看见他所戴的帽子像个方形屋子，又很高，说 ：这难道是古代方山冠的遗像么？ 因此称他为 方山子 。到苏轼被贬谪到黄州，经过岐亭，认出了他，人们才知道他是陈忄造。
English: He lived in a hermitage, ate vegetarian food, and traveled on foot in the mountains. His wife, children, servants, and slaves were all happy and content. He did not communicate with the outside world, and no one knew them. People saw that the hat he wore looked like a square house, and was very tall, and said, "Is this the remains of the ancient Fangshan crown? Therefore, he was called Fangyanzi. He was exiled to Huangzhou in Sui, and after passing through Qiting, he was recognized, and people knew that he was made by Chen Xizhao.

