古文：虞舜耕于历山，得 玉历 于河际之岩，舜知天命在己，体道不倦。
现代文：舜在历山耕地，在黄河边的岩石上拾到一只玉鬲。舜知道天神的意旨是把天下托付给自己。所以努力行道而不知疲倦。
English: In the cultivated land of Leshan Mountain and on the rocks by the Yellow River, he picked up a jade dragonfly. He knew that the will of the gods was to entrust the world to himself. So he worked hard and did not get tired.

古文：舜，龙颜，大口，手握褒。
现代文：舜长得眉骨突起，嘴巴宽大，手握褒。
English: The eyebrows are raised, the mouth is wide, and the hands are clasped.

古文：宋均注曰： 握褒，手中有 褒 字，喻从劳苦受褒饬致大祚也。 
现代文：宋均注解说： 握褒，是手掌中握着 褒 字。说明他出身劳苦，但后来受到褒扬嘉奖，以致得到了大福。 
English: Song Jun's annotation explains: "Holding praise" is holding the word "praise" in the palm of the hand, indicating that he came from a hard-working background, but later received praise and awards, resulting in a great fortune.

古文：汤既克夏，大旱七年，洛川竭。
现代文：汤战胜了夏桀后，大旱七年，洛水都干涸了。
English: After the Tang Dynasty defeated the Xia Dynasty, there was a seven-year drought, and the Luo River dried up.

古文：汤乃以身祷于桑林，翦其爪、发，自以为牺牲，祈福于上帝。于是大雨即至，洽于四海。
现代文：汤就用自己作为祭品在桑林向上天析祷，他剪掉了自己的指甲和头发，自己把自己当作祭祀用的牲畜，向上天求福，于是大雨马上降临，全国都湿润了。
English: Tang used himself as a sacrificial offering in the mulberry grove to pray to the heavens. He cut off his nails and hair, treated himself as a sacrificial animal, and prayed to the heavens for blessings. As a result, heavy rain immediately fell, and the whole country was wet.

古文：吕望钓于渭阳。
现代文：吕尚在渭河的北岸钓鱼，周文王出去打猎。
English: Lushang was fishing on the north bank of the Min River, while Zhou Wenwang was out hunting.

古文：文王出游猎，占曰： 今曰猎得一狩，非龙，非螭，非熊，非罴。合得帝王师。 
现代文：打猎前的占卜结果说： 今天猎获一只动物，不是龙不是螭，不是熊不是罴，而应该得到一个帝王的老师。 
English: The result of the divination before the hunt said: Today I hunted an animal, not a dragon, not a dragonfly, not a bear, not a dragonfly, but I should get an emperor's teacher.

古文：果得太公于渭之阳，与语，大悦，同车载而还。
现代文：结果周文王在渭河的北岸发现了吕尚，与他交谈后，十分高兴，便让他与自己乘坐同一辆车回去了。
English: As a result, Zhou Wenwang found Lushan on the north bank of the Min River. After talking with him, he was very happy and let him go back with him in the same car.

古文：武王伐纣，至河上，雨甚。疾雷，晦冥。扬波于河。
现代文：周武王讨伐商纣王，来到黄河边上，而下得很大，雷声激越，天昏地暗，黄河内波涛翻滚。
English: Zhou Wu Wang fought against the merchants and merchants, came to the edge of the Yellow River, and fell heavily, the thunder was agitated, the sky was dark, and the waves rolled in the Yellow River.

古文：众甚惧。武王曰： 余在天下，谁敢干余者？ 
现代文：大家都很害怕，周武王说： 我在，天下有谁敢来冒犯我！ 
English: Everyone was very afraid. King Zhou Wu said: "I am here, who in the world would dare to offend me!"

古文：风波立济。
现代文：风波马上平息了。
English: The uproar soon died down.

古文：鲁哀公十四年，孔子夜梦三槐之间，丰、沛之邦，有赤氤气起，乃呼颜回、子夏同往观之。
现代文：鲁哀公十四年，孔子在一个晚上梦见三棵槐树之间，在沛县的丰邑疆域内，有红色的天地之气升起，于是就叫了颜回、子夏一起去观看。
English: In the 14th year of King Lu's reign, Confucius dreamed one night that between three eucalyptus trees, in the Fengyi territory of Pei County, there was a red sky and a red sky, so he called Yan Hui and Zixia to go and watch.

古文：驱车到楚西北范氏街，见刍儿打鳞，伤其左前足，束薪而覆之。孔子曰： 儿来！
现代文：他们赶着车来到楚国西北面的范氏街，看见有个割草的小孩在打麒麟，把那麒麟左侧的前脚都打伤了，还拿了一捆柴草把它盖了起来。孔子说： 小孩过来！
English: They rushed the car to Fan's Street in the northwest of Chu, and saw a child cutting grass hitting a giraffe, injuring the front foot on the left side of the giraffe, and taking a bundle of firewood to cover it up. Confucius said: Come here, child!

古文：汝姓为谁？ 
现代文：你的姓是什么？ 
English: What's your last name?

古文：儿曰： 吾姓为赤松，名时乔，字受纪。 
现代文：这小孩说： 我的姓是赤松，名时乔，字受纪。 
English: The child said, "My last name is Akamatsu, my first name is Jo, and my first word is chihiro.

古文：孔子曰： 汝岂有所见乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 你是否看见了什么东西？ 
English: Confucius said, "Do you see anything?"

古文：儿曰： 吾所见一禽，如麇，羊头，头上有角，其末有肉。
现代文：小孩说： 我看见的东西是一只禽兽，象獐，长着羊头，头上有角，角的末端有肉。
English: And the child said, What I saw was a beast like a calf, with a lamb's head, and it had horns on its head; and the ends of the horns were flesh.

古文：方以是西走。 
现代文：刚从这儿向西跑去。 
English: I just ran west from here.

古文：孔子曰： 天下已有主也。为赤刘。陈、项为辅。
现代文：孔子说： 天下已经有了主人了，这主人是炎汉刘邦，陈涉、项羽只是辅佐。
English: Confucius said: The world already has a master, this master is the ardent Han Liu Bang, Chen Zang and Xiang Yu are only assistants.

古文：五星入井，从岁星。 
现代文：金、木、水、火、土五星进入井宿，跟着岁星。 
English: The five stars of gold, wood, water, fire and earth enter the well, followed by the year star.

古文：儿发薪下鳞，示孔子。
现代文：小孩打开柴草下的麒麟，给孔子看。
English: The child opened the unicorn under the brushwood and showed it to Confucius.

古文：孔子趋而往，鳞向孔子蒙其耳，吐三卷图，广三寸，长八寸，每卷二十四子。
现代文：孔子有礼地小步快跑过去。麒麟面对孔子，遮蔽着它的耳朵，吐出三卷图，图宽三寸，长八寸，每卷有二十四个字。
English: Confucius courteously trotted over. The unicorn faced Confucius, covered its ears, and spat out three rolls of pictures, three inches wide and eight inches long, each roll containing twenty-four characters.

古文：其言赤刘当起日周亡，赤气起，火耀兴，玄丘制命，帝卯金。
现代文：那文字是说： 炎汉刘氏要兴起，周朝要灭亡。红色的天地之气上升，火德荣耀兴盛。孔子拟订了天命，那皇帝是刘姓。 
English: The inscription reads: "The Han Liu Dynasty will rise, the Zhou Dynasty will fall, the red heaven and earth will rise, and the fire of virtue and glory will flourish. Confucius formulated the Mandate of Heaven, and the emperor's surname is Liu."

古文：孔子修春秋，制孝经，既成，斋戒向北辰而拜，告备于天。
现代文：孔子修订《春秋》，制作《孝经》，已经完成后，便洁净身心，对着北极星下拜，向上天报告他的成功。
English: Confucius revised the "Spring and Autumn Classic" and compiled the "Book of Filial Piety." When he had finished, he cleansed his body and soul, bowed down to the North Star, and reported his success to heaven.

古文：乃洪郁，起白雾摩地，白虹自上而下，化为黄玉，长三尺，上有刻文。
现代文：于是天空便弥漫阵下白色的大雾，一直碰到地面，红色的虹霓从上面挂下来，变成了黄色的玉，长三尺，上面有雕刻着的文字。
English: As a result, the sky was filled with a white fog until it touched the ground, and the red rainbow hanging from it turned into a yellow ball, three feet long, with carved words on it.

古文：孔子跪受而读之，曰： 宝文出，刘季握。
现代文：孔子跪着接受了这块玉，又诵读那上面的文字，念道： 宝玉上的文字出世，天下要被刘季掌握。
English: Confucius knelt down and accepted the jewel, and read the words on it, saying, "When the words on the jewel are born, the whole world will be controlled by Liu Ji."

古文：卯，金，刀，在轸北。
现代文：卯金刀之刘氏，出生在楚国之北。
English: The Liu clan, known for its golden swords, was born in the north of Chu.

古文：字禾子，天下服。 
现代文：他的字是禾子之季，天下的人都归服。 
English: The world is obedient to the word of grass.

古文：秦穆公时，陈仓人掘地，得物，若羊非羊，若猪非猪。
现代文：秦穆公的时候，陈仓县有人挖地时得到一物体，象羊又不是羊，象猪又不是猪。
English: During the time of Qin Mu Gong, someone in Chencang County was digging in the ground when they found an object. It was like a sheep but not a sheep, like a pig but not a pig.

古文：牵以献穆公。
现代文：他就牵了去献给秦穆公，在路上碰到两个孩子。
English: He took it to give it to Qin Mu Gong, and on the way he met two children.

古文：道逢二童子，童子曰： 此名为媪。常在地，食死人脑。
现代文：孩子说： 这东西名字叫媪，常常在地下吃死人的脑子。
English: The child said, "This thing is called a centipede, and it often eats the brains of dead people underground.

古文：若欲杀之，以柏插其首。 
现代文：你如果要杀掉它，请用柏树插进它的头。 
English: If you want to kill it, stick its head in a cypress tree.

古文：媪曰： 彼二童子，名为陈宝。
现代文：媪说： 那两个孩子名字叫陈宝。
English: Zou said: Those two children's name is Chen Bao.

古文：得雄者王，得雌者伯。 
现代文：得到那雄的就能称王天下，得到那雌的就能称霸诸侯。 
English: Whoever gets the male will become king of the world, and whoever gets the female will become ruler of the world.

古文：陈仓人舍媪逐二童子，童子化为雉，飞入平林。
现代文：陈仓县这人就放弃了媪，追赶那两个孩子。那两个孩子便变成了野鸡，飞进了平原上的树林。
English: The man in Chencang County gave up his beak and chased the two children, who turned into pheasants and flew into the woods on the plain.

古文：陈仓人告穆公，穆公发徒大猎，果得其雌。
现代文：陈仓县这人把这事告诉了穆公。穆公发动部下举行大规模的围猎，结果捕获了那只雌野鸡。
English: The man from Chencang County told Mu Gong about this, and Mu Gong's subordinates launched a large-scale hunt, which resulted in the capture of the female pheasant.

古文：又化为石。置之汧、渭之间，至文公时，为立祠陈宝。
现代文：但那雌野鸡却又变成了石头，所以秦穆公就把它放置在汧水和渭河之间。到文公的时候，还为它建立了庙宇，庙名陈宝。
English: But the female pheasant turned into stone again, so Qin Mu Gong placed it between the Surabaya Water and the Surabaya River. When it came to Wengong, he also built a temple for it, the temple name Chen Bao.

古文：其雄者飞至南阳。今南阳雉县，是其地也。
现代文：那只雄野鸡飞到南阳郡，现在的南阳郡雉县就是它降落的地方。
English: That male pheasant flew to Nanyang County, and the current Nanyang County is where it landed.

古文：秦欲表其符，故以名县。
现代文：秦国想表明自己受命于天的吉祥征兆，所以用它来命名那个县。
English: Qin wanted to show that he was guided by the auspicious signs of heaven, so he named the county after it.

古文：每陈仓祠时有赤光，长十余丈，从雉县来，入陈仓祠中，有声殷殷如雄雉。
现代文：每当陈仓县祭祀时，就有长十多丈的红光，从雉县那边过来。进入陈仓县的祠庙内，并有象雄野鸡发出的那种殷殷殷的声音。
English: Whenever there is a religious service in Chencang County, there is a long red light, more than ten meters high, coming from the other side of Lixian County. It enters the ancestral temple in Chencang County, and there is the kind of cooing sound emitted by male pheasants.

古文：其后，光武起于南阳。
现代文：后来光武帝刘秀便发迹于南阳。
English: Later, the Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu was born in Nanyang.

古文：宋大夫邢史子臣明于天道。
现代文：宋国大夫邢史子臣懂得天神的意志。
English: Song Guo Daifu and Zou Shi Zixin understood the will of the gods.

古文：周敬王之三十七年，景公问曰： 天道其何祥？ 
现代文：周敬王三十七年，宋景公问他说： 你懂得天神的意志，它可有什么吉凶的征兆？ 
English: In the thirty-seventh year of King Zhou Jing's reign, Song Jing Gong asked him: "You understand the will of the gods, but what are the signs of good and bad luck?

古文：对曰： 后五十年五月丁亥，臣将死。
现代文：邢史子臣回答说： 过五十年，五月了亥日，我将死去。
English: Zou Fizi replied, "In fifty years, in May, on the day of the boar, I will die.

古文：死后五年五月丁卯，吴将亡。
现代文：我死了以后五年的五月丁卯日，吴国将灭亡。
English: When I die, five years from now, the county will be destroyed.

古文：亡后五年，君将终。
现代文：吴国灭亡后五年，您将寿终。
English: Five years after the death of the nation, you, the sovereign, will pass away.

古文：终后四百年，邾王天下。 
现代文：您逝世以后四百年，邾氏将统治天下。 
English: Four hundred years after your death, you will be the ruler of the country.

古文：俄而皆如其言所云。
现代文：后来发生的事情都象他说的那样。
English: What happened next was exactly as he said.

古文：邾王天下者，谓魏之兴也。
现代文：他所说的 邾氏将统治天下 ，是指魏王的兴起。
English: When he said that the Yi clan would rule the world, he was referring to the rise of the Wei dynasty.

古文：邾，曹姓，魏亦曹姓，皆邾之后。
现代文：邾氏，姓曹，魏王也姓曹，都是邾国曹挟的后裔。
English: The Yi clan, surnamed Cao, and the Wei king, also surnamed Cao, are all descendants of Caozhang of the State of Wei.

古文：其年数则错。未知刑史失其数耶？
现代文：不过，他所说的年数却错了，不知道是邢史子臣失算了那数字呢？
English: However, the number of years he said was wrong. I wonder if it was Zou Shizichen who miscalculated that number.

古文：将年代久远，注记者传而有谬也？
现代文：还是年代长久了，注解的人在传授过程中造成了错误？
English: Or has the passage of time caused commentators to make mistakes in the teaching process?

古文：吴以草创之国，信不坚固，边屯守将，皆质其妻子，名曰： 保质童子。 
现代文：吴国因为是初次建立的国家，信用靠不住，所以边防上驻守的将领，都把他们的妻子儿女作为人质留在京城，这些人员名叫 担保人质 。
English: Because Wu was the first country to be established, its credibility was not reliable, so the generals stationed on the border kept their wives and children as hostages in Beijing. These people were called guarantor hostages.

古文：少年以类相与娱游者，日有十数。
现代文：这样的儿童少年，因为同样做人质而在一起玩耍的，每天有十几个。
English: There are more than a dozen such children and teenagers who play together every day because they are also hostages.

古文：孙休永安三年二月，有一异儿，长四尺余，年可六七岁，衣青衣，忽来从群儿戏。
现代文：孙休永安三年三月，有一个奇异的小孩，长四尺多，年龄大约在六七岁，穿着青色的衣服，忽然来跟孩子们玩耍。
English: In March of the third year of Sun Xiu Yong'an, there was a strange child, more than four feet long, about six or seven years old, wearing blue clothes, suddenly came to play with the children.

古文：诸儿莫之识也，皆问曰： 尔谁家小儿，今日忽来？ 
现代文：孩子们没有一个认识他的，都问他： 你是谁家的小孩，今天忽然来这里？ 
English: None of the children knew him, and they all asked him: Whose child are you, coming here today all of a sudden?

古文：答曰： 见尔群戏乐，故来耳！ 
现代文：他回答说： 看见你们成群结队地玩耍娱乐，所以我才来了。 
English: He replied, "I came here because I saw groups of you playing and having fun.

古文：详而视之，眼有光芒，爚爚外射。
现代文：仔细地打量他，只见他眼睛有光芒，闪闪向外发射。
English: Looked at him carefully, only to see his eyes have a glow, flashing outwards.

古文：诸儿畏之重问其故。儿乃答曰： 尔恐我乎？
现代文：孩子们都怕他，又反复问他的来历，那孩子才回答说： 你们怕我吗？
English: The children were afraid of him and repeatedly asked him where he came from, to which the boy replied: "Are you afraid of me?

古文：我非人也，乃荧惑星也，将有以告尔。三公归于司马。 
现代文：我不是人，而是火星。我有件事要告诉你们，刘、曹、孙三公归属于司马。 
English: I am not a man, but Mars. I have something to tell you. Liu, Cao and Sun San Gong belong to Sima.

古文：诸儿大惊，或走告大人，大人驰往观之。
现代文：孩子们大吃一惊，有的跑去告诉了自己的大人。大人便赶去看他。
English: The children were taken aback, and some ran to tell their parents, who rushed to see him.

古文：儿曰： 舍尔去乎！ 
现代文：那孩子说： 我抛下你们走啦！ 
English: The boy said, "I'll leave you and go!"

古文：耸身而跃，即以化矣。
现代文：便纵身一跳，马上就消失了。
English: He jumped up and disappeared immediately.

古文：仰而视之，若曳一疋练以登天。
现代文：抬头里他，只见他就象拖着一匹白色的熟绢上了天。
English: He looked up and saw that he was dragging a white donkey up to the sky.

古文：大人来者，犹及见焉。
现代文：跑过来的大人，还赶上看见了他。
English: An adult who ran over and caught up with him saw him.

古文：飘飘渐高，有顷而没。
现代文：只见他飘啊飘啊渐渐地升高，过了一会儿就没有了。
English: I just saw him float and float and gradually rise, and after a while he was gone.

古文：时吴政峻急，莫敢宣也。
现代文：当时吴国的政局很危险，所以没有人敢宣扬这件事。
English: At that time, the political situation in Wu was very dangerous, so no one dared to publicize it.

古文：后四年而蜀亡，六年而魏废，二十一年而吴平：是归于司马也。
现代文：过了四年，蜀国灭亡了，过了六年，魏国被废黜了；过了二十一年，吴国被平定了。这就是那孩子所说的 刘、曹、孙三公归属于司马 。
English: Four years later, the State of Shu was destroyed, six years later, the State of Wei was overthrown, and twenty-one years later, the State of Wu was pacified. This is what the child said about Liu, Cao, and Sun belonging to Sima.

古文：都水马武举戴洋为都水令史，洋请急还乡，将赴洛，梦神人谓之曰： 洛中当败，人尽南渡。
现代文：主管河渠灌溉的都水马武提拔戴洋任都水令史。戴洋请假回家，将去洛阳，忽然梦见仙人对他说： 洛阳当会被败，人们全都渡江南下。
English: Dai Yang, who is in charge of the irrigation of the canals, was promoted to the position of the director of the irrigation of the capital. Dai Yang asked for leave to go home, and was about to go to Luoyang. Suddenly, he dreamed of a fairy who said to him: Luoyang will be defeated, and people will all cross the river to the south.

古文：年五年，扬州必有天子。 
现代文：再过五年，扬州一定会有天子。 
English: In another five years, Yangzhou will definitely have a heavenly son.

古文：洋信之，遂不去。
现代文：戴洋相信这梦，就不去洛阳了。
English: Dai Yang believed in this dream and did not go to Luoyang.

古文：既而皆如其梦。
现代文：过了不久，发生的事都象他的梦。
English: It wasn't long before it all seemed like a dream.

