古文：司巫掌群巫之政令。
现代文：司巫掌管有关群巫的政令。
English: The chief magistrate is in charge of issuing decrees concerning the group of witches.

古文：若国大旱，则帅巫而舞雩；国有大灾，则帅巫而造巫恒；祭祀，则共主，及道布，及蒩馆。
现代文：如果国家发生大旱，就率领群巫起舞而进行雩祭。国有大灾，就率领巫官察视先世之巫攘除同类灾情的旧例以便仿行。
English: If there is a great drought in the country, he will lead a group of witches to dance and perform a holocaust. If there is a great disaster in the country, he will lead the magistrate to observe the old example of the previous generation of witches to eliminate similar disasters in order to follow suit.

古文：凡祭事，守瘗。凡丧事，掌巫降之礼。
现代文：举行祭祀时，就供给盛木主的匣和神所用的布巾，以及盛藉草用的筐。凡祭祀，负责守护瘗埋的牲币。凡丧事：掌管巫下神之礼。
English: When a religious service is held, he provides the wooden box and cloth used by the deities, as well as the basket used for the grass. For all religious services, he is responsible for guarding the buried livestock coins. For all funerals: he is in charge of the ceremony for the deities.

古文：男巫掌望祀、望衍、授号，旁招以茅。
现代文：男巫负责在举行望祀、望延时授给所祭神的名号，用茅向四方招请所祭之神。
English: The sorcerer is responsible for giving the name of the deity to be worshipped during the wabi-sabi and wabi-sabi, and using the maypole to call out to the deity in all directions.

古文：冬堂赠，无方无算；春招弭，以除疾病。
现代文：岁终举行堂赠之祭以送走不祥和恶梦，所送的方向和远近没有一定。春季招求福祥，安息灾祸，以除去疾病。
English: At the end of the year, a gift-giving ceremony is held to send away bad luck and nightmares. The direction and distance of the gift are not certain. In the spring, good fortune is invited, and calamities are put to rest to eliminate diseases.

古文：王吊，则与祝前。
现代文：王外出吊唁臣丧，就与丧祝走在王前为王除去凶邪之气。
English: When the king goes out to condole with his mourners, it is the same as walking in front of the king to remove the evil spirit.

古文：女巫掌岁时祓除、衅浴、旱暵，则舞雩。
现代文：女巫掌管每年在一定时节举行祓祭以除去邪疾，以及用香草煮水沐浴的事。
English: The witches presided over the annual exorcism festival at a certain time of the year to remove evil diseases, as well as the use of herbs to boil water for bathing.

古文：若王后吊，则与祝前。凡邦之大灾，歌哭而请。
现代文：发生旱灾，就为雩祭而舞如果王后外出吊唁，就与女祝走在王后前面为王后除去凶邪之气。凡王国遇有大灾，就或歌或哭而请求神灵消灾。
English: If there is a drought, they dance for the burnt offering; if the queen goes out to offer condolences, they walk in front of her with the wishing woman to remove the evil spirit for the queen. Whenever there is a great disaster in the kingdom, they either sing or cry and ask the gods to eliminate the disaster.

古文：大史掌建邦之六典，以逆邦国之治。掌法，以逆官府之治；掌则，以逆都鄙之治。
现代文：大史掌握大宰所建王国的六种法典，以迎受天下各国上报的治理情况的文书；掌握八种法则以迎受各官府上报的治理情况的文书；掌握八种法则以迎受采邑上报的治理情况的文书。
English: Daishi grasped the six codes of the kingdom built by Dazai to meet the governance situation reported by all countries in the world; grasped the eight rules to meet the governance situation reported by all government departments; grasped the eight rules to meet the governance situation reported by the provinces.

古文：凡辨法者考焉，不信者刑之，凡邦国都鄙及万民之有约剂者藏焉，以贰六官，六官之所登，若约剂乱，则辟法，不信者刑之。
现代文：凡邦国、官府、采邑有争讼的就据法考其是非，不合法的就加以惩罚。凡邦国、采邑和民众订有盟约券书的就负责收藏，用作六官所藏正文的副本，如果盟约券书有所更改又收藏六官所上报的副本。
English: If there is a dispute between the state, government, or municipality, it shall be judged according to the law, and if it is illegal, it shall be punished. If the state, government, or municipality has a contract with the people, it shall be responsible for collecting and using it as a copy of the text of the contract held by the six authorities, and if the contract has been changed, it shall also collect the copy reported by the six authorities.

古文：正岁年，以序事。颁之于官府及都鄙，颁告朔于邦国。
现代文：如果盟约券书被违背，就打开盟约券书加以考察，不守约的就加以惩罚。调整岁和年的误差以便按季节安排民众应做的事，把这种安排颁布给各官府和采邑。
English: If the book of covenants is violated, open the book of covenants and examine it, and punish those who do not keep the contract. Adjust the difference between the year and the year to arrange the things that the people should do according to the season, and promulgate this arrangement to the government offices and counties.

古文：闰月，诏王居门，终月。
现代文：年终颁布明年十二个月的朔日给各诸侯国。
English: At the end of the year, the new year's day of the 12th month of the next year was promulgated to the various states.

古文：大祭祀，与执事卜日，戒卑宿之日，与群执事读礼书而协事。
现代文：祭祀那天，手执礼书以安排助祭诸臣按常礼所当在的位次。
English: On the day of the ritual, the hand-holding ritual book is used to arrange the ministers who assist the priest according to the order in which they should be present at the ritual.

古文：祭之日，执书以次位常，辩事者考焉，不信者诛之。大之日、朝觐，以书协礼事。
现代文：有因礼争讼的就据礼书以察断，违礼者就要受惩罚。诸侯大会同而来朝觐王，事先依照礼书预习并记录所当行的礼事。
English: If there is a dispute over etiquette, the etiquette book will be used to judge, and the offender will be punished. When the assembly of lords and queens come together, they will prepare and record the proper etiquette in advance according to the etiquette book.

古文：及将币之日，执书以诏王。
现代文：到诸侯向王进献玉那天，拿着礼书以告教王行礼事。
English: On the day when the lords came to present the jewels to the king, he took the letter of commendation to tell the king to perform the formalities.

古文：大师，抱天时，与大师同车。
现代文：王亲征，就抱持观测天象的仪器与大师同乘一车。
English: Wang Fanzheng, holding an instrument for observing celestial objects, rode in the same car with the master.

古文：大迁国，抱法以前。
现代文：国都大迁徙，就抱持司空营建国都之法前往。
English: After the great migration of the national capital, he went there with the idea of building a national capital in the sky.

古文：大丧，执法以莅劝防。遣之日，读诔，凡丧事考焉。
现代文：有大丧时，执掌丧葬之法而临视指挥拉柩车者和执披者防护柩车的事，设大遣奠那天宣读诔辞。凡丧事考察行礼的得失。
English: When there is a great funeral, the person in charge of the funeral law will observe the conductor pulling the hearse and the performer protecting the hearse. The eulogy will be read out on the day of the great memorial. In all funerals, the pros and cons of the salute will be examined.

古文：小丧，赐谥。
现代文：有小丧负责赐给死者谥号。
English: Some mourners are responsible for giving the deceased a nickname.

古文：凡射事，饰中，舍筭，执其礼事。
现代文：凡举行射箭比赛，洗刷盛笄的中，从中里取笄放在地上计算射中的多少，并执掌有关的礼事。
English: When an archery competition is held, the middle of the loaded crossbow is washed, the crossbow is taken from the middle and placed on the ground to calculate the number of hits, and the relevant ceremony is performed.

古文：小史掌邦国之志，奠系世，辨昭穆。
现代文：小史掌管王国和王畿内侯国的史记，撰定帝系和世本，辨别诏穆的次序。
English: Xiao Shi was in charge of the history of the kingdom and Wang Guizhong's principality, compiling the imperial line and the world record, and distinguishing the order of the imperial edict.

古文：若有事，则诏王之忌讳。
现代文：如果王有事要到宗庙祈祷祭祀，就告诉王先王的忌日和名讳。
English: If the king has to go to the ancestral temple to pray and offer sacrifices, he should tell the king the day of his death and his name.

古文：大祭祀，读礼法，史以书叙昭穆之俎簋。
现代文：举行大祭祀，大史与有关官吏读礼法书，小史依据礼法书排定诏穆和俎簋的位次。
English: The grand ritual was held, the grand historian read the etiquette book with the relevant officials, and the minor historian ranked the position of the emperor and the eunuch according to the etiquette book.

古文：大丧、大宾客、大会同、大军旅，佐大史。
现代文：在有大丧、大宾客、大会同、大征伐时，协助大史行事。
English: When there is a great mourning, a great guest, a great conference, or a great conquest, assist the great history.

古文：凡国事之用礼法者，掌其小事。
现代文：凡王国的事要用礼法的，掌管其中小事所当用的礼法。
English: Let all the affairs of the kingdom be conducted with propriety, and let him who has charge of the least of these govern himself with propriety.

古文：卿大夫之丧。赐谥，读诔。
现代文：卿大夫的丧事，负责赐予谥号，宣读诔词。
English: In the event of the death of a distinguished doctor, he is responsible for bestowing the posthumous name and reading the eulogy.

古文：冯相氏掌十有二岁，十有二月，十月二辰，十日，二十有八星之位，辨其叙事，以会天位。
现代文：冯相氏负责观测十二年绕天一周的太岁、一年十二次盈亏的月亮、斗柄所指的十二辰、一旬的十天、日月五星所在二十八宿的位置，辨别和排列年月时节朔望等历法的事，以与日月五星等天体运行的位置相对照。
English: Feng Xiang was responsible for observing the lunar year, which takes 12 years to orbit the earth, the moon, which waxes and wanes 12 times a year, the 12 hours of the day, the 10 days of the month, and the positions of the 28 constellations of the sun, moon and five stars. He was also responsible for distinguishing and arranging the events of the lunar calendar, such as the leap year, and comparing them with the positions of the sun, moon and five stars and other celestial bodies.

古文：冬、夏致日，春、秋致月，以辨四时之叙。
现代文：冬至、夏至测度日影的短长，春分、秋分测度月影的短长，据以辨别四季的代序。
English: The winter solstice and summer solstice measure the short length of the sun's shadow, and the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox measure the short length of the moon's shadow, according to which the order of the four seasons can be distinguished.

古文：保章氏掌天星，以志星辰、日月之变动，以观天下之迁，辨其吉凶。
现代文：保章氏掌管观测天上的星象，以记录星、辰、日、月的变动，据以观测天下的变化，辨别这种变化的吉凶。
English: Baozhang was in charge of observing the stars in the sky to record the changes of the stars, the hour, the day, and the month, to observe the changes in the world, and to distinguish the fortunes of such changes.

古文：以星土辨九州之地，所封封域，皆有分星，以观妖祥。
现代文：根据星宿的分野来辨别九州的地域，所分封国家的界域都有自己的分星，通过观察分星以观测各国的妖祸吉祥。
English: The regions of Kyushu are distinguished according to the fields of the constellations. The boundaries of the assigned countries all have their own horoscope. It is auspicious to observe the evil omens of each country by observing the horoscope.

古文：以十有二岁之相，观天下之妖祥。
现代文：根据岁星历经十二次时的星象，来观测天下的妖祸吉祥。
English: According to the stars when the year star passes through twelve times, to observe the world's evil and auspicious.

古文：以五云之物，辨吉凶、水旱、降丰荒之祲象。
现代文：根据日旁五种云色，来辨别能够预兆吉凶和水旱所降以及年成丰欠的阴阳相犯的气象。
English: According to the five cloud colors around the sun, to distinguish the weather that can foreshadow the auspicious and unlucky, the water and drought, and the ying and yang of the year's abundance.

古文：以十有二风，察天地之和命，乖别之妖祥。
现代文：根据十二个月的风，来观测天地之气的和与不和所预示的妖祸吉祥。
English: According to the wind of the twelve months, to observe the harmony and discord of the atmosphere of heaven and earth, the foreshadowed evil and auspicious.

古文：凡此五物者，以诏救政，访序事。
现代文：凡以上所述五种占验方法坦以告教王补救政治失误，谋议并依次安排好所应做的事。
English: All of the above-mentioned five methods of occupying and testing should openly appeal to the Pope to remedy political mistakes, discuss and arrange what should be done in turn.

古文：内史掌王之八枋之法，以诏王治。一曰爵，二曰禄，三曰废，四曰置，五曰杀，六曰生，七曰予，八曰夺。
现代文：内史协助大宰掌管王的八种权柄的运用之法，以告教王治驭群臣：一是授予爵位，二是授予俸禄，三是废黜官职，四是安置官职，五是诛杀，六是赦免死罪，七是赐予，八是剥夺。
English: The following are the eight ways in which Dazai assisted the king in controlling the use of power: one is to grant a title, the second is to grant a salary, the third is to abolish a post, the fourth is to place a post, the fifth is to kill, the sixth is to pardon the death penalty, the seventh is to grant, and the eighth is to deprive.

古文：执国法及国令之贰，以考政事，以逆会计。
现代文：执掌国法和国家政令的副本，据以考察各诸侯国、府和采邑的政事，据以受纳并考察他们的会计文书。
English: He was in charge of the copy of the state law and the state decree, on the basis of which he examined the political affairs of the various provinces, prefectures and counties, and on the basis of which he accepted and examined their accounting documents.

古文：掌叙事之法，受讷访，以诏王听治。
现代文：掌管依尊卑次序安排群臣向王奏事之法，接受群臣的谋议转告给王而由王听断处置。
English: He was in charge of arranging for the vassals to report to the king according to the order of precedence. He accepted the advice of the vassals and conveyed it to the king, who then decided on the matter.

古文：凡命诸侯及孤、卿、大夫，则策命之。
现代文：凡策命诸侯以及孤卿大夫，就受王命作策书加以任命。
English: All the strategists of the lords and nobles, as well as the lonely doctors, were appointed by the king's order.

古文：凡四方之事书，内史读之。
现代文：凡四方奏事的文书，由内史读给王听。
English: All the documents of the Quartet were read to Wang from the Inner History.

古文：王制禄，则赞为之。以方出之，赏赐。
现代文：王制定俸禄，就帮助王撰定文辞，用方版宣示出去。
English: When Wang formulated the salary, he helped Wang to write the wording and send it out in a printed version.

古文：亦如之。
现代文：当王有所赏赐时也这样做。
English: The king does the same when he receives a reward.

古文：内史掌书王命，遂贰之。
现代文：内史负责书写王的命令，接着便抄写命令的副本加以保存。
English: The Inner Historian was responsible for writing down the king's orders, then copying them down and storing them.

古文：外史掌书外令，掌四方之志，掌三皇五帝之书，掌达书名于四方。
现代文：外史负责书写王下达给畿外的命令。掌管四方诸侯国的史记，掌管三皇五帝的典籍。负责把统一的文字传达到四方各国。
English: He was in charge of foreign history, writing the orders given by the king to the provinces outside the Kinki region. He was in charge of the histories of the provinces in the four directions, in charge of the classics of the three emperors and five emperors. He was in charge of transmitting the unified script to the countries in the four directions.

古文：若以书使于四方，则书其令。
现代文：如果使者拿着王的命令出使四方，就负责书写命令授给使者。
English: If a messenger is sent out with the king's order, he is responsible for writing the order and giving it to the messenger.

古文：御史掌邦国、都鄙及万民之治令，以赞冢宰。
现代文：御史掌管有关各诸侯国、采邑以及民众治理方面命令的文书，以协助冢宰进行治理。
English: The goshi was in charge of the documents relating to the orders of each vassal state, county and town, as well as the governance of the people, in order to assist the kanzai in governance.

古文：凡治者受法令焉，掌赞书，凡数従政者。
现代文：凡从事治理的官吏都从御史那里受取书写成文的法令。负责帮助王撰写命令。凡统计从政者人数的事都由御史负责。
English: All officials involved in governance receive written decrees from the goshi. They are responsible for helping the king write orders. The goshi is responsible for counting the number of politicians.

古文：巾车掌公车之政令，辨其用与其旗物而等叙之，以治其出入。
现代文：巾车掌管有关官车的政令，分辨它们的用途和所当建树的旌旗，区别等级和尊卑次序，管理它们的接收和分配。
English: In charge of the decrees concerning the official cars, distinguishing their use and the flags to be erected, distinguishing the rank and order of superiority and inferiority, and managing their reception and distribution.

古文：王之五路：一曰玉路，锡，樊缨，十有再就，建大常，十有二斿，以祀。金路，钩，樊缨九就，建大旂，以宾、同姓以封。象路，朱，樊缨七就，建大赤，以朝、异姓以封。革路，龙勒，条缨五就，建大白，以即戎，以封四卫。木路，前樊鹄缨，建大麾，以田，以封蕃国。
现代文：王的五种车：一是玉路，驾车的马有用金镂饰的当卢，繁和缨都用五彩的厕缠绕十二匝，车上树大常旗，大常旁饰有十二脖，用于祭祀；二是金路，驾车的马有金饰的钩，樊和缨都用五彩的厕缠绕九匝，车上树大旃旗，用于会宾客，封赐同姓；三是象路，驾车的马配有朱饰的络头，樊和缨都用五彩的厕缠绕七匝，车上树大赤旗，用于上朝，封赐异姓；四是革路，驾车的马配有白黑二色杂饰的韦做的络头，樊和缨都用丝绦缠绕五匝，车上树大白旗，用于军事，用于封赐守卫四方的诸侯；五是木路，驾车的马饰有浅黑色的樊和白色的缨，车上树有大麾旗，用于田猎，用于封赐九州外的蕃国。
English: The king's five kinds of chariots: the first is the jade road, the driving horse has a gold-encrusted Danglu, and the Shanzhong and Yao all use a multi-colored toilet to wind the twelve cymbals, the car has a large banner, and the side of the large banner is decorated with twelve necks, which is used for sacrifice; the second is the gold road, the driving horse has a gold-decorated hook, the cymbals and Yao all use a multi-colored toilet to wind the nine cymbals, the car has a large banner for meeting guests, and the same surname is given;

古文：王后之五路：重翟，锡面朱緫；厌翟，勒面缋緫；安车，雕面，鹥緫皆有容盖；翟车，贝面，组緫；有握；辇车，组挽，有翣，羽盖。
现代文：王后的五种车：一是重翟，驾车的马面上有用金镂饰的当卢，马勒两侧缀饰着红色的缯带；二是厌翟，驾车的马面上有杂饰黑白二色的韦做的当卢，马勒两侧缀饰着画有花纹的缯带；三是安车，驾车的马面上有画饰的当卢，马勒两侧缀饰着青黑色的缯带；以上三种车上都设有容盖；四是翟车，驾车的马面上有用贝壳装饰的当卢，马勒两侧缀饰着丝带，车上设有幄；五是辇车，有供人牵引用的丝带，车两旁设有要扇，车上设有羽盖。
English: There are five kinds of the Queen's carriages: the first is the heavy carriage, the driving surface of the horse is adorned with gold-plated danglu, the horse is decorated with red ribbons on both sides; the second is the loathsome carriage, the driving surface of the horse is decorated with black-and-white woven danglu, the horse is decorated with patterned ribbons on both sides; the third is the safe carriage, the driving surface of the horse is decorated with painted danglu, the horse is decorated with blue-black ribbons on both sides; the above three carriages are equipped with a cover; the fourth is the carriage, the driving surface of the horse is decorated with

古文：王之丧车五乘：木车，蒲蔽，犬衤冥，尾櫜疏饰，小服皆疏；素车，棼蔽，犬礻冥，素饰，小服皆素；藻车，藻蔽，鹿浅礻冥，革饰。駹车，萑蔽，然礻冥，髹饰。漆乘，藩蔽，豻衤冥，雀饰。
现代文：王的丧车有五种：一是木车，用蒲草做车上的藩蔽，车轼上覆盖用白狗皮做的禊，设有用白狗皮尾做的盛兵器橐，祺和橐都用粗布饰边，小兵器袋也都用粗布饰边；二是素车，用蓣麻做车上的藩蔽，车轼上覆盖用白狗皮做的禊，祺用白缯饰边，小兵器袋也都用白缯饰边；三是藻车，用苍色的缯做车上的藩蔽，车轼上覆盖用浅毛的鹿皮做的祺，祺用去毛的鹿皮革饰边四是骁车，用细苇席做车上的藩蔽，车轼上覆盖用果然皮做的禊，稹用赤而微黑的韦饰边；五是漆车，用黑漆的细苇席做车上的藩蔽，车轼上覆盖用犴皮做的旗，祺用黑而微赤的韦饰边。
English: There are five kinds of funeral carriages for the king: the first is a wooden carriage, the cattails are made of rushes, the roof of the carriage is covered with white dog skins, and the arms are made of white dog skins. The carts and saddles are decorated with coarse cloth, and the small weapon bags are also decorated with coarse cloth; the second is a plain carriage, the roof of the carriage is made of nettles, the roof of the carriage is covered with white dog skins, the saddles are decorated with white dog skins, and the small weapon bags are also decorated with white dog skins; the third is a seaweed carriage, the

古文：服车五乘：孤乘夏篆，卿乘夏缦，大夫乘墨车，士乘栈车，庶人乘役车。
现代文：执行公务的车有五种：孤乘用夏篆，卿乘用夏缦，大夫乘用墨车，土乘用栈车，庶人乘用役车。
English: There are five kinds of official cars: the lonely passenger car, the noble passenger car, the doctor's passenger car, the peasant's passenger car, and the commoner's passenger car.

古文：凡良车、散车不在等者，其用无常。
现代文：凡良车或散车，不在分等级的车之中，它们的用途也没有一定。
English: Ordinary cars or loose cars are not among the graded cars, and their use is not certain.

古文：凡车之出入，岁终则会之，凡赐阙之。
现代文：凡车辆的派出收回，年终就要对车辆的完损情况做一次统计。
English: Whenever a vehicle is sent for recovery, it is necessary to make an estimate of the damage to the vehicle at the end of the year.

古文：毁折入赍于职币。
现代文：凡赏赐出去的车不论完损不在统计之内。
English: Any car that is given away is not included in the statistics, regardless of whether it is damaged or not.

古文：大丧，饰遣车，遂廞之，行之。
现代文：损毁车的要交赔偿金到职币那里。有大丧，装饰遣车，接着加以陈列，而后由人举着往墓地。
English: Damaged and destroyed cars have to pay compensation to the local money. There is a great mourning, decorated cars are sent, then displayed, and then carried to the cemetery.

古文：及葬，执盖，従车持旌。
现代文：到出葬的时候，拿着盖跟从柩车，并拿着写有死者名字的旌旗。
English: When it's time for the funeral, follow the hearse with the coffin lid and hold the coffin flag with the name of the deceased.

古文：及墓，虖启关，陈车。
现代文：到达墓前，呼令打开墓道的门，陈列祥车。
English: When they arrived at the grave, they were ordered to open the door to the graveyard and display the carriage.

古文：小丧，共柩与其饰。
现代文：有小丧，供给载棺柩的车，以及柩车上的装饰物。
English: There will be a small funeral, a hearse carrying the coffin, and decorations on the hearse.

古文：岁时，更续，共其币车。
现代文：每年按季节更换新车以续用，把换下来的坏车供给车人取材。
English: New cars are replaced every year according to the season to continue using them, and the bad cars that are replaced are provided to the drivers for coverage.

古文：大祭祀，鸣铃以应鸡人。
现代文：举行大祭祀的清晨，摇铃以与鸡人呼喊天亮的声音相应和。
English: In the early morning, when the great ritual is held, the bell is rung to correspond with the sound of the rooster calling for dawn.

古文：典路掌王及后之王路，辨其名物与其用说。
现代文：典路掌管王和王后的五路，辨别它们的名称种类，以及套马驾车和解马卸车的事。
English: The King's and Queen's Road presides over the five roads, distinguishing their names and types, as well as the driving of horses and the unloading of horses.

古文：若有大祭祀，则出路，赞驾说。
现代文：如果有大祭祀，就出车，帮助给车套马和解马卸车。
English: If there's a big religious ceremony, they'll get out of the car and help unload the cart, horse and carriage.

古文：大丧、大宾客，亦如之。
现代文：有大丧、大宾客，也这样做。
English: If there's a big funeral, big guests, do the same.

古文：凡会同、军旅，吊于四方，以路従。
现代文：凡王会同、征伐、吊唁四方诸侯，就驾着王所乘以外的车随行。
English: All the princes of the four quarters, who had been with the king in his campaigns and condolences, accompanied him in cars other than the one the king was riding in.

古文：车仆掌戎路之萃，广车之萃，阙车之萃，苹车之萃，轻车之萃。
现代文：车仆掌管戎路的副车，广车的副车，阙车的副车，蓣车的副车，轻车的副车。
English: The conductor is in charge of the secondary car, the secondary car of the wide car, the secondary car of the narrow car, the secondary car of the narrow car, and the secondary car of the light car.

古文：凡师，共革车，各以其萃。
现代文：凡征伐供王革车，又以其余各革车的副车随行。
English: Whenever the king's chariot was used for conquest, it was accompanied by a second chariot from each of the other chariots.

古文：会同，亦如之。
现代文：王外出会同时也这样做。
English: Wang Gaidai would also do this at the same time.

古文：大丧，廞革车。
现代文：有大丧就陈列王的革车。
English: When there is a great loss, the king's chariot is put on display.

古文：大射，共三乏。
现代文：举行大射礼，供给所需的三乏。
English: A grand firing ceremony was held, and the three required supplies were supplied.

古文：司常掌九旗之物名，各有属，以待国事。
现代文：司常掌管九种旗的名称，各种旗都有同类属的小旗，以待国家有事肘用。
English: He is usually in charge of the names of the nine kinds of flags, and each kind of flag has a small flag of the same kind, which can be used when the country is in trouble.

古文：日月为常，交龙为旂，通帛为旃，杂帛为物，熊虎为旗，鸟隼为旟，龟蛇为旐，全羽为┸，析羽为旌。
现代文：画有日月的叫做常，画有交龙的叫做旃，缪和脖同色叫做旃，缪和脖不同色叫做物，画有熊虎的叫做旗，画有鸟隼的叫做旃，画有龟蛇的叫做旒，用全羽饰旗杆叫做旌，用析羽饰旗杆叫做旌。
English: A painting with the sun and the moon is called a jang, a painting with a dragon is called a yakitori, a yakitori with the same color as the neck is called a yakitori, a yakitori with a different color than the neck is called a thing, a painting with a bear and a tiger is called a flag, a painting with a bird's beak is called a yakitori, a painting with a turtle and a snake is called a yakitori, a flagpole decorated with feathers is called a yakitori, and a flagpole decorated with feathers is called a yakitori.

古文：及国之大阅，赞司马，颁旗物：王建大常，诸侯建旂，孤卿建旃，大夫、士建物，师都建旗，州里建旟，县鄙建旐。
现代文：到国家大阅兵的时候，协助司马颁发旗帜：王树大常，诸侯树旃，孤卿树缪和旃同色的旃，大夫士树缪和旃异色的旃，军帅和大都、小都之长树缪和旃同色的旗，乡吏树缪和脖异色的旖，县鄙官吏树旒，道车所载旖杆饰为全羽，脖车上所载旒杆饰为析羽。
English: When it was time for the grand national military parade, he assisted Sima in handing out the flags: Wang Shu Dajang, Zhuhou Shuxuan, Kuoqing Shuxuan and the same-colored Shuxuan, Dafu Shi Shuxuan and the different-colored Shuxuan, the flag of the general and the long Shuxuan and the same-colored Shuxuan of the big city and the small city, the Shuxuan and the different-colored Shuxuan of the town official Shuxuan, the Shuxuan of the county official Shuxuan, the Shuxuan carried on the road car was decorated with full feathers, and the

古文：道车载┸，斿车载旌，皆画其象焉，官府各象其事，州里各象其名，家各象其号。
现代文：旗的缪上都书写各自的官事、姓名：官府各书写官事、姓名，州里官吏各书写官事、姓名，采邑主各书写官事、姓名。
English: On the flags, officials and their names are written: officials and their names are written on the flags of government offices, officials and their names are written on the flags of prefectures, and officials and their names are written on the flags of prefectures.

古文：凡祭祀，各建其旗。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，为参加祭祀者各树其旌旗。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, each tree holds its banner for the participants.

古文：会同、宾客，亦如之，置旌门。
现代文：参加会、同、接待宾客也这样，并为王在外的住处设置旌旗以象宫门。
English: This was also the case for attending meetings, conferences, and receiving guests, and for the king's residence outside, a banner was set up to resemble the palace gate.

古文：大丧，共铭旌，建廞车之旌。及葬，亦如之。
现代文：有大丧，供给铭旌，为所陈列的遣车树旌旗，到下葬时也要为遣车树旗。
English: There will be a grand funeral, a memorial plaque will be provided, and the flags displayed will be the flags of the funeral procession, and they will also be the flags of the funeral procession when they are buried.

古文：凡军事，建旌旗洮共旅瘳置旗弊之。
现代文：凡有军事行动，为兵车树旌旗，到召集民众时也设置旌旗，待民众到齐后就把旗放倒。
English: Whenever there is a military operation, the flag is hoisted for the troop car, and the flag is also set up when the people are gathered. When the people are gathered, the flag is lowered.

古文：甸，亦如之。
现代文：田猎时也这样设置旌旗。
English: When hunting in the fields, the banner is also set up in this way.

古文：凡射，共获旌。
现代文：凡举行射箭比赛，供给唱获者所需的旌旗。
English: Whenever an archery competition is held, the winners are provided with the required flags.

古文：岁时，共更旌。
现代文：每年按季供给新旗以更换旧旗。
English: New flags are supplied each year on a quarterly basis to replace the old ones.

古文：都宗人掌都祭祀之礼。
现代文：都宗人掌管都中的祭祀之礼。
English: Todosonin is in charge of the rituals at Todochu.

古文：凡都祭祀，致福于国，正都礼与其服。
现代文：凡都中举行祭祀，祭毕把祭肉送给王。规正都中的各种礼仪和服饰。
English: In all capital cities, sacrifices are held, and the sacrificial meat is then presented to the king. The various ceremonies and costumes in the capital are regulated.

古文：若有寇戎之事，则保群神之壝。
现代文：如果有贼寇或外敌侵犯，就保护群神的祭坛。
English: Protect the altars of the gods if they are attacked by bandits or foreign enemies.

古文：国有大故，则令祷祠。既祭，反命于国。
现代文：国家有大的变故，就命令都中官吏祈祷并于事后报神；报神祭后，就向王报告。
English: When there was a great change in the country, he ordered the officials in the capital to pray and report to the god afterwards; after the report, they reported to the king.

古文：家宗人掌家祭祀之礼。
现代文：家宗人掌管家邑的祭祀之礼。
English: The head of the family presides over the ceremony.

古文：凡祭祀，致福。
现代文：凡举行祭祀祭毕都要送祭肉给王。
English: After every religious ceremony, the meat of the sacrifice must be presented to the king.

古文：国有大故，则令祷祠，反命祭，亦如之。
现代文：国家有大的变故，就命令家邑官吏祈祷、事后报神，然后向王报告。
English: When there was a big change in the country, he ordered the officials in his hometown to pray, report to God afterwards, and then report to the king.

古文：掌家礼，与其衣服、宫室、车旗之禁令。
现代文：获福后命令举行报神祭，祭后也向王报告。管有关家邑的礼仪及其衣服、宫室、车旗等的禁令。
English: After receiving the blessing, he ordered to hold a festival to announce the god, and after the festival, he also reported to the king. He controlled the etiquette of the relevant homestead and the prohibition of its clothes, palace, car flags, etc.

古文：凡以神仕者掌三辰之法，以犹鬼、神、示之居，辨其各物。
现代文：凡担任神仕的，掌管根据日、月、星三辰以确定众神神位之法，以绘制人鬼、天神和地神在天位置的图形，辨别它们的名称和类别。
English: Those who were in charge of divinities were in charge of determining the divinities of the gods according to the sun, moon, and stars, drawing the figures of ghosts, angels, and earth gods in the sky, and distinguishing their names and categories.

古文：以冬日至致天神、人鬼，以夏日至致地示物鬽，以禬国之凶荒、民之札丧。
现代文：在冬至那天招致天神和人鬼加以祭祀，在夏至那天招致地神和百物之神加以祭祀，以除去国家和民众的灾荒、瘟疫。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, celestial gods and ghosts are invited to be sacrificed, and on the day of the summer solstice, the gods of the earth and the gods of a hundred things are invited to be sacrificed, in order to remove disasters and plagues from the country and the people.

