古文：操行有常贤，仕宦无常遇。
现代文：操行，有一贯优良的；而做官，却没有总是被赏识和重用的。
English: His conduct has always been excellent, but his service has not always been appreciated and valued.

古文：贤不贤，才也；遇不遇，时也。
现代文：人品好不好，是才能和操行问题；不被重用，是时运问题。
English: Whether one's character is good or not is a matter of talent and conduct; whether one is not reused is a matter of time.

古文：才高行洁，不可保以必尊贵；能薄操浊，不可保以必卑贱。
现代文：才能高超操行高尚，不一定就会尊贵；才能低下操行恶劣，也不可能就必定要卑贱。
English: If one's talent is superior and one behaves nobly, one will not necessarily be honored; if one's talent is inferior and one behaves badly, it is not possible and one must be humble.

古文：或高才洁行，不遇，退在下流；薄能浊操，遇，在众上。
现代文：有人才能超群，操行高尚，不被赏识，居于低下的地位；而有人才能低下，操行恶劣，却被重用，地位在众人之上。
English: There are men of great ability, of noble conduct, who are not esteemed, but have a lowly place; and there are men of low ability, of evil conduct, who are esteemed, but have a high place.

古文：世各自有以取士，士亦各自得以进。
现代文：不同时代各自有用来选拔 士 的标准，而 士 也各有猎取功名的途径。
English: Different eras have their own criteria for selecting scholars, and scholars also have their own ways of hunting for fame.

古文：进在遇，退在不遇。
现代文：升迁在于受到赏识，落第在于不受赏识。
English: To be promoted is to be appreciated; to be demoted is not to be appreciated.

古文：处尊居显，未必贤，遇也；位卑在下，未必愚，不遇也。
现代文：处于尊贵显赫地位，未必就贤能，只不过是受到重用；地位卑贱低下，未必就愚笨，只不过是不被赏识。
English: In high and honourable station, men are not necessarily virtuous, but only misused; in low and mean station, men are not necessarily stupid, but only unappreciated.

古文：故遇，或抱洿行，尊於桀之朝；不遇，或持洁节，卑於尧之廷。
现代文：所以只要被赏识，操行恶劣的，也会在夏桀的朝廷上受到尊重；不被赏识，虽有高尚节操，在尧的朝廷上也会处于卑贱的地位。
English: Therefore, as long as they are appreciated, those who behave badly will also be respected in the court of Xia Xi; if they are not appreciated, although they have noble ethics, they will be in a lowly position in the court of Yao.

古文：所以遇不遇非一也：或时贤而辅恶；或以大才从於小才；或俱大才，道有清浊；或无道德而以技合；或无技能，而以色幸。
现代文：因此，被赏识重用还是遭厌恶斥退，原因是各种各样的：有的是贤臣却辅佐了暴君；有的是臣子才大却要服从于才小的君主；有的是臣与君都有大才，而道德却有清浊高低之分；有的是虽没有道德，却以一技之长合了君主的意；有的是连一技之长都没有，而是仗着姿色受到宠爱。
English: Therefore, whether it is appreciated and reused or repelled by disgust, the reasons are various: some are wise ministers but support the tyrant; some are courtiers with great talent but have to obey the small monarch; some are courtiers and princes with great talent, but have a clear distinction between high and low morality; some are without morality, but meet the monarch's wishes with a skill; some do not even have a skill, but are favored by virtue of appearance.

古文：伍员、帛喜，俱事夫差，帛喜尊重，伍员诛死。此异操而同主也。
现代文：伍员、帛喜一起事奉夫差，帛喜受到尊重，而伍员却被处死，这就是不同操行的人事奉同一个君主。
English: An officer and a soldier serve the same emperor, and the officer is respected, but the soldier is executed. This means that people with different behaviors serve the same emperor.

古文：或操同而主异，亦有遇不遇，伊尹、箕子，是也。
现代文：有的才能操行都相同，却因事奉的君主各异，有被赏识重用的，有遭厌恶斥退的，伊尹和箕子就是这样。
English: Some talents and actions are the same, but they are different because of the monarchs they serve. Some are appreciated and reused, and some are repulsed and rejected. This is the case with Yi Yin and Xun Zi.

古文：伊尹、箕子才俱也，伊尹为相，箕子为奴；伊尹遇成汤，箕子遇商纣也。
现代文：伊尹和箕子才能相同，伊尹做了国相，箕子却沦为奴隶，这是因为伊尹遇到的是成汤，而箕子却碰上了商纣。
English: Yi Yin and Zou Zi have the same talent. Yi Yin became the Minister of State, but Zou Zi became a slave. This is because Yi Yin encountered a soup, while Zou Zi encountered a market.

古文：夫以贤事贤君，君欲为治，臣以贤才辅之，趋舍偶合，其遇固宜；以贤事恶君，君不欲为治，臣以忠行佐之，操志乖忤，不遇固宜。
现代文：贤臣事奉贤君，君主想把国家治理好，贤臣以自己超群的才智辅佐他，由于追求和厌弃恰好一致，他们受到赏识重用理所当然。贤臣事奉恶君，君主不想把国家治理好，贤臣虽尽心竭力去辅助他，终因操行和志向相反，不受赏识重用也理所当然。
English: A wise minister serves a wise prince, the monarch wants to govern the country well, and the wise minister assists him with his superior intellect. Since pursuit and rejection coincide, they are appreciated and reused as a matter of course. A wise minister serves an evil prince, the monarch does not want to govern the country well, and although the wise minister tries his best to assist him, he is not appreciated and reused as a matter of course because of his behavior and aspirations.

古文：或以贤圣之臣，遭欲为治之君，而终有不遇，孔子、孟轲是也。
现代文：有的作为具有很高智慧和道德的臣子，也遇上想把国家治理好的君主，然而终有不受赏识重用的，孔子、孟轲就是这样。
English: There are courtiers with high wisdom and morality, and there are monarchs who want to govern the country well, but there are those who are not appreciated and used. This is the case with Confucius and Mencius.

古文：孔子绝粮陈、蔡，孟轲困於齐、梁，非时君主不用善也，才下知浅，不能用大才也。
现代文：孔子在陈国与蔡国途中没有粮食，孟轲在齐国和魏国陷入困境，这并非当时君主不肯任用好人，而是他们才智浅陋，没有能力使用大才。
English: Confucius did not have food on the way to Chen Guo and Cai Guo, and Meng Xi was in trouble in Qi Guo and Wei Guo. This was not because the monarch did not want to appoint good people at that time, but because their talents were shallow and they did not have the ability to use great talents.

古文：夫能御骥騄者，必王良也；能臣禹、稷、皋陶者，必尧、舜也。
现代文：能够驾御千里马的，一定是王良；能够任用禹、稷、皋陶为臣的，必定是尧、舜。
English: Wang Liang must be able to drive a thousand-horse chariot; Yu, Zou, and Jintao must be able to appoint Yu, Zou, and Jintao as vassals.

古文：御百里之手，而以调千里之足，必摧衡折轭之患；有接具臣之才，而以御大臣之知，必有闭心塞意之变。
现代文：只能驾御日跑百里马的人，而要他去驾御千里马，必定有毁坏衡木折断轭木的危险；只有使用备位充数臣子的才能，却用他去驾御有大臣才智的人，就必然会有才智受压抑的不正常现象。
English: A person who can only drive a horse that can run a hundred miles a day, but if he is asked to drive a horse that can run a thousand miles, there must be a danger of destroying the balance beam and breaking the root beam; only if he uses the talent of a reserved number of courtiers, but uses it to drive a person with ministerial talent, there must be an abnormal phenomenon of talent being suppressed.

古文：故至言弃捐，圣贤距逆，非憎圣贤，不甘至言也。圣贤务高，至言难行也。
现代文：所以，抛弃高明中肯的意见，圣贤遭到拒绝和排斥，并非是憎恶圣贤，不愿听高明中肯的意见，而是圣贤追求的理想太高，深切高明的意见实行起来很困难。
English: Therefore, abandoning the wise and pertinent opinions and rejecting and rejecting the sages is not to hate the sages and not to listen to the wise and pertinent opinions, but the ideals pursued by the sages are too high, and it is very difficult to implement the profound and wise opinions.

古文：夫以大才干小才，小才不能受，不遇固宜。
现代文：才能大的去求才能小的任用他，才能小的不可能接受，因此不受赏识重用理所当然。
English: It is impossible to accept a small talent, so it is not appreciated and reused as a matter of course.

古文：或以大才之臣，遇大才之主，乃有遇不遇，虞舜、许由、太公、伯夷是也。
现代文：有大才的臣子，遇到有大才的君主，仍然有被不被赏识重用的问题，虞舜、许由，太公、伯夷就是这样。
English: When a talented courtier meets a talented monarch, there is still a problem of not being appreciated and reused. This is the case for the three emperors, Yu Xi, Xu Yu, Taigong, and Bo Yi.

古文：虞舜、许由俱圣人也，并生唐世，俱面於尧。虞舜绍帝统，许由入山林。
现代文：虞舜、许由都是圣人，都生活在尧的时代，又都见过尧，而虞舜继承了帝位，许由却隐入山林。
English: Both Yu Yao and Xu Yue are saints. They both lived in the era of Yu Yao and have seen Yu Yao. While Yu Yao inherited the imperial throne, Xu Yue hid in the mountains.

古文：太公、伯夷俱贤也，并出周国，皆见武王；太公受封，伯夷饿死。
现代文：太公、伯夷都是贤人，都生活在周国，又都见过周武王，而太公受封，伯夷却饿死。
English: Taigong and Bo Yi were both wise men, both lived in Zhou, and both had seen King Zhou, but while Taigong received the title, Bo Yi starved to death.

古文：夫贤圣道同，志合趋齐，虞舜、太公行耦，许由、伯夷操违者，生非其世。出非其时也。
现代文：圣贤道同、志合、目标一致，舜与尧、太公与周武王操行一致，而许由、伯夷却与当时君主的操行相违背，原因是他们与所生长的社会、所处的时代不相适应。
English: The saints and sages had the same way of life, the same aspiration and the same goal. Emperor Wu and Empress Dowager Cixi, the Grand Duke and King Zhou Wu had the same behavior. However, Emperor Xu Rong and Emperor Boyi violated the behavior of the monarchs at that time, because they were not compatible with the society in which they grew up and the times in which they lived.

古文：道虽同，同中有异，志虽合，合中有离。
现代文：道义虽然相同，但相同中也有差异；志向虽然一致，但一致中也有差别。
English: Although the morality is the same, there are also differences in the same; although the aspirations are the same, there are also differences in the same.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：道有精粗，志有清浊也。
现代文：因为道义有精深与粗浅，志向有高尚与庸俗。
English: Because morality is both profound and shallow, and aspiration is both noble and vulgar.

古文：许由，皇者之辅也，生於帝者之时；伯夷，帝者之佐也，出於王者之世，并由道德，俱发仁义，主行道德，不清不留；主为仁义，不高不止，此其所以不遇也。
现代文：许由，是上古 皇者 辅佐之才，却生在 帝者 时代；伯夷，是 帝者 辅佐之才，却处于 王者 时代。他们都遵循道德，都实行仁义。君主实行德政，如果不完善他们就不肯留下来辅佐；君主实行仁义，如果不理想他们也不愿留下来辅佐，这就是他们不被赏识重用的原因。
English: Xu Rong, an ancient imperial aide, was born in the era of the emperor; Bo Yi, an imperial aide, was born in the era of the king. They both follow morality and practice benevolence. The monarchs practice virtue, and if they are not perfect, they do not want to stay as aides; the monarchs practice benevolence, and if they are not ideal, they do not want to stay as aides. This is why they are not appreciated and reused.

古文：尧溷，舜浊；武王诛残，太公讨暴，同浊皆粗，举措均齐，此其所以为遇者也。
现代文：尧道德污浊，舜的道德也污浊；周武王要伐商纣，太公也要伐商纣。同样庸俗一样粗浅，行动措施都一样，这就是他们被赏识和重用的原因。
English: The morals of the yakuza are filthy, and the morals of the yakuza are filthy; King Zhou Wu wants to cut down the yakuza, and the Tai Gong wants to cut down the yakuza. They are equally vulgar and shallow, and the action measures are the same, which is why they are appreciated and reused.

古文：故舜王天下，皋陶佐政，北人无择深隐不见；禹王天下，伯益辅治，伯成子高委位而耕。
现代文：所以，舜统治天下，皋陶便辅助政务，而北人无择却深深隐藏不肯露面；禹统治天下，伯益来辅佐治理，而伯成子高却辞官去务农。
English: Therefore, Zhai ruled the world, Zhai Tao assisted in government affairs, while the northerners had no choice but to hide deeply and refused to show their faces; Yu ruled the world, Bo Yi came to assist in governance, while Bo Cheng Zigao resigned to work in agriculture.

古文：非皋陶才愈无择，伯益能出子高也，然而皋陶、伯益进用，无择、子高退隐，进用行耦，退隐操违也。
现代文：并非皋陶才能胜过无择，伯益才能超出子高。然而皋陶、伯益做官受重用，而无择、子高却退居归隐，当官受重用是他们与君主操行一致，退居归隐是他们跟君主操行相违背。
English: It is not the case that the ability to be virtuous is superior to the ability to be unscrupulous, or that the ability to benefit others is superior to the ability to benefit oneself. However, the ability to be virtuous and the ability to benefit others are highly valued as officials, while the ability to be unscrupulous and the ability to benefit others are highly valued as retired officials. The ability to be highly valued as retired officials is consistent with the behavior of the monarch, while the ability to live in seclusion is contrary to the behavior of the monarch.

古文：退隐势异，身虽屈，不愿进；人主不须其言，废之，意亦不恨，是两不相慕也。
现代文：退隐地位低下，但由于与君主合不来，即使受委屈，也不愿去做官；君主不听取其意见，不用他们，心里也不感到遗憾，这是双方互不以为然啊！
English: Retirees have a low status, but because they cannot get along with the monarch, even if they are wronged, they do not want to become officials; the monarch does not listen to their opinions, does not use them, and does not feel regret in his heart. This is mutual disapproval!

古文：商鞅三说秦孝公，前二说不听，後一说用者：前二，帝王之论；後一，霸者之议也。
现代文：商鞅三次劝说秦孝公采纳自己的主张，前二次建议秦孝公不听，最后一次建议被采纳了：前二次，是成就 帝业 、 王业 的理论；最后一次，是成就 霸业 的理论。
English: Shangyao persuaded Qin Xiaogong to adopt his proposal three times. The first two times, he suggested that Qin Xiaogong not listen to him. The last time, his suggestion was adopted. The first two times, it was the theory of achieving "imperialism" and "royalty"; the last time, it was the theory of achieving "domination."

古文：夫持帝王之论，说霸者之主，虽精见距；更调霸说，虽粗见受。
现代文：拿成就 帝亚 、 王业 的理论，去劝导只想称霸的君主，理论虽然精辟，肯定被拒绝；如果换成 霸业 理论，即使粗疏，也会被接受。
English: The theory of using the theory of achieving dia and vangye to persuade the monarch who only wants to dominate, although the theory is incisive, it will definitely be rejected; if it is replaced with the theory of hegemony, even if it is rough, it will be accepted.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：精遇孝公所不欲得，粗遇孝公所欲行也。
现代文：因为理论虽精辟，碰上秦孝公不喜欢；而理论虽粗疏，却遇到秦孝公想实施。
English: Because although the theory is incisive, Qin Xiaogong does not like it; and although the theory is crude, Qin Xiaogong wants to implement it.

古文：故说者不在善，在所说者善之；才不待贤，在所事者贤之。
现代文：所以，不在于劝说者说得多么好，而在于被劝说者能喜欢；才能不需要多么高明，而在于被事奉者能赏识。
English: Therefore, it does not depend on how well the persuader speaks, but on whether the persuaded person can like it; talent does not need to be so clever, but on whether the served person can appreciate it.

古文：马圄之说无方，而野人说之;子贡之说有义，野人不听。
现代文：像养马人的话，没有什么大道理，而农民喜欢；子贡的话，虽然符合仁义的道理，农民却不爱听。
English: Like the words of horse breeders, there is no big reason, but farmers like it; the words of tithes, although consistent with the principle of benevolence, farmers do not like to hear.

古文：吹籁工为善声，因越王不喜，更为野声，越王大说。
现代文：又如吹籁的人擅长演奏优美动听的乐曲，因为越王不喜欢，改成民间小调，越王就高兴。
English: Another example is that the trumpeters are good at playing beautiful music, and because King Yue doesn't like it, they change it to a folk minor, which makes King Yue happy.

古文：故为善於不欲得善之主，虽善不见爱；为不善於欲得不善之主，虽不善不见憎。
现代文：所以，即使是好的，对于不喜欢它的君主来说，虽好却不被钟爱；而那不好的，对于喜欢它的君主，虽不好，也不会被憎恶。
English: So that what is good, though good, is not loved by a prince who does not like it, and what is bad, though bad, is not hated by a prince who does like it.

古文：此以曲伎合，合则遇，不合则不遇。
现代文：这就是凭小技去投合，投合了则被赏识重用，不投合就被厌恶斥退。
English: This is to match with a small skill, and if it matches, it will be appreciated and reused, and if it does not match, it will be rejected with disgust.

古文：或无伎，妄以奸巧合上志，亦有以遇者，窃簪之臣，鸡鸣之客是。
现代文：有人连小技也没有，胡乱以不正当手段去迎合上司的心意，也有被赏识的，像盗窃簪子的臣子，学鸡叫的食客就是这样。
English: There are people who don't even have a minor skill, who use improper means to pander to the boss's wishes, and there are also people who are appreciated, such as courtiers who steal dice and diners who learn to make chicken calls.

古文：窃簪之臣，亲於子反，鸡鸣之客，幸於孟尝。
现代文：盗窃簪子的臣子，被子反所爱；学鸡叫的食客被孟尝君所宠。
English: The vassal who steals the mule is loved by the quilt; the diner who learns to make chicken calls is favored by Meng Yaojun.

古文：子反好偷臣，孟尝爱伪客也。
现代文：子反喜欢偷窃的臣子，孟尝君宠爱弄虚作假的食客。
English: His son, on the other hand, is a courtier who likes to steal, and Meng Yuqun is a diner who likes to cheat.

古文：以有补於人君，人君赖之，其遇固宜。
现代文：由于对主子有好处，主子就器重他们，其受到赏识重用理所当然。
English: Because they are good for the master, the master values them, and they are appreciated and reused as a matter of course.

古文：或无补益，为上所好，籍孺、邓通是也。
现代文：有的虽无益处，但是为上司所欢喜，像籍儒、邓通就是如此。
English: Some, like Zhu and Duntong, are of no use, but are liked by their bosses.

古文：籍孺幸於孝惠，邓通爱於孝文，无细简之才，微薄之能，偶以形佳骨娴，皮媚色称。
现代文：籍孺被汉惠帝宠幸，邓通被汉文帝宠爱，他们连浅薄的学问也没有，微小的才能也没有，只不过由于外貌漂亮、体型优美，皮肤细腻、颜色美艳而得到君主的欢心。
English: Zeki Yao was favored by Emperor Hanhui, and Dantong was favored by Emperor Hanwen. They did not even have shallow learning, nor did they have minor talents, but they won the favor of the monarch because of their beautiful appearance, graceful body, delicate skin, and beautiful color.

古文：夫好容，人所好也，其遇固宜。
现代文：当然，美好的容貌，人人所喜爱，他们被赏识重用理所当然。
English: Of course, good looks, loved by everyone, they are appreciated and used as a matter of course.

古文：或以丑面恶色，称媚於上，嫫母、无盐是也。
现代文：有的人容貌丑陋、颜色难看，却又被君主赞尝喜爱，嫫母、无盐就是这样。
English: Some people are ugly in appearance, ugly in color, but they are admired and loved by the monarch, such as the queen mother and the salt-free.

古文：嫫母进於黄帝，无盐纳於齐王。
现代文：嫫母被黄帝选为妃子，无盐被齐王立为王后。
English: Yan's mother was chosen by the Yellow Emperor to be his concubine, and Wu's mother was chosen by King Qi to be his queen.

古文：故贤不肖可豫知，遇难先图。
现代文：所以，人品好不好可以预先知道，但能否得到君主的尝识和重用，却很难预料。
English: Therefore, it is possible to know in advance whether a person's character is good or bad, but it is difficult to predict whether the monarch's taste and reuse can be obtained.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：人主好恶无常，人臣所进无豫，偶合为是，适可为上。
现代文：因为君主的好恶变化无常，臣子要进献什么才符合其心意，却无法预先知道，偶然投合算是做对了，凑巧与其心意一致就要算是好的了。
English: Because the monarch's likes and dislikes are fickle, it is impossible for a vassal to know in advance what he or she should offer that will be in line with his or her heart's desire. If it happens to coincide with his or her heart's desire, it is considered to be right, and if it happens to coincide with his or her heart's desire, it is considered to be good.

古文：进者未必贤，退者未必愚；合幸得进，不幸失之。
现代文：升官者未必贤能，退隐者未必愚笨，投合受宠的得任用，不受宠的则被斥退。
English: Those who are promoted are not necessarily virtuous, those who retire are not necessarily stupid, those who are favored are appointed, and those who are not favored are rejected.

古文：世俗之议曰： 贤人可遇，不遇，亦自其咎也：生而希世准主，观鉴治内，调能定说，审词际会。能进有补赡主，何不遇之有？
现代文：社会上一般的意见是： 贤德的人应当被重用，要是不被重用，也是由于他自己的过错。读书人如果能迎合社会风气，揣摩君主意图，观察其境内情况，而调整自己专长，确定自己主张，周密窥测时机，能进献对君主有好处的东西，怎么会不受到赏识和重用呢？
English: The general opinion in society is that a virtuous person should be reused, and if he is not reused, it is also due to his own fault. If a reader can cater to the social atmosphere, guess the monarch's mind map, observe the situation in his territory, and adjust his expertise, determine his own position, carefully spy the opportunity, and can offer something that is good for the monarch, how can he not be appreciated and reused?

古文：今则不然，作无益之能，纳无补之说，以夏进炉，以冬奏扇，为所不欲得之事，献所不欲闻之语，其不遇祸幸矣，何福佑之有乎？ 
现代文：现在却不是这样，而是去作弄一些无益的技能，接受一些无益的主张，这等于夏天向君主进献火炉，冬天向君主献上扇子，尽做些君主不想做的事，献上些君主不想听的话，不碰上灾祸就算幸运了，怎么还能得福呢？ 
English: Now it is not so, but to play with some useless skills and accept some useless propositions, which is tantamount to offering the monarch a furnace in summer and a fan in winter, doing something that the monarch does not want to do, offering some words that the monarch does not want to hear, and even if you are lucky not to encounter disaster, how can you still be blessed?

古文：进能有益，纳说有补，人之所知也；或以不补而得佑，或以有益而获罪。
现代文：贡献有益的才能，采纳有益的主张，这是人所共知的常识。但有时会由于无益而得福，有时又由于有益而获罪。
English: It is a well-known common sense to contribute useful talents and adopt useful ideas, but sometimes you will be blessed because of uselessness, and sometimes you will be punished because of usefulness.

古文：且夏时炉以炙湿，冬时扇以火。
现代文：况且夏天还可以用火炉来烘烤潮湿的东西，冬天可以用扇子来扇火。
English: Moreover, in summer you can also use the stove to bake something moist, and in winter you can use a fan to fan the fire.

古文：世可希，主不可准也；说可转，能不可易也。
现代文：社会风气可以迎合，君主的意图却猜测不到；意见可以随君主好恶而改换，才能却难于一下子改变。
English: Social customs can be accommodated, but the monarch's intentions cannot be guessed; opinions can be changed according to the monarch's likes and dislikes, but talents are difficult to change all at once.

古文：世主好文，己为文则遇；主好武，己则不遇。
现代文：如果当时的君主好文，而自己会文就能被赏识重用；君主要是好武，自己则不会被任用。
English: If the monarch at that time was good at writing, and his or her writings could be appreciated and reused; if the monarch was mainly good at martial arts, he or she would not be appointed.

古文：主好辩，有口则遇；主不好辩，己则不遇。
现代文：倘若君主好辩，有口才就会被赏识重用；君主要是不好辩，自己则不会被任用。
English: If the prince is argumentative, his eloquence will be appreciated and used; if the prince is not argumentative, he will not be appointed.

古文：文主不好武，武主不好文；辩主不好行，行主不好辩。
现代文：重视文的君主不重视武，重视武的君主不重视文；重视口才的君主不重视行为，重视行为的君主不重视口才。
English: The monarch who attaches importance to literature does not attach importance to the military, the monarch who attaches importance to the military does not attach importance to literature, the monarch who attaches importance to eloquence does not attach importance to behavior, and the monarch who attaches importance to behavior does not attach importance to eloquence.

古文：文与言，尚可暴习；行与能，不可卒成。
现代文：文章和说话，还可以迅速学习；行为和才能，不可能立刻实现。
English: Writing and speaking can also be learned quickly; behavior and talent cannot be realized immediately.

古文：学不宿习，无以明名。
现代文：学问不经过平时的学习和积累，不能成名。
English: Knowledge cannot become famous without regular study and accumulation.

古文：名不素著，无以遇主。
现代文：名望不一向显著，不可能被君主重用。
English: Fame is not always conspicuous and cannot be reused by the monarch.

古文：仓猝之业，须臾之名，日力不足。不预闻，何以准主而纳其说，进身而托其能哉？
现代文：匆忙学到的本领，短时间树立的名望，时间和功力都不够，要是对自己预先没有了解，用什么来揣摩君主的意图而让其采纳主张，从而获得任用并发挥自己的才能呢？
English: Hastily learned skills, short-term reputation, time and effort are not enough. If you do not know yourself in advance, what can you use to guess the monarch's intention and let it adopt the idea, so as to get appointed and exert your talents?

古文：昔周人有仕数不遇，年老白首，泣涕於涂者。人或问之： 何为泣乎？ 
现代文：以前周朝有个人想做官，屡次都没有被任用，年纪老了头发白了，在路边低声哭泣。过路人有的问他： 为什么哭啊？ 
English: Once upon a time, in the Zhou Dynasty, there was a man who wanted to be an official, but he was not appointed many times. When he was old, his hair turned white, and he cried in a low voice on the roadside. Some passers-by asked him, "Why are you crying?"

古文：对曰： 吾仕数不遇，自伤年老失时，是以泣也。 
现代文：回答说： 我想做官却屡次不被任用，自己悲伤年老错过了时机，因此哭了。 
English: He replied: I wanted to be an official, but I was not appointed many times. I was sad because I missed the opportunity in my old age, so I cried.

古文：人曰： 仕奈何不一遇也？ 
现代文：有人问： 你想做官为什么一次也不被任用呢？ 
English: Someone asked: If you want to be an official, why don't you ever get appointed?

古文：对曰： 吾年少之时，学为文。
现代文：回答道： 我年少的时候，学的是文。
English: He replied: When I was young, I studied literature.

古文：文德成就，始欲仕宦，人君好用老。
现代文：到文治之德成就了，开始想做官，而当时君主喜欢任用年老的。
English: He wanted to be an official, and at that time the monarch liked to appoint old people.

古文：用老主亡，後主又用武，吾更为武。
现代文：爱用老年人的君主死了，后继君主却又要任用会武的，于是我改为习武。
English: The monarch who loved to use the elderly died, but the succeeding monarch wanted to appoint a martial artist, so I changed to martial arts.

古文：武节始就，武主又亡。
现代文：武艺刚学好，重用会武的君主又死了。
English: The monarch, who had just learned martial arts and was a keen martial arts practitioner, died again.

古文：少主始立，好用少年，吾年又老，是以未尝一遇。 
现代文：年少的君主刚即位，喜欢任用少年，我的年纪又老了，因此一次也没有被任用过。 
English: The young monarch, who has just ascended the throne, likes to appoint young people, and I am old, so I have never been appointed.

古文：仕宦有时，不可求也。
现代文：当官是有时运的，不应当强求。
English: Officials are sometimes lucky, and should not be forced.

古文：夫希世准主，尚不可为，况节高志妙，不为利动，性定质成，不为主顾者乎？
现代文：唉，迎合社会风气，揣摩君主意图，还不能达到目的，何况节操高尚，志向远大，不被利禄引诱，性格品质已经固定，不被君主重视的人呢？
English: Alas, those who pander to the social mores and try to figure out the monarch's mind cannot yet achieve their goals. What about those who are noble, have high aspirations, are not lured by gifts, have their character qualities already fixed, and are not valued by the monarch?

古文：且夫遇也，能不预设，说不宿具，邂逅逢喜，遭触上意，故谓之遇。
现代文：遇呀，才能不是预先练习好的，主张不是平常准备好的，而是碰巧遇到君主满意，恰好符合他的心意，这样才称之为 遇 。
English: By chance, talent is not practiced in advance, proposition is not usually prepared, but happens to meet the monarch's satisfaction, just in line with his mind, so it is called chance.

古文：如准主调说，以取尊贵，是名为揣，不名曰遇。
现代文：要是揣摩君主的意图来改变自己的主张，而得到敬重和地位，这应该起名为 揣摩 ，不能起名叫 遇 。
English: If you guess the monarch's intention to change your opinion and gain respect and status, this should be called "guessing," not "meeting."

古文：春种谷生，秋刈谷收，求物物得，作事事成，不名为遇。
现代文：春天耕种谷物生长，秋天收割谷物得到收成，求物物得，作事事成，不能称为 遇 。
English: Cultivating crops in spring to grow, harvesting crops in autumn to get a harvest, seeking things and getting things, doing things and getting things, can not be called luck.

古文：不求自至，不作自成，是名为遇。
现代文：不求自至，不作自成，这才能称为 遇 。
English: This can only be called an encounter if it does not seek its own way and does not make its own way.

古文：犹拾遗於涂，摭弃於野，若天授地生，鬼助神辅，禽息之精阴庆，鲍叔之魂默举，若是者，乃遇耳。
现代文：如同在路上捡到别人遗失的东西，在郊外拣取别人抛弃的东西；好像是天给的地生的，鬼助的神帮的；犹如禽息的精神暗中推荐百里奚，鲍叔的魂魄暗中举荐管仲，像这样，才算是 遇 啊。
English: Like picking up things lost by others on the road, picking up things abandoned by others in the suburbs; it seems to be a heaven-given, earth-born, ghost-helped deity; like the spirit of the bird's breath secretly recommending Bailiyao, Uncle Bao's soul secretly recommending Guanzhong, like this, it is only a chance.

古文：今俗人即不能定遇不遇之论，又就遇而誉之，因不遇而毁之，是据见效，案成事，不能量操审才能也。
现代文：现在一般人既不能对遇和不遇的议论作出正确判断，又单凭被重用就称赞，根据不被重用就毁谤。这种只凭现有效果和既成事实判定是非的作法，是不可能衡量操行和考察才能的。
English: Nowadays, the average person is not able to make a correct judgment on the discussion of whether or not to meet, and is praised simply by being reused, and is slandered by not being reused. This kind of practice of judging right and wrong only by existing effects and facts is impossible to measure conduct and examination ability.

