古文：裴邃，字渊明，河东闻喜人，魏襄州刺史绰之后也。
现代文：裴邃字渊明，河东闻喜人，是魏朝的襄州刺史裴绰的后代。
English: Pei Yuanzhi Yuanming, Hedong Wenshi Ren, is a descendant of the Wei Dynasty's Xiangzhou scholar Pei Kuo.

古文：祖寿孙，寓居寿阳，为宋武帝前军长史。
现代文：他的祖父叫裴寿孙，家住在寿阳县，是宋武帝的前军长史。
English: His grandfather, Pei Shousun, who lived in Shouyang County, was the former military commander of Emperor Songwu.

古文：父仲穆，骁骑将军。
现代文：他的父亲叫裴仲穆，当过骁骑将军。
English: His father, Pei Zhongmu, was a cavalry general.

古文：邃十岁能属文，善《左氏春秋》。
现代文：裴邃十岁时就会写文章，擅长《左氏春秋》。
English: At the age of ten, Pei Yao could write articles and was good at "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：齐建武初，刺史萧遥昌引为府主簿。
现代文：南齐建武初年，刺史萧遥昌引荐他当州府主簿。
English: In the first year of Nanqi Jianwu, he was recommended by Xiao Yuchang, the chief secretary of the State Council.

古文：寿阳有八公山庙，遥昌为立碑，使邃为文，甚见称赏。
现代文：寿阳县裹有八公山庙，萧遥昌为之立碑，让裴邃撰写碑文，碑文深受称赞和欣赏。
English: Shouyang County is surrounded by the Eight Kings Mountain Temple. Xiao Yuchang erected a monument for it, and asked Pei Jun to write an inscription. The inscription was highly praised and appreciated.

古文：举秀才，对策高第，奉朝请。
现代文：裴邃考中秀才后，在朝廷的取士考试中高中榜首，被任命为奉朝请。
English: After Pei Jiuquan excelled in the junior high school entrance examination, he ranked first in the junior high school entrance examination of the imperial court, and was appointed to serve the imperial court.

古文：东昏践阼，始安王萧遥光为抚军将军、扬州刺史，引邃为参军。
现代文：东昏侯即位后，始安王萧遥光任抚军将军、扬州刺史，他引荐裴邃当参军。
English: After Emperor Dongwu ascended to the throne, King Xiao Yaoguang of the First An Dynasty appointed him as the general of the Fuzhou army and the governor of Yangzhou, and he recommended Pei Xuan to join the army.

古文：后遥光败，邃还寿阳，值刺史裴叔业以寿阳降魏，豫州豪族皆被驱掠，邃遂随众北徙。魏主宣武帝雅重之，以为司徒属，中书郎，魏郡太守。
现代文：后来，萧遥光败落，裴邃回到寿阳，正遇上刺史裴叔业献出寿阳向魏国投降，豫州的贵族大户全都被驱逐劫掠，裴邃于是跟随大家向北迁徙，魏国皇帝宣武帝非常看重他，任命他为司徒属，中书郎，魏郡太守。
English: Later, when Xiao Yaoguang was defeated and Pei Yao returned to Shouyang, he was met by the assassin Shi Pei Shuye, who offered Shouyang to Wei for surrender. All the aristocrats of Yuzhou were expelled and plundered. Pei Yao then followed everyone to migrate north. Emperor Xuanwu of Wei valued him very much and appointed him as a member of the Stuxi clan, the chief scribe, and the governor of Wei County.

古文：魏遣王肃镇寿阳，邃固求随肃，密图南归。
现代文：魏国派遣王肃镇守寿阳，裴邃坚决请求跟随王肃，暗中计划回到南方去。
English: Wei dispatched Wang Su Zhen to guard Shouyang, Pei Yu firmly requested to follow Wang Su and secretly planned to return to the south.

古文：天监初，自拔还朝，除后军谘议参军。
现代文：天监初年，裴邃自己逃出魏国，回到南朝，被任命为后军谘议参军。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Inspector, Pei Xuan himself escaped from Wei and returned to the Southern Dynasty. He was appointed as an adviser to the rear army to join the army.

古文：邃求边境自效，以为辅国将军、庐江太守。
现代文：裴邃自己要求到边境去效力，于是又任命他为辅国将军、庐江郡太守。
English: Pei Jun himself asked to go to the border to serve, so he appointed him as an auxiliary general and the governor of Minjiang County.

古文：时魏将吕颇率众五万奄来攻郡，邃率麾下拒破之，加右军将军。
现代文：当时魏国大将吕颇率领五万大军突然前来进攻庐江郡，裴邃率领自己的部下进行抵抗，打败了魏军，裴邃被加任右军将军。
English: At that time, the general of the Wei dynasty, Lü Po, led a 50,000-strong army to suddenly attack Minjiang County. Pei Xuan led his subordinates to resist and defeated the Wei army. Pei Xuan was appointed as the general of the right army.

古文：五年，征邵阳洲，魏人为长桥断淮以济。
现代文：五年，出征邵阳洲，魏军在淮河上搭了一座长桥遇河。
English: Five years later, when the Wei army set out for Shaoyangzhou, they built a long bridge across the Huai River.

古文：邃筑垒逼桥，每战辄克，于是密作没突舰。
现代文：裴邃修筑堡垒向长桥逼进，每次作战都能取胜，因此，他暗地襄制作了没有烟囱的舰船。
English: Pei Xuan built a fortress to force his way into the Long Bridge and win every battle, so he secretly made a ship without a chimney.

古文：会甚雨，淮水暴溢，邃乘舰径造桥侧，魏众惊溃，邃乘胜追击，大破之。
现代文：正碰上下大雨，淮河水位暴涨，裴邃带人乘坐舰船径直来到长桥旁边，魏军大吃一惊，溃不成军，裴邃等人乘胜追击，大败魏军。
English: It was raining heavily, and the water level of the Huaihe River was soaring. Pei Jun and his men took a ship and went straight to the side of the Long Bridge. The Wei army was taken by surprise and could not be defeated. Pei Jun and others took advantage of the victory to pursue and defeated the Wei army.

古文：进克羊石城，斩城主元康。
现代文：裴邃进而攻克羊石城，杀了城主元康。
English: Pei Jun went on to conquer the city of Yangshi and killed the lord of the city, Yuan Kang.

古文：又破霍丘城，斩城主甯永仁。
现代文：又攻破霍丘城，将城主宁永仁斩首。
English: They also broke through Huoqiu City and beheaded the lord of the city, Ning Yongren.

古文：平小岘，攻合肥。
现代文：之后，又平定小岘，攻下合肥。
English: After that, it subdued Xiaotang again and captured Hefei.

古文：以功封夷陵县子，邑三百户。
现代文：裴邃因功被封为夷陵县子，食邑三百户。
English: Pei Hao was awarded the title of the son of Yiling County for his achievements, and his food village has grown to 300 households.

古文：迁冠军长史、广陵太守。
现代文：迁任冠军长史、广陵郡太守。
English: Chang Shi, champion of relocation, became the governor of Guangling County.

古文：邃与乡人共入魏武庙，因论帝王功业。
现代文：裴邃和同乡人一起进入魏武庙，并议论起帝王的功业。
English: Pei Jun and his fellow villagers entered the Weiwu Temple together and discussed the emperor's exploits.

古文：其妻甥王篆之密启高祖，云 裴邃多大言，有不臣之迹。 
现代文：他妻子的外甥王篆之偷偷向高祖告密，说 裴邃说了很多大话，有不忠于君主的迹象 。
English: His wife's nephew, Wang Xizhi, secretly informed Gaozu that Pei Xizhi had said a lot of big words and showed signs of being disloyal to the monarch.

古文：由是左迁为始安太守。
现代文：因此，裴邃被降职，任始安郡太守。
English: As a result, Pei Xuan was demoted and became the governor of Shi'an County.

古文：邃志欲立功边陲，不愿闲远，乃致书于吕僧珍曰： 昔阮咸、颜延有 二始 之叹。吾才不逮古人，今为三始，非其愿也，将如之何！ 
现代文：裴邃立志要在边陲立功，不愿意到太清闲的地方去，就写了一封书信给吕僧珍说： 从前阮咸、颜延有 二始 的叹息，我的才能比不上古人，现在是三始，这不是我的心愿，该怎么办? 
English: Pei Yan was determined to make a great contribution to the country and did not want to go to a place that was too idle, so he wrote a letter to Lü Sengzhen, saying: In the past, Ruan Han and Yan Yan had a second sigh, my talent was not as good as the ancients, now it is the third sigh, this is not my wish, what should I do?

古文：未及至郡，会魏攻宿预，诏邃拒焉。
现代文：还没有到达始安郡，正巧魏军进攻宿预，皇帝韶令裴邃前去抵御魏军。
English: Before reaching Shi'an County, the Wei army attacked Shudu, and the emperor ordered Pei Jun to defend against the Wei army.

古文：行次直渎，魏众退。
现代文：裴邃行进到直渎这个地方，魏军就撤退了。
English: When Pei Jun marched to Zhouzhuang, the Wei army retreated.

古文：迁右军谘议参军、豫章王云麾府司马，率所领助守石头。
现代文：裴邃迁任右军谘议参军、豫章王的云麾府司马，率领他的部队帮助守卫石头城。
English: Pei Xuan was transferred to the Right Army to advise and join the army, and became the Sima of Yunnan Prefecture of King Yuanzhang. He led his troops to help guard Stone Town.

古文：出为竟陵太守，开置屯田，公私便之。
现代文：后出任童陵郡太守，他开垦屯田，公家私人都感到方便。
English: After that, he served as the governor of Tongling County, and he opened up the Tonden, which was convenient for both the public and private sectors.

古文：迁为游击将军、硃衣直阁，直殿省。
现代文：又迁任游击将军、朱衣直合，在殿省内当值。
English: He was also transferred to the post of guerrilla general, Zhu Yi Zhaohai, and was on duty in the palace province.

古文：寻迁假节、明威将军、西戎校尉、北梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：不久，迁任假节、明威将军、西戎校尉、北梁州和秦州二州刺史。
English: Soon, the relocation of the holiday, General Mingwei, Lieutenant Xi Rong, and the history of the two states of Beiliang and Qinzhou.

古文：复开创屯田数千顷，仓廪盈实，省息边运，民吏获安，乃相率饷绢千余匹。邃从容曰： 汝等不应尔；吾又不可逆。 
现代文：他又开创了屯田敷千顷，粮仓裹装满了粮食，造就可以省去或停止对边境的运输，军民都得以安定。于是他们相继送来一千多匹绢，裴邃从容地说： 你们不应该这样，但我又不能违逆你们的心意。 
English: He also created thousands of hectares of farmland, grain silos filled with grain, so that transportation to the border could be avoided or stopped, and the military and civilians could be stabilized. So they successively sent more than a thousand donkeys. Pei Jun said calmly: You should not do this, but I cannot go against your wishes.

古文：纳其绢二匹而已。
现代文：于是，他衹象征性地收下了其中的两匹绢而已。
English: As a result, he only symbolically took in two of the donkeys.

古文：还为给事中、云骑将军、硃衣直阁将军，迁大匠卿。
现代文：回朝后，任给事中、云骑将军、朱衣直合将军，迁任大匠卿。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was assigned to the middle, General Yunjie and General Zhu Yizhong, and transferred to the position of Daisho Sir.

古文：普通二年，义州刺史文僧明以州叛入于魏，魏军来援。
现代文：普通二年，义州刺史文僧明献义州叛投到魏国，魏军前来支援。
English: Two years later, the Yizhou Zhishi Wen monk defected from Yizhou to Wei, and the Wei army came to support him.

古文：以邃为假节、信武将军，督众军讨焉。
现代文：皇帝任命裴邃为假节、信武将军，督领大军讨伐魏军。
English: The emperor appointed Pei Jun to be the false festival, the general of the letter, and the leader of the army to fight against the Wei army.

古文：邃深入魏境，从边城道，出其不意。魏所署义州刺史封寿据檀公岘，邃击破之，遂围其城，寿面缚请降，义州平。
现代文：裴邃深入魏国境内，从边城借道，出其不意，而魏国所部署的义州刺史堑昼占据了擅公蛆，塑窒打败了挝画，并进而包围了府城，封寿自己反绑双手请求投降，义州于是被平定。
English: Pei Shou penetrated deep into the territory of Wei, took a detour from the border city, and took it by surprise, while Yizhou Shishi, deployed by Wei, occupied the town of Xuan Gong, defeated Lao painting, and further encircled the capital city. Feng Shou tied his hands and asked for surrender, and Yizhou was then pacified.

古文：除持节、督北徐州诸军事、信武将军、北徐州刺史。未之职，又迁督豫州、北豫、霍三州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇合肥。
现代文：裴邃被授予持节、督北徐州诸军事、信武将军、北徐州刺史，还没到职上任，又迁任督豫州、北豫州、霍州三州诸军事、豫州刺史，坐镇合肥。
English: Pei Xuan was awarded the title of Jisetsu, Governor of North Xuzhou Military, General of Xinwu, and North Xuzhou Military Historian. Before he took office, he was transferred to the position of Governor of Yuzhou, North Yuzhou, Huzhou Three-State Military Historian, and Yuzhou Military Historian, and was stationed in Hefei.

古文：四年，进号宣毅将军。
现代文：四年，裴邃进封号为宣毅将军。
English: In four years, Pei Bingjin's title was changed to General Xuan Yi.

古文：是岁，大军将北伐，以邃督征讨诸军事，率骑三千，先袭寿阳。
现代文：遣年，梁朝大军准备北伐，任命裴邃督征讨诸军事，率领骑兵三千，先行袭击寿阳。
English: At the turn of the year, Liang's army was preparing for the Northern Expedition. He appointed Pei Bingdu to recruit soldiers and lead 3,000 cavalry to attack Shouyang first.

古文：九月壬戌，夜至寿阳，攻其郛，斩关而入，一日战九合，为后军蔡秀成失道不至，邃以援绝拔还。
现代文：九月壬戌，队伍连夜到达寿阳，进攻寿阳的外城，杀掉守关士兵进入内城，一天襄就战了九个回合，而后军蔡秀成因为迷路，没有及时赶到，裴邃因为后援断绝，就抽身回师了。
English: In September, the team arrived in Shouyang overnight, attacked the outer city of Shouyang, killed the soldiers guarding the gate and entered the inner city. They fought nine rounds in one day, and then Cai Xucheng's army did not arrive in time because they lost their way, and Pei Xuan withdrew and returned to the division because his backup was cut off.

古文：于是邃复整兵，收集士卒，令诸将各以服色相别。
现代文：在遣襄，裴邃再次整顿军队，收集士兵。命令几位将领各自用不同服装颜色互相区别开。
English: At Yuanxiang, Pei again reorganized the army and gathered soldiers, ordering several generals to distinguish each other with different clothing colors.

古文：邃自为黄袍骑，先攻狄丘、甓城、黎浆等城，皆拔之。
现代文：裴邃自己率领穿黄袍的骑兵，先向狄丘、甓城、黎浆等城进攻，全都被攻下。
English: Pei Xuan himself led the cavalry wearing yellow robes to attack Diqiu, Shicheng, Lirui and other cities first, and all of them were captured.

古文：屠安成、马头、沙陵等戍。
现代文：屠灭了安城、马头、沙陵等戍所。
English: Ancheng, Ma Tou, Shaling and other places of worship were destroyed.

古文：是冬，始脩芍陂。
现代文：遣年冬季，开始修筑芍陂。
English: In the winter of the following year, the construction of the moat began.

古文：明年，复破魏新蔡郡，略地至于郑城，汝颍之间，所在响应。
现代文：第二年，又攻下了魏国的新蔡郡，占领的地盘一直到了郑城，汝水、颍水之间的人民，到处都来响应。
English: In the second year, they conquered Xin Cai County in Wei Province, and the occupied territory went all the way to Zhengcheng. People from all over the country came to respond.

古文：魏寿阳守将长孙稚、河间王元琛率众五万，出城挑战。邃勒诸将为四甄以待之，令直阁将军李祖怜伪遁以引稚，稚等悉众追之，四甄竞发，魏众大败。
现代文：魏国守卫寿阳的将领长孙稚、河间王元琛率领五万大军，出城前来挑战，裴邃统率四个将领分作四翼等待魏军，命令直合将军李祖怜假装逃跑，引诱长孙稚，长孙稚率所有人马去追李祖怜，逭时，裴邃埋伏的四翼部队相继出动，魏军被打得大败。
English: The generals of Wei who were guarding Shouyang, Changsun Chou and Wang Yuanjun of Kawama, led a 50,000-strong army and came out of the city to challenge. Pei Jun, at the head of four generals, divided them into four wings to wait for the Wei army. He ordered Zhouga General Li Zu'er to pretend to escape, lure Changsun Chou, and Changsun Chou led all the men to chase Li Zu'er. At dusk, the four wings of Pei Jun's ambush were sent out one after another, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：斩首万余级。
现代文：斩首一万多级。
English: More than 10,000 heads were chopped off.

古文：稚等奔走，闭门自固，不敢复出。
现代文：长孙稚等人奔走逃命，回城后，关闭城门坚守，不敢再出城作战。
English: The eldest grandson, the youngest, and others ran for their lives. After returning to the city, they closed the gates and held fast, not daring to leave the city to fight.

古文：其年五月，卒于军中。
现代文：遣一年的五月，裴邃在军营中去世。
English: In May of the following year, Pei Yao died in a military camp.

古文：追赠侍中、左卫将军，给鼓吹一部，进爵为侯，增邑七百户。
现代文：被迫赠为侍中、左卫将军，送给他鼓吹一部，进爵位为侯爵，增加食邑七百户。
English: He was forced to make a gift to the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and gave him a share of the propaganda, and was promoted to the rank of marquis, increasing the number of households by 700.

古文：谥曰烈。
现代文：谧号烈。
English: 号烈.

古文：邃少言笑，沉深有思略，为政宽明，能得士心。
现代文：裴邃平时少言寡语，不苟言笑，思想深沉，有谋略，他为政宽和开明，能得到士兵们的衷心拥护。
English: Pei Xuan is usually taciturn, unsmiling, deep-thinking, and strategic. He is broad-minded and open-minded, and can get the soldiers' heartfelt support.

古文：居身方正有威重，将吏惮之，少敢犯法。
现代文：他为人端方正直有威仪，将士官吏们又都很敬畏他，很少有人敢犯法。
English: He was a man of great integrity and dignity, and officers and officials were in awe of him. Few dared to break the law.

古文：及其卒也，淮、肥间莫不流涕，以为邃不死，洛阳不足拔也。
现代文：他去世后，淮河、胆水间的人民没有不流泪涕泣的，他们认为裴邃如果不死的话，洛阳不致被攻陷。
English: After his death, there was no one among the people of Huaihe and Qishui who did not shed tears. They believed that if Pei Xuan did not die, Luoyang would not be conquered.

古文：子之礼，字子义，自国子生推第，补邵陵王国左常侍、信威行参军。
现代文：裴邃的儿子裴之礼，字子义，由国子生而中第，补任邵陵王的国左常侍、信威行参军。
English: Baizhi's son, Baizhi Li, nicknamed Ziyi, was born as a son of the state and became the middle son. He was appointed as the attendant of King Shao Ling and joined the army.

古文：王为南兗，除长流参军，未行，仍留宿卫，补直阁将军。
现代文：邵陵王任南兖州长官时，裴之礼被任命为长流参军，没有到任，仍然留下宿卫，补任直合将军。
English: When Shao Ling Wang was the governor of Nanxun, Pei Zhili was appointed to join the army for a long time. He did not take up the post, but still remained as a bodyguard, filling in for General Zhihe.

古文：丁父忧，服阕袭封，因请随军讨寿阳，除云麾将军，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：逭时他父亲去世了，服丧期满后，他袭封父亲的爵位，因而请求跟随军队讨伐寿阳，被任命为云麾将军，迁任散骑常侍。
English: When he was very young, his father died. After the period of mourning was over, he usurped his father's title, so he asked to follow the army to fight against Shouyang. He was appointed as the general of Yunnan Province and transferred to the position of straggler.

古文：又别攻魏广陵城，平之，除信武将军、西豫州刺史，加轻车将军，除黄门侍郎，迁中军宣城王司马。
现代文：又另外进攻魏国的广陵城，平定了逭座城后，被授予信武将军、西豫州刺史，加任轻车将军，任黄门侍郎，迁任中军宣墟王的司马。
English: In addition, he attacked Guangling City in Wei Province, and after the city of Xunza was leveled, he was awarded the title of General of Xinwu, the title of General of Western Yuzhou, the title of General of Light Vehicles, the title of Yellow Gate Attendant, and the title of Sima of the King of Xuanhu of the Chinese Army.

古文：寻为都督北徐、仁、睢三州诸军事、信武将军、北徐州刺史。
现代文：不久任都督北徐州、仁州、睢州三州诸军事、信武将军、韭筮蛆刺史。
English: He was soon appointed the military governor of the Northern Xuzhou, Renzhou, and Zhangzhou Three Provinces, the general of Xinwu, and the governor of Zhanshi.

古文：征太子左卫率，兼卫尉卿，转少府卿。
现代文：后被征召为太子左卫率，兼任卫尉卿，转任少府卿。
English: Later, he was called up to serve as the Prince's Left Guard, concurrently serving as the Captain of the Guard, before being transferred to the post of the Junior Minister of the Interior.

古文：卒，谥曰壮。
现代文：裴之擅去世后，谧号壮。
English: After Pei Zhisheng's death, his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子政，承圣中，官至给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：他的儿子裴政，在承圣年间，任官职为给事黄门侍郎。
English: His son, Pei Zheng, held the official position of the attendant of the Yellow Gate during the consecration year.

古文：江陵陷，随例入西魏。
现代文：丝堕沦陷后，他随例进入厘魏。
English: After the fall of the Silk Road, he followed suit and entered the Wei Dynasty.

古文：之高字如山，邃兄中散大夫髦之子也。
现代文：裴之高字如山，是裴邃兄长中散大夫裴髦的儿子。
English: Pei Zhi Gao Zi Ru Shan is the son of Pei Yao's elder brother, Zhongshan doctor Pei Shiguo.

古文：起家州从事、新都令、奉朝请，迁参军。
现代文：初入仕时任州从事、新都县令、奉朝请，迁任参军。
English: When he first entered the service, he was assigned to a prefecture, ordered to a new capital county, invited to the imperial court, and transferred to join the army.

古文：颇读书，少负意气，常随叔父邃征讨，所在立功，甚为邃所器重，戎政咸以委焉。
现代文：裴之高读了不少书，少年时自以为意志和气概很了不起，经常跟随他的叔父裴辽东征西讨，所到之处都立功，深受裴邃的器重，裴邃把军事政务都委任他去办理。
English: Pei Zhigao read a lot of books. When he was a boy, he thought his will and spirit were great. He often followed his uncle Pei Liao on the east and west campaigns. He made contributions everywhere he went. He was deeply influenced by Pei Xuan. Pei Xuan appointed him to handle all military and government affairs.

古文：寿阳之役，邃卒于军所，之高隶夏侯夔，平寿阳，仍除平北豫章长史、梁郡太守，封都城县男，邑二百五十户。
现代文：在寿阳战役中，裴邃在军营中去世，裴之高隶属于夏侯夔，平定了寿阳，被授予平北豫章长史、梁郡太守，被封为都城县男，食邑二百五十户。
English: In the Battle of Shouyang, Pei Zhi Gao died in the military camp. Pei Zhi Gao was subordinate to Xia Houyi and conquered Shouyang. He was awarded the title of Long History of Pingbei Yuzhang and the Governor of Liang County. He was named the man of Ducheng County and had 250 households.

古文：时魏汝阴来附，敕之高应接，仍除假节、飚勇将军、颍州刺史。
现代文：当时魏国的汝阴前来归附梁朝，皇帝令裴之高去接应，并授予他假节、飙勇将军、颖州刺史。
English: At that time, Ruyin of Wei came to annex the Liang Dynasty, and the emperor ordered Pei Zhigao to respond, and awarded him the False Festival, General Gaoyong, and Yingzhou History.

古文：士民夜反，逾城而入，之高率家僮与麾下奋击，贼乃散走。
现代文：有些士民乘天黑造反，他们跳墙而入，裴之高率领家裹的仆人和部下奋力反击，反贼遣才逃散。
English: Some people took advantage of the darkness to rebel. They jumped over the wall and entered the house. Pei Zhigao led his servants and subordinates in a fierce counterattack, and the rebels fled.

古文：父忧还京。
现代文：裴之高因父亲去世回到京都。
English: Due to his father's death, Peizhikao returns to Kyoto.

古文：起为光远将军，合讨阴陵盗贼，平之，以为谯州刺史。
现代文：被起用为光速将军，参加讨伐阴陵的强盗，平定了这伙强盗，裴之高被任命为谯州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the speed of light general, participated in the crusade against the robbers of Yinling, and pacified this group of robbers. Pei Zhigao was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：又还为左军将军，出为南谯太守、监北徐州，迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：又回京担任左军将军，出任南谯郡太守、监督北徐州，迁任员外散骑常侍。
English: He also returned to Beijing to serve as the general of the Left Army, served as the governor of Nanlu County and the supervisor of North Xuzhou, and was transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer riding horseback.

古文：寻除雄信将军、西豫州刺史，余如故。
现代文：不久，被授予雄信将军、西豫州刺史，其他官职依旧。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General Xiongxin and the title of West Henan Provincial Historian, and his other official positions remained the same.

古文：侯景乱，之高率众入援，南豫州刺史、鄱阳嗣王范命之高总督江右援军诸军事，顿于张公洲。
现代文：侯景之乱发生后，裴之高率领大军入城救援，南豫州刺史、鄱阳嗣王范命命令墓之台总管丝右援军诸军事，驻扎在张公洲。
English: After the Houjing Disturbance occurred, Pei Zhigao led a large army into the city for rescue. Nan Yu Zhou Zhi Shi and Su Yang Zi Wang Fan ordered the general manager of the tomb to send reinforcements to the military, stationed in Zhang Gongzhou.

古文：柳仲礼至横江，之高遣船舸二百余艘迎致仲礼，与韦粲等俱会青塘立营，据建兴苑。
现代文：柳仲礼到横丝，裴之高派船只二百多艘迎接塑倥擅，他们和童塞等人会合，都在直擅这个地方建立营寨，占据建兴茎。
English: When Liu Zhongli arrived at Hengshi, Pei Zhigao sent more than two hundred ships to meet the Shuxing soldiers. They met with Tongsai and others, and all of them built a camp at this place, occupying the Jianxing Stem.

古文：及城陷，之高还合肥，与鄱阳王范西上。
现代文：城池被攻陷以后，苤之庖回到合胆，与鄱阳王芦箠向西逆流而上。
English: After the fall of the castle, Zou Zou returned to Hailu and followed the westward current of King Luo of Shenyang.

古文：稍至新蔡，众将一万，未有所属。元帝遣萧慧正召之，以为侍中、护军将军。
现代文：刚到堑蔡，队伍将近一万人，没有所属的主人，梁元帝派萧慧正去召裴之高来，任命他为侍中、护军将军。
English: Just arrived in Jiu Cai, the team is nearly ten thousand people, there is no owner to belong to, Emperor Liang Yuan sent Xiao Huizheng to summon Pei Zi Gao, appointed him as an attendant and escort general.

古文：到江陵，承制除特进、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：裴之高到后，秉承皇帝旨意，被授予特进、金紫光禄大夫。
English: After Pei Zhigao arrived, he was awarded the title of "special promotion" and "gold and purple doctor" in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：卒，时年七十三。
现代文：裴主茵去世，终年七十三岁。
English: Princess Pei passed away at the age of 73.

古文：赠侍中、仪同三司，鼓吹一部。
现代文：被迫赠为侍中、仪同三司，送鼓吹一部。
English: He was forced to give up his position as a chamberlain and the three offices of ceremony and etiquette, as well as a part of his right to preach.

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号恭。
English: 号恭.

古文：子畿，累官太子右卫率、隽州刺史。
现代文：裴之高的儿子裴畿，屡次担任太子右卫率、隽州刺史。
English: Pei Zhi Gao's son, Pei Gui, repeatedly served as the prince's right guard and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：西魏攻陷江陵，畿力战死之。
现代文：西魏攻陷江陵时，裴畿奋力作战而死。
English: When Jiangling fell to the Western Wei Dynasty, Pei Qi fought hard and died.

古文：之平字如原，之高第五弟。
现代文：裴之平字如原，是裴之高的第五个弟弟。
English: Pei Zhi Ping Zi is the fifth younger brother of Pei Gao.

古文：少亦随邃征讨，以军功封都亭侯。
现代文：少年时也跟随裴邃征讨，因军功被封为都亭侯。
English: When he was a boy, he also followed Pei Xuan to collect taxes, and was awarded the title of Du Ting Hou (都亭侯) for his military exploits.

古文：历武陵王常侍、扶风、弘农二郡太守，不行，除谯州长史、阳平太守。
现代文：历任武陵王的常侍、扶风弘农二郡的太守，没有赴任，又被授予谯州郡长史、阳平郡太守。
English: Successive attendants of King Muryeong and the governors of the two counties of Fufeng and Hongnong did not take up their posts, but were awarded the posts of the governor of Yeongju County and the governor of Yangpyeong County.

古文：拒侯景，城陷后，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军、太子詹事。
现代文：他参加抗拒侯景，城被攻陷后，迁任散骑常侍、右卫将军、太子詹事。
English: He took part in resisting Houjing, and after the city was captured, he was transferred to the positions of straggler, general of the right guard, and prince.

古文：之横字如岳，之高第十三弟也。
现代文：裴之横字如岳，是裴之高的第十三个弟弟。
English: Pei's horizontal character is Yue, the thirteenth brother of Pei Gao.

古文：少好宾游，重气侠，不事产业。
现代文：少年时喜好四处游荡，很看重豪侠义气，不愿从事生产事业。
English: When he was a boy, he liked to roam around, he valued the heroic spirit, and he did not want to engage in production.

古文：之高以其纵诞，乃为狭被蔬食以激厉之。
现代文：裴之高因为他的放纵荒诞，就给他做了一床窄被子，并衹给他吃蔬食，以此来激励他。
English: Pei Zhigao thought his indulgence was absurd, so he made him a bed with a narrow quilt and encouraged him to eat vegetables.

古文：之横叹曰： 大丈夫富贵，必作百幅被。 
现代文：裴之横叹息说： 大丈夫我富贵以后，一定要做一百幅被子。 
English: Pei Zhi sighed and said, "It's okay, after I become rich, I will definitely make a hundred quilts."

古文：遂与僮属数百人，于芍陂大营田墅，遂致殷积。
现代文：于是和家襄的僮仆好几百人，来到芍陂，大规模开垦荒地，因此而达到殷富，有了积累。
English: As a result, he and several hundred of his family's servants came to Handan to reclaim the wasteland on a large scale. As a result, they became wealthy and accumulated wealth.

古文：太宗在东宫，闻而要之，以为河东王常侍、直殿主帅，迁直阁将军。
现代文：梁太宗萧纲还是太子时，听说了裴之横的事，就邀他来京城，让他当河东王常侍、直殿主帅，迁任直合将军。
English: When Liang Taizong Xiao Gang was still a prince, he heard about Pei Zhiyong and invited him to Beijing to become the King of Hedong's personal attendant, the captain of the palace, and the general of the palace.

古文：侯景乱，出为贞威将军，隶鄱阳王范讨景。
现代文：侯景之乱时，裴之横出任贞威将军，附属于鄱阳王萧范，跟他一起讨伐侯景。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, Pei Zhiyang served as General Zhenwei, attached to King Xiao Fan of Shenyang, and fought against Houjing together with him.

古文：景济江，仍与范长子嗣入援。
现代文：侯景渡过了长江，裴之横就和萧范的长子萧嗣回京增援。
English: After Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, Pei Zhi Heng and Xiao Fan's eldest son, Xiao Zi, returned to Beijing for reinforcement.

古文：连营度淮，据东城。
现代文：他们连营渡过淮河，占领了东城。
English: They crossed the Huai River and occupied Dongcheng.

古文：京都陷，退还合肥，与范溯流赴湓城。
现代文：京都被攻陷后，裴之横撤退回到合肥，与萧范一起逆流而上，奔赴湓城。
English: After the fall of Kyoto, Pei Zhi Heng retreated back to Hefei and, together with Xiao Fan, went upstream to Lucheng.

古文：景遣任约上逼晋熙，范令之横下援，未及至，范薨，之横乃还。
现代文：侯景派遣任约往上游进逼晋熙，萧范命令裴之横往下游援救，还没到达目的地，萧范去世，裴之横就回来了。
English: Hou Jing dispatched Ren about upstream to force Jinxi, Xiao Fan ordered Baizhong to rescue downstream, but before reaching the destination, Xiao Fan died, and Baizhong returned.

古文：时寻阳王大心在江州，范副梅思立密要大心袭湓城，之横斩思立而拒大心。
现代文：当时寻阳王萧大心在江州，萧范的副将梅思立秘密邀约芦去坐袭击，墓主撞杀死了撞墨立而后抵御萧大心。
English: At that time, Xiao Daxin, the sun-seeking king, was in Jiangzhou. Mei Sili, the vice-commander of Xiao Fan, secretly invited Yorou to attack. The tomb owner hit and killed Kuan Muxili, and then resisted Xiao Daxin.

古文：大心以州降景。
现代文：萧大心献江州投降了侯景。
English: Xiao Daxin surrendered Jiangzhou to Houjing.

古文：之横率众与兄之高同归元帝，承制除散骑常侍、廷尉卿，出为河东内史。
现代文：裴之横率领自己的部队与他的兄长裴之高一起归附梁元帝，秉承皇帝旨意，被任命为散骑常侍、廷尉卿，出任河东郡内史。
English: Pei Zhiyang led his troops together with his brother Pei Zhi Gao to be annexed to Emperor Liang Yuan. Adhering to the emperor's will, he was appointed as a cavalryman, a courtier, and served as the county historian of Hedong County.

古文：又随王僧辩拒侯景于巴陵，景退，迁持节、平北将军、东徐州刺史，中护军，封豫宁侯，邑三千户。
现代文：又跟随王僧辩在巴陵这个地方抵抗侯景，侯景退回去后，裴之横迁任持节、平北将军、束徐州刺史，中护军，被封为琼空堡，食邑三千户。
English: He also followed Wang Sangye in resisting Hou Jing in this part of Baling. After Hou Jing retreated, Pei was transferred to the position of holding section, the general of Pingbei, the commander of Xuzhou, and the middle guard, and was named Qiong Kuang Fort, with 3,000 households.

古文：又随僧辩追景，平郢、鲁、江、晋等州，恒为前锋陷阵。
现代文：又跟随王仅盘追讨追景，平郢、鲁、江、晋等几个州，裴之横一直担任先锋冲锋陷阵。
English: He also followed Wang to pursue the pursuit of the pursuit, Pinglu, Lu, Jiangsu, Jin and other provinces, and Pei has always been the vanguard of the charge.

古文：仍至石头，破景，景东奔，僧辩令之横与杜掞入守台城。
现代文：就在石头这个地方，打败景，景奔向东逃跑，僧辩镒命墓之横与丝魍进入皇垣守卫。
English: Just at this place of stone, defeating Jing, Jing ran to the east to escape, and the monk Debate ran to the side of the tomb and the silk cocoon entered the imperial wall to guard it.

古文：及陆纳据湘州叛，又隶王僧辩南讨焉。
现代文：后来，堕曲依靠翅反叛，墓丈之横又跟随王僧辩向南讨伐陆纳。
English: Later, the Fallen Qiang rebelled by relying on the wings, and the side of the tombstone followed Wang Sangyan to the south to fight Lu Na.

古文：于阵斩纳将李贤明，遂平之。
现代文：在战阵上杀死陆纳的大将李贤明，于是平定了逭场叛乱。
English: Li Xianming, the general who killed Lu Na on the battlefield, thus quelled the battlefield rebellion.

古文：又破武陵王于硖口。
现代文：裴之横还在硖口打败丫武陵王。
English: Pei Zhiyang also defeated Ama Wuling Wang in Hekou.

古文：还除吴兴太守，乃作百幅被，以成其初志。
现代文：他回来后，被任命为吴兴郡太守，就做了一百幅被子，以实现他当初的志愿。
English: After his return, he was appointed governor of Wuxing County, and he made a hundred quilts to fulfill his original wish.

古文：后江陵陷，齐遣上党王高涣挟贞阳侯攻东关，晋安王方智承制，以之横为使持节、镇北将军、徐州刺史，都督众军，给鼓吹一部，出守蕲城。
现代文：后来，江陵被攻陷，南齐派遣上党王高涣扶持贞阳侯进攻束关，晋安王萧方智秉承皇帝旨意，任命裴之横为使持节、镇北将军、徐州刺史，都督众军，并送给鼓吹一部，出京守卫蕲城。
English: Later, after the fall of Jiangling, Nanqi dispatched Gao Gan, the king of Shang, to support Zhengyang and attack Shuguang, and Xiao Fangzhi, the king of Jinan, adhered to the emperor's will and appointed Pei Zhiyang as the envoy, the general of Zhenbei, the governor of Xuzhou, and the governor of the army, and gave him a part of the propaganda, and went to Beijing to guard the city.

古文：之横营垒未周，而齐军大至，兵尽矢穷，遂于阵没，时年四十一。
现代文：裴之横还没有修筑好军营的壁垒，而南齐的大军就已经到了，裴之横的队伍逭时士兵大多战死，箭矢用尽，裴之横也在阵地上战死，终年四十一岁。
English: Pei Zhiyang had not yet built the barricade of the military camp, but the Nanzhi army had already arrived. When Pei Zhiyang's team was exhausted, most of the soldiers were killed in battle, and the arrows were exhausted. Pei Zhiyang also died in battle, at the age of forty-one.

古文：赠侍中、司空公，谥曰忠壮。
现代文：被追赠为侍中、司空公，谧号忠壮。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer and Empress Dowager, and his posthumous name was Chuzo.

古文：子凤宝嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧凤宝继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Fengbao, became his successor.

古文：夏侯亶，字世龙，车骑将军详长子也。
现代文：夏侯亶字世龙，是车骑将军夏侯详的长子。
English: Xia Hou Zi Zi Long is the eldest son of the chariot and cavalry general Xia Hou Yu.

古文：齐初，起家奉朝请。
现代文：南齐初年，夏侯直离家入仕，当了奉朝请。
English: In the first year of the Southern Qi Dynasty, Xia Hou left home and entered the service.

古文：永元末，详为西中郎南康王司马，随府镇荆州，亶留京师，为东昏听政主帅。
现代文：永元末年，夏侯详任西中郎南康王的司马，随着王府镇守荆州，夏侯直留在京师，任束昏侯的听政主帅。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Xia Hou was appointed as the steward of the West Middle Lang, King Nankang, and as the governor of Jingzhou, Xia Hou stayed in Beijing and served as the political coach of the drowsy lord.

古文：及崔慧景作乱，亶以捍御功，除骁骑将军。
现代文：在崔慧景作乱时，夏侯宣因护卫皇帝的功劳，被授予骁骑将军。
English: During the rebellion of Cui Huijing, Xia Houxuan was awarded the title of General of Cavalry for his service in protecting the emperor.

古文：及高祖起师，详与长史萧颖胄协同义举，密遣信下都迎亶，亶乃赍宣德皇后令，令南康王纂承大统，封十郡为宣城王，进位相国，置僚属，选百官。
现代文：高祖兴起义师时，夏侯详和长史萧颖胄协商共同举起义旗，他们秘密派遣信使到京都去迎接夏侯直出来，夏侯直就携带宣德皇后的手令，令南康王纂位继承皇帝大统，封十郡为宣城王，进位为相国，设置官僚属下，选举百官。
English: When Gao Zu raised the banner of righteousness, Xia Hou Zi and Chang Shi Xiao Ying Qi jointly raised the banner of righteousness in consultation. They secretly sent a messenger to Kyoto to meet Xia Hou Zi. Xia Hou Zi carried the order of Empress Xuan De, making King Nankang succeed to the throne of Emperor Taizong, sealing ten counties as the King of Xuancheng, promoting the country, setting up bureaucratic subordinates, and electing hundreds of officials.

古文：建康城平，以亶为尚书吏部郎，俄迁侍中，奉玺于高祖。
现代文：建康城被平定后，任命夏侯直为尚书吏部郎，不久迁任侍中，他把皇帝的玉玺奉献给了高祖。
English: After Jiankang City was subdued, he appointed Xia Houzhong as the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：天监元年，出为宣城太守。
现代文：天监元年，夏侯直出任宣城郡太守。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, Xia Houzhi became the governor of Xuancheng County.

古文：寻入为散骑常侍，领右骁骑将军。
现代文：不久被召入任散骑常侍，兼任右骁骑将军。
English: He was soon called up to the rank of straggler, and also served as the right-hand cavalry general.

古文：六年，出为平西始兴王长史、南郡太守，父忧解职。
现代文：六年，出任平西始兴王的长史、南郡太守，因父亲去世而解除职务。
English: For six years, he served as the long history of Pingxi Shi Xing Wang and the governor of Nan County, but was relieved of his duties due to the death of his father.

古文：居丧尽礼，庐于墓侧，遗财悉推诸弟。
现代文：在服丧期间，他完全做到符合礼节，在父亲坟墓旁边搭了一个草棚，自己就住在裹面，父亲遗留下来的财产，他全都推让给了几个弟弟。
English: During the mourning period, he fully complied with the etiquette. He built a grass hut next to his father's grave and lived in the shroud himself. He gave away all the property left by his father to several younger brothers.

古文：八年，起为持节、督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，领安陆太守。
现代文：八年，夏侯直被起用为持节、督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，兼任安陆郡太守。
English: In the eighth year, Xia Houzhi was appointed as the military governor, the military governor of Shuzhou, the general of Nobu, the governor of Shuzhou, and the governor of Anlu County.

古文：服阕，袭封豊城县公。
现代文：服丧期满后，他袭封为丰城县公。
English: After the mourning period expired, he was enthroned as the Fengcheng County magistrate.

古文：居州甚有威惠，为边人所悦服。
现代文：夏侯直在州任官职上很有威仪和惠政，为边境人民所悦服。
English: Xia Houzhi was very dignified and benevolent in his post as a state official, which pleased the border people.

古文：十二年，以本号还朝，除都官尚书，迁给事中、右卫将军、领豫州大中正。
现代文：十二年，以原来的封号回到朝廷，被授予都官尚书，迁任给事中、右卫将军、兼任豫州大中正。
English: In the twelfth year, he returned to the imperial court with his original title, was awarded the title of Shoshu, and was transferred to the middle and right guard generals, and also served as the vice-president of Yuzhou University.

古文：十五年，出为信武将军、安西长史、江夏太守。
现代文：十五年，出任为信武将军、安西长史、江夏郡太守。
English: In 15 years, he served as General Nobutake, Anxi Changshi, and Jiangxia County Governor.

古文：十七年，入为通直散骑常侍、太子右卫率，迁左卫将军，领前军将军。
现代文：十七年，被召入任通直散骑常侍、太子右卫率，迁任左卫将军，兼任前军将军。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was called into the position of Tsuchizuchishanki no Tsuneishi, the prince's right guard, transferred to the left guard general, and also served as the former army general.

古文：俄出为明威将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：不久又出任明威将军、吴兴郡太守。
English: Soon after, he became the Mingwei General and Wu Xing County Governor.

古文：在郡复有惠政，吏民图其像，立碑颂美焉。
现代文：他在郡守职位上又实行惠政，郡裹的官吏和百姓给他昼了像，立石碑歌颂他的德政。
English: In his position as county governor, he also practiced benevolent governance. The officials and people of the county gave him a portrait, and erected a stone monument to praise his virtuous governance.

古文：普通三年，入为散骑常侍，领右骁骑将军，转太府卿，常侍如故。
现代文：普通三年，被召入任散骑常侍，兼任右骁骑将军，转任太府卿，常侍一职如故。
English: After three years as an ordinary, he was called up to be a knight errant, and concurrently served as a right-hand knight general. He was then transferred to the position of daifu-kyo, and his position as a knight is still the same.

古文：以公事免，未几，优诏复职。
现代文：因公家事务被免官，不久，皇帝特下韶令让他官复原职。
English: He was removed from office due to public affairs, and soon after, the emperor issued a special edict to reinstate him.

古文：五年，迁中护军。
现代文：五年，迁任中护军。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the position of middle guard.

古文：六年，大举北伐。先遣豫州刺史裴邃帅谯州刺史湛僧智、历阳太守明绍世、南谯太守鱼弘、晋熙太守张澄，并世之骁将，自南道伐寿阳城，未克而邃卒。
现代文：六年，梁朝大规模北伐，先派遣豫州刺史裴邃统率谯州刺史湛僧智、历阳郡太守明绍世、南谯郡太守鱼弘、晋熙郡太守张澄，这些人都是当世的骁将。他们从南道进伐寿阳城，还未攻克而裴邃就去世了。
English: In the sixth year, the Liang Dynasty launched a large-scale Northern Expedition. First, they dispatched Zhi Zhi Zhan Zang Zhi of Yuzhou Province, led by Zhi Zhi Zhan Zang Zhi, the governor of Liyang County, Ming Shao Shi, the governor of Nanlu County, Yu Hong, and the governor of Jinxi County, Zhang Cheng, all of whom were great generals of the present day. They entered Shouyang City from the South Road, but they did not conquer it, and Pei Zhi died.

古文：乃加亶使持节，驰驿代邃，与魏将河间王元琛、临淮王元彧等相拒，频战克捷。
现代文：就加任夏侯直为使持节，骑马急驰前去代替裴邃，他和魏军将领河间王元琛、临淮王元或等互相交战，他频频出战，每次都告捷。
English: He was appointed by Xia Houzhi as the envoy of the festival, and he rode on horseback to replace Pei Xuan. He and the Wei army generals, such as Wang Yuanqi and Wang Yuan or Lin Huai, fought against each other. He frequently went to war, and every time he was successful.

古文：寻有密敕，班师合肥，以休士马，须堰成复进。
现代文：不久，皇帝下了一道密令，让他们班师回合肥，以便使士兵和马匹得到休息，等到大堰筑成后再进军。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued a secret order to have his soldiers and horses fattened so that they could rest until the weir was complete.

古文：七年夏，淮堰水盛，寿阳城将没，高祖复遣北道军元树帅彭宝孙、陈庆之等稍进，亶帅湛僧智、鱼弘、张澄等通清流涧，将入淮、肥。
现代文：七年夏季，淮河堤堰裹的水非常盛大，寿阳城将被淹没，高祖又派遣北道军元树统率彭昼孙、陈庆之等逐渐推进一些，夏侯宣统率画丰登、鱼弘、强运等疏通遣遮溯，准备进入进回、旦巳丞。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, the water around the dam of the Huaihe River was very large, and Shouyang City would be flooded. Gao Zu also sent Peng Rongsun and Chen Qing, the leading generals of the North Korean army, to gradually push forward, and Xia Hou Xuan led Feng Deng, Yu Hong, Qiang Yun and other leaders to block the backwash and prepare to enter the back and forth.

古文：魏军夹肥筑城，出亶军后，亶与僧智还袭，破之。
现代文：苏军沿旦巴丞两岸修筑城墙，从夏室皇军队的后面冲出，夏侯直舆湛僧智回马袭击，打败了魏军。
English: The Soviet army built the city wall along both banks of the Dangba River, rushed out from the back of the summer imperial army, and attacked the summer imperial army and defeated the Wei army.

古文：进攻黎浆，贞威将军韦放自北道会焉。
现代文：又进攻黎浆，梁贞威将军韦放从北道前来与夏侯直部会合。
English: Li Pul attacked again, and Liang Zhenwei's general Wei Fang came from the North to meet with Xia Hou.

古文：两军既合，所向皆降下。
现代文：两军合到一起后，所到之处，魏军全都投降，城池被攻下。
English: After the two armies came together, the Wei army surrendered everywhere they went, and the city was captured.

古文：凡降城五十二，获男女口七万五千人，米二十万石。
现代文：投降的城池一共有五十二座，俘获男女人七万五千人，米二十万石。
English: A total of fifty-two castles surrendered, seventy-five thousand men and women were captured, and 200,000 koku of rice was taken.

古文：诏以寿阳依前代置豫州，合肥镇改为南豫州，以亶为使持节、都督豫州缘淮南豫霍义定五州诸军事、云麾将军、豫、南豫二州刺史。
现代文：皇帝下诏，依照前代的制度，在寿阳代置琼丛，盒旦暧改为亩辽川，任命夏堡皇为使持节、都督豫州和沿淮河的南豫州、霍州、义州、鱼出共五州诸军事、云麾将军、邃业、卢琼业二州的刺史。
English: The emperor decreed that, in accordance with the previous generation's system, Qiong Cong should be placed in Shouyang, Kaotan Jun should be changed to Mu Liaochuan, and Xia Burghuang should be appointed as the commander-in-chief, the governor of Yuzhou and the five states along the Huaihe River, namely, South Yuzhou, Huozhou, Yizhou, and Guodu, as well as the generals of Yunnan, Minya, and Luqiong.

古文：寿春久罹兵荒，百姓多流散，亶轻刑薄赋，务农省役，顷之民户充复。
现代文：寿春地区长久以来遭受兵燹之灾，百姓大多四处流散，夏侯直实行减轻刑罚降低赋税的政策，让百姓全力务农，省去劳役，很快，人民的户口敷就扩充到原来的规模了。
English: The Shuchun area had long been plagued by war, and most of the people had dispersed. Xia Houzhi implemented a policy of reducing penalties and lowering taxes, allowing the people to do their best in agriculture and avoiding labor service. Soon, the people's hukou was expanded to its original size.

古文：大通二年，进号平北将军。
现代文：大通二年，夏室皇进封号为平北将军。
English: In the second year of Datong, Emperor Natsumuro was given the title of General of the North.

古文：三年，卒于州镇。
现代文：三年，他在州镇任上去世。
English: He died in office three years later.

古文：高祖闻之，即日素服举哀，赠车骑将军。
现代文：产祖梁武帝听到噩耗，当天就穿着素衣举行哀悼，并追赠他为车骑将军。
English: When Emperor Liangwu, the progenitor of the dynasty, heard the bad news, he wore plain clothes to mourn on the same day, and posthumously awarded him the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：谥曰襄。
现代文：谧号襄。
English: His nickname is Xiang.

古文：州民夏侯简等五百人表请为亶立碑置祠，诏许之。
现代文：州民夏侯简等五百人向皇帝上表，请求为夏侯直立碑建祠，皇帝下诏允许。
English: Five hundred people, including Xia Houjian, a citizen of the state, petitioned the emperor to erect a monument and build a shrine for Xia Houjian. The emperor gave his permission.

古文：亶为人美风仪，宽厚有器量，涉猎文史，辩给能专对。
现代文：夏侯直为人风度翩翩，仪表俊美，性情宽厚，器量很大，涉猎文史，能言善辩，并能见问就答。
English: Xia Hou Zhi is a person with a charming demeanor, a handsome appearance, a generous disposition, a great capacity, dabbles in literary history, can speak well, and can answer questions.

古文：宗人夏侯溢为衡阳内史，辞日，亶侍御坐，高祖谓亶曰： 夏侯溢于卿疏近？ 
现代文：与他同族的夏侯溢担任了衡阳郡的内史，向皇帝辞行那天，夏侯直陪坐在皇帝身边，高祖梁武帝对夏侯直说： 夏侯溢和你的关系是远还是近? 
English: His compatriot Xia Houyi was in charge of the internal history of Hengyang County. On the day of his resignation to the emperor, Xia Houyi sat next to the emperor. Emperor Gaozhu Liangwu said to Xia Houyi: Is Xia Houyi's relationship with you distant or close?

古文：禀答曰： 是臣从弟。 
现代文：夏侯宜回答说： 他是臣的堂弟。 
English: Xia Houyi replied, "He is my cousin."

古文：高祖知溢于亶已疏，乃曰： 卿伧人，好不辨族从。 
现代文：高祖知道夏侯溢已经和夏侯直疏远，就说： 你这个北方人，连同族同宗人都分辨不清。 
English: Gao Zu knew that Xia Houyi had already distanced himself from Xia Hou Zhi, so he said: You, a northerner, can't even distinguish between people of the same race and the same clan.

古文：亶对曰： 臣闻服属易疏，所以不忍言族。 
现代文：夏侯宣回答说： 臣听说同服中的兄弟姐妹容易疏远，所以不忍心说是同族。 
English: Xia Houxuan replied: "I have heard that brothers and sisters in the same clothing are easily alienated, so I can't bear to say that they are the same race.

古文：时以为能对。
现代文：当时人们都认为他擅长应对。
English: At that time, people thought he was good at coping.

古文：亶历为六郡三州，不修产业，禄赐所得，随散亲故。
现代文：夏侯宜历任过六个郡三个州的长官，他不为自己积蓄产业，所得到的官俸和皇帝的赏赐，随手就散发给了亲戚和朋友。
English: Xia Houyi served as the governor of six counties and three states in succession. He did not accumulate property for himself. The official salary and the emperor's reward he received were distributed to relatives and friends.

古文：性俭率，居处服用，充足而已，不事华侈。
现代文：他本性俭朴，所居住的地方和服装用品等，都衹是够用而已，不追求华丽奢侈。
English: His nature is frugal, the place he lives and clothing supplies are just enough for Tudor, and he does not pursue gorgeous luxury.

古文：晚年颇好音乐，有妓妾十数人，并无被服姿容。
现代文：夏侯直晚年非常喜爱音乐，他养了十几名艺妓和妾，都没有什么姿色容貌和衣服。
English: In his later years, Xia Hou Zhi was very fond of music. He raised more than a dozen geishas and concubines, all of whom had little in the way of appearance or clothing.

古文：每有客，常隔帘奏之，时谓帘为夏侯妓衣也。
现代文：每当有客人来，艺妓们就隔着帘子演奏音乐，当时人们都说，逭帘子就是夏侯艺妓们的衣服。
English: Whenever guests came, the geishas would play music through the curtains. At that time, people said that the curtains were the clothes of the summer geishas.

古文：亶二子：谊，损。
现代文：夏侯宜有两个儿子：夏侯谊，夏侯损。
English: Xia Houyi had two sons: Xia Houyi and Xia Houzi.

古文：谊袭封豊城公，历官太子舍人，洗马。
现代文：夏侯谊袭封了丰城公的爵位，历任太子舍人，洗马等官职。
English: Xia Houyi inherited the title of Prince of Fengcheng, and successively held official positions such as Prince Consort and Horse Washer.

古文：太清中，侯景入寇，谊与弟损帅部曲入城，并卒围内。
现代文：太清年间，侯景作乱侵犯京城，夏侯谊和弟弟夏侯损率领自己的部下进入京城作战，二人都死于围城之中。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, the Houjing Rebellion invaded Beijing. Xia Houyi and his brother Xia Houzai led their men into the capital to fight, and both died in the siege.

古文：夔字季龙，亶弟也。
现代文：夏侯夔字季龙，是夏侯宣的弟弟。
English: Xia Hou Zi Zi Qilong is Xia Hou Xuan's younger brother.

古文：起家齐南康王府行参军。
现代文：刚离家入仕，就任南齐南康王的府行参军。
English: He had just left home to join the army, taking up the post of the governor of Nankang in Southern Qi.

古文：中兴初，迁司徒属。
现代文：中兴初年，迁任司徒属。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was transferred to Stuxi.

古文：天监元年，为太子洗马，中舍人，中书郎。
现代文：天监元年，任太子洗马，中舍人，中书郎。
English: In the first year of Tensho era, he was appointed as Prince Saima, Chushonin, and Chushiro.

古文：丁父忧，服阕，除大匠卿，知造太极殿事。
现代文：父亲去世后为父亲守丧，服丧期满后，被授予大匠卿，主持造太极殿的事务。
English: After his father's death, he held a memorial service for him. After the period of mourning was over, he was awarded the title of Grand Master and presided over the construction of the Taiji Temple.

古文：普通元年，为邵陵王信威长史，行府国事。
现代文：普通元年，任邵陵王的信威长史，执行府国事务。
English: In the first year of the common era, King Shao Ling, with a long history of prestige, carried out the affairs of the prefecture.

古文：其年，出为假节、征远将军，随机北讨，还除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：遣年，出任假节、征远将军，随机向北征讨，回来后被授予给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the year of the Chinese New Year, he served as the general of the holiday and the expedition, and randomly went to the north to fight. After returning, he was awarded the title of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：二年，副裴邃讨义州，平之。
现代文：二年，作为裴邃的副官协助征讨盏业，平定了盏蚶。
English: In the second year, as an aide-de-camp of Pei Xuan, he assisted in the collection of zhuan industry and leveled zhuan zhuan.

古文：三年，代兄亶为吴兴太守，寻迁假节、征远将军、西阳、武昌二郡太守。
现代文：三年，代替兄长夏堡直出任昱璺型太守，不久，迁任假节、征远将军、西旦困逮旦塑二郡的太守。
English: Three years later, he replaced his older brother, Xia Boji, as the grand marshal of Shantou County. Soon after, he was transferred to be the grand marshal of Shantou County and the grand marshal of Shantou County.

古文：七年，征为卫尉，未拜，改授持节、督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，领安陆太守。
现代文：七年，被征召任卫尉，没有拜官，又改任持节、督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，兼任安陆郡太守。
English: In the seventh year, he was conscripted to serve as a guard lieutenant, but he did not have any official title. He was also reassigned to the posts of Jisetsu, Superintendent of the State Military, General Nobutake, Secretary of the State, and concurrently served as the Governor of Anlu County.

古文：八年，敕夔帅壮武将军裴之礼、直阁将军任思祖出义阳道，攻平静、穆陵、阴山三关，克之。
现代文：八年，皇帝命令夏侯夔统率壮武将军裴之礼、直合将军任思祖从义阳道出发，进攻平静、穆陵、阴山三关，结果攻下了这三关。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor ordered Xia Houjun to lead the strong military generals Pei Zili and Zhihe General Ren Sizu to set out from Yiyang Road and attack the three passes of calm, Muling and Yinshan. As a result, they conquered these three passes.

古文：是时谯州刺史湛僧智围魏东豫州刺史元庆和于广陵，入其郛。
现代文：这时谯州刺史湛僧智在广陵包围了魏国束豫州刺史元庆和，并进入它的外城。
English: At this time, in Guangling, Zhang Zizhi Zhan Zangzhi encircled the Wei State and Yuan Qinghe, the Zizhi of Yuzhou, and entered its outer city.

古文：魏将元显伯率军赴援，僧智逆击破之，夔自武阳会僧智，断魏军归路。
现代文：魏军将领元颢伯率领军队奔赴救援，湛僧智迎击魏军并打败了这支队伍，夏侯夔从武阳前来舆湛僧智会合，切断了魏军回去的退路。
English: Yuan Zibo, the general of the Wei army, led the army to rush to the rescue. Cham Sozhi met the Wei army and defeated this team. Xia Houyi came from Wuyang to meet Cham Sozhi and cut off the retreat of the Wei army.

古文：庆和于内筑栅以自固，及夔至，遂请降。
现代文：元庆和在城内筑起栅栏，以便加固自己的防守设施，夏侯夔来到后，元庆和于是请求投降。
English: Yuan Qinghe built a fence inside the city in order to strengthen his defensive facilities. After Xia Houyi arrived, Yuan Qinghe asked for surrender.

古文：夔让僧智，僧智曰： 庆和志欲降公，不愿降僧智，今往必乖其意；且僧智所将为乌合募人，不可御之以法。
现代文：夏侯夔要把功劳让给湛僧智，湛僧智说： 元庆和的心意是要向您投降，而不愿意向我僧智投降，我今天如果去接受他的投降，肯定是违背他的心意；而且僧智我所统领的是招募来的乌合之众，不能依法统御降军。
English: Xia Houyi wanted to give the credit to Zhan Zengzhi. Zhan Zengzhi said: Yuan Qinghe's intention is to surrender to you, but he is not willing to surrender to me, Zengzhi. If I accept his surrender today, it will definitely be against his intention. Moreover, Zengzhi and I are in command of the recruited rabble, and cannot lead the army to surrender in accordance with the law.

古文：公持军素严，必无犯令，受降纳附，深得其宜。 
现代文：您主持军队一直很严格，必定没人敢违反命令，您去接受投降，接纳归附，是最合适的了。 
English: You have been very strict in presiding over the army. No one will dare to disobey orders. It is most appropriate for you to accept surrender, acceptance and affiliation.

古文：于是夔乃登城拔魏帜，建官军旗鼓，众莫敢妄动，庆和束兵以出，军无私焉。
现代文：因此，夏侯夔就登上城墙，拔掉魏军的旗帜，树起梁朝军队的旗鼓，众人没有一个敢轻举妄动，元庆和整顿队伍出城，军队裹没有人搞暗中活动。
English: Therefore, Xia Houyi climbed the city wall, pulled down the banner of the Wei army, and raised the banner of the North Korean army. No one dared to act rashly. The Yuanqing and rectification teams left the city, and no one in the army engaged in covert activities.

古文：凡降男女口四万余人，粟六十万斛，余物称是。
现代文：投降的男女人口一共四万多人，小米六十万斛，其余物品也大致如此。
English: A total of more than 40,000 men and women surrendered, 600,000 kilos of millet, and the rest of the goods were roughly the same.

古文：显伯闻之夜遁，众军追之，生擒二万余人，斩获不可胜数。
现代文：元显伯听到消息后连夜逃跑，梁朝大军紧紧追赶，活捉了二万多人，斩杀的人不可胜数。
English: After hearing the news, Yuan Xianbo fled overnight. Liang's army chased after him, captured more than 20,000 people alive, and killed countless people.

古文：诏以僧智领东豫州，镇广陵。
现代文：皇帝下韶命湛僧智兼管束豫州，镇守广陵。
English: The emperor appointed Zhan Zangzhi to be the governor of Yuzhou and the keeper of Guangling.

古文：夔引军屯安阳。
现代文：夏侯夔带领军队屯驻安阳。
English: Xia Houjun led the army stationed in Anyang.

古文：夔又遣偏将屠楚城，尽俘其众，由是义阳北道遂与魏绝。
现代文：夏侯夔又派遣偏将屠减楚城，俘获了全部人马，从此义阳的北道就与魏国断绝了来往。
English: Xia Houjun also dispatched a partial general to slaughter and reduce Chucheng, captured all the men and horses, and since then, the North Road of Yiyang has cut off contacts with Wei.

古文：大通二年，魏郢州刺史元愿达请降，高祖敕郢州刺史元树往迎愿达，夔亦自楚城会之，遂留镇焉。
现代文：大通二年，魏国的郢州刺史元愿达请求向梁朝投降，梁武帝命郢州刺史元树前往迎接元愿达，夏侯夔也从楚城前来会合，于是就留在郡裹镇守了。
English: In the second year of Datong, the Wei state's Zhangzhou Jishi Yuan Zhida requested to surrender to the Liang Dynasty, Emperor Liangwu ordered Zhangzhou Jishi Yuan Shu to go to meet Yuan Zhida, and Xia Houyi also came from Chu City to meet, so he stayed in the county to guard the town.

古文：诏改魏郢州为北司州，以夔为刺史，兼督司州。
现代文：皇帝命令改魏郢州为北司州，任命夏侯夔为北司州刺史，兼督司州。
English: The emperor ordered to change Wei Bozhou to Beisi Province, and appointed Xia Houyi as the governor of Beisi Province and the governor of Beisi Province.

古文：三年，迁使持节，进号仁威将军，封保城县侯，邑一千五百户。
现代文：三年，迁任使持节，进封号为仁威将军，被封为保城县侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the third year, he was transferred to the post of envoy to hold the festival, and was given the title of General Ren Wei. He was appointed as the governor of Baocheng County, with 1,500 households in the food village.

古文：中大通二年，征为右卫将军，丁所生母忧去职。
现代文：中大通二年，被征召任右卫将军，因他的生身母亲去世而离职。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was conscripted to serve as a general of the Right Division, but left the service due to the death of his biological mother.

古文：时魏南兗州刺史刘明以谯城入附，诏遣镇北将军元树帅军应接，起夔为云麾将军，随机北讨。
现代文：当时魏国的南兖州刺史刘明以谯城归附梁朝，皇帝诏令派遣镇北将军元树统率军队去接应，起任夏侯夔为云麾将军，见机行事，讨伐北方。
English: At that time, Liu Ming, the statesman of southern Luzhou of the Wei Dynasty, annexed Yingcheng to the Liang Dynasty. The emperor issued a decree to dispatch the general of Zhenbei, Yuan Shu Tong, to lead the army to respond. He appointed Xia Houyi as the general of Yunnan, and took advantage of the opportunity to fight in the north.

古文：寻授使持节、督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史。
现代文：不久，夏侯夔被任命为使持节、督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史。
English: Soon after, Xia Houyi was appointed as the commander of the Southern Yuanshou Military Region and the Southern Yuanshou Military Historian.

古文：六年，转使持节、督豫、淮、陈、颍、建、霍、义七州诸军事、豫州刺史。
现代文：六年，转任使持节、督豫州、淮州、陈州、颁州、建州、霍州、义州七个州的诸军事、豫州刺史。
English: In six years, he was transferred to the military of the seven states of Jizhou, the governor of Yuzhou, HuaiZhou, ChenZhou, ZheZhou, JianZhou, Huozhou and Yizhou, and the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：豫州积岁寇戎，人颇失业，夔乃帅军人于苍陵立堰，溉田千余顷。岁收谷百余万石，以充储备，兼赡贫人，境内赖之。
现代文：豫州多年来遭受战争侵犯，大多数人失业，夏侯夔就统率军人在苍陵筑起堤坝，用水灌溉田地一千多顷，一年后收获谷子一百多万石，用来充当储备，同时也供给贫困人家，境内百姓都依赖他而活了下来。
English: Over the years, Yuzhou has been invaded by war, and most people have lost their jobs. Therefore, Xia Houjun led the soldiers to build a dam in Soring and irrigated more than one thousand hectares of fields with water. A year later, more than one million stones of millet were harvested to serve as a reserve and also to supply poor families. The people in the territory all depended on him to survive.

古文：夔兄亶先经此任，至是夔又居焉。
现代文：夏侯夔的兄长夏侯直先前曾担任过这个官职，到现在夏侯夔又位居此官。
English: Xia Houyao's brother, Xia Houzhi, had previously held this post, and now Xia Houyao also holds this post.

古文：兄弟并有恩惠于乡里，百姓歌之曰： 我之有州，频仍夏侯；前兄后弟，布政优优。 
现代文：兄弟二人都给乡里留下了恩惠，老百姓作歌赞颂他们道： 我之有州，频仍夏侯；前兄后弟，布政优优。 
English: Both brothers have left a legacy of benevolence in the countryside, and the people have sung their praises, saying: I have a county, but I am still a summer lord; my former brother and my younger brother are good at governance.

古文：在州七年，甚有声绩，远近多附之。
现代文：夏侯夔在州裹任官七年，成绩很大，名声很好，远近的人都依附于他。
English: Xia Houjun has been an official in the prefecture for seven years. He has made great achievements and has a good reputation. People near and far are attached to him.

古文：有部曲万人，马二千匹，并服习精强，为当时之盛。
现代文：共有部曲一万人，马二千匹，这些人全都是精兵强将，善于骑射，成为当时的一件盛事。
English: A total of ten thousand people and two thousand horses, all of whom were elite soldiers, good at riding and shooting, became a grand event at that time.

古文：性奢豪，后房伎妾曳罗縠饰金翠者亦有百数。
现代文：夏侯夔性情豪放奢侈，他的后房裹的艺伎侍妾以百计数，全都穿罗纱做的衣服，饰戴金翠首饰。
English: Xia Houyi was a man of extravagant tastes. He had hundreds of geisha concubines in his back room, all of whom wore robe made of brocade and gold and emerald jewelry.

古文：爱好人士，不以贵势自高，文武宾客常满坐，时亦以此称之。
现代文：他还爱好结交人士，从不因自己官高位重而自视清高，他的家裹经常是高朋满座，文武官员都有，当时的人们也因这事而称道他。
English: He was also fond of socializing with people. He never regarded himself as high-ranking because of his high-ranking position. His house was often full of high-ranking officials, both military and civilian, and people at the time praised him for this.

古文：大同四年，卒于州，时年五十六。
现代文：大同四年，夏侯夔在豫州去世，终年五十六岁。
English: In the same year, Xia Houyi died in Yuzhou at the age of fifty-six.

古文：有诏举哀，赙钱二十万，布二百匹。
现代文：皇帝下韶举行哀悼活动，赐办丧事用的钱二十万，布二百匹。
English: The emperor decreed to hold a mourning activity, and gave 200,000 yuan and 200 pieces of cloth for the funeral.

古文：追赠侍中、安北将军。
现代文：追赠他为侍中、安北将军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Samurai Junior Middle Officer and General Anpaku.

古文：谥曰桓。
现代文：谧号桓。
English: 号桓.

古文：子撰嗣，官至太仆卿。
现代文：夏侯夔的儿子夏侯赞继嗣，作官至太仆卿。
English: Xia Houzan's son, Xia Houzan Heir, served as an official up to the rank of eunuch.

古文：撰弟譒，少粗险薄行，常停乡里，领其父部曲，为州助防，刺史萧渊明引为府长史。
现代文：夏侯赞的弟弟夏侯翻，少年时行为粗险，品行轻薄，经常停留在乡里，带领他父亲的部曲，充当州襄的助防，刺史萧渊明引用他当府长史。
English: Xia Houzan's younger brother, Xia Houfu, when he was a teenager, was reckless and frivolous. He often stayed in the countryside, led his father's troops, and served as an assistant to the state, and Xiao Yuanming quoted his history as governor.

古文：渊明彭城战没，复为侯景长史。
现代文：萧渊明在彭城战死以后，夏侯谱又当侯景的长史。
English: After Xiao Yuanming died in the battle of Pengcheng, Xia Houpu was also a long history of Houjing.

古文：景寻举兵反，譒前驱济江，顿兵城西士林馆，破掠邸第及居人富室，子女财货，尽略有之。
现代文：不久，侯景举兵反叛，夏侯语作为先驱部队首先渡江，他把队伍停顿在京城西边的士林馆，攻破府邸官第以及百姓中的富裕人家进行劫掠，把人家的子女和财产货物，全都据为已有。
English: Soon, Hou Jing raised an army to rebel, and Xia Hou Yu was the first to cross the river as a pioneer force. He halted the team at the Shilin Pavilion on the west side of the capital, attacked the residence of officials and the rich people among the people to loot, and took their children and property goods.

古文：渊明在州有四妾，章、于、王、阮，并有国色。
现代文：萧渊明在州裹有四个侍妾，章氏、于氏、王氏、阮氏，都长得非常漂亮。
English: Xiao Yuanming had four concubines in the state, Zhang, Yu, Wang and Ruan, all of whom were very beautiful.

古文：渊明没魏，其妾并还京第，譒至，破第纳焉。
现代文：萧渊明在魏国战死后，他的侍妾全都回到了京城的府第，夏侯诸到来后，进入府第把她们都纳为自己的侍妾了。
English: After the death of Xiao Yuanming in the Wei War, his concubines all returned to the capital's fudai. After the arrival of Xia Hou Zhu, he entered the fudai and took them as his concubines.

古文：鱼弘，襄阳人。
现代文：鱼弘是襄阳人。
English: Yu Hong is from Yangyang.

古文：身长八尺，白皙美姿容。
现代文：他身高八尺，皮肤白皙，容貌俊美。
English: He is eight feet tall, fair-skinned and good-looking.

古文：累从征讨，常为军锋，历南谯、盱眙、竟陵太守。
现代文：他多次跟随皇帝征讨，经常担任军队的前锋，历任南谯郡、盱眙郡、竟陵郡的太守。
English: He followed the emperor's conquests many times, often served as the army's vanguard, and successively served as the governor of Nanlu County, Handan County, and Jingling County.

古文：常语人曰： 我为郡，所谓四尽：水中鱼鳖尽，山中麞鹿尽，田中米谷尽，村里民庶尽。
现代文：他经常对别人说： 我当郡守，有所谓四尽：水裹鱼鳖尽，山中獐鹿尽，田中米谷尽，村裹民庶尽。
English: He often said to others: When I was a county magistrate, there were four things I had to do: I had to catch fish in the water, catch elk in the mountains, catch rice in the rice paddies, and catch people in the villages.

古文：丈夫生世，如轻尘栖弱草，白驹之过隙。
现代文：大丈夫人生在世，就像一粒灰尘栖落在小草中一样轻微，又像一匹白马跳过山隙一样短暂。
English: It's okay, life in the world is as light as a speck of dust nestled in the grass, and as short as a white horse jumping over a mountain gap.

古文：人生欢乐富贵几何时！ 
现代文：人生的欢乐和富贵能享受多久呢! 
English: How long can you enjoy the joys and riches of life!

古文：于是恣意酣赏，侍妾百余人，不胜金翠，服玩车马，皆穷一时之绝。
现代文：因此，他尽情地喝酒赏赐，拥有侍妾百余人，金银珠翠不可胜敷，服饰玩物车马，都是当时的绝品。
English: Therefore, he drank as much as he liked, had more than a hundred concubines, gold and silver beads, clothing, toys, chariots and horses, all of which were the best at the time.

古文：迁为平西湘东王司马、新兴、永宁二郡太守，卒官。
现代文：鱼弘迁任平西湘东王的司马，新兴、永宁二郡的太守，在官任上去世。
English: Yu Hongqian was appointed as the Sima of the Pingxi Xiangdong King, the emerging, Yongning two-county governor, and died in office.

古文：韦放，字元直，车骑将军睿之子。
现代文：韦放字元直，是车骑将军韦睿的儿子。
English: Wei Fangzhu Yuan Zhi is the son of the cavalry general Wei Rui.

古文：初为齐晋安王宁朔迎主簿，高祖临雍州，又召为主簿。
现代文：他最初当齐晋安王的宁朔迎主簿，高祖驾临壅州时，又召他任主簿。
English: In the beginning, when the king of Qi Jinan was in Ningshuo, Gao Zu drove to Linzhou, he also called him to be the master of the book.

古文：放身长七尺七寸，腰带八围，容貌甚伟。
现代文：韦放身高七尺七寸，腰带有八围，容貌非常伟岸。
English: Wei Fang is seven feet seven inches tall, with a waist of eight, and a very handsome face.

古文：天监元年，为盱眙太守，还除通直郎，寻为轻车晋安王中兵参军，迁镇右始兴王谘议参军，以父忧去职。
现代文：天监元年，任盱眙郡太守，回京后被授予通直郎，不久任轻车晋安王的中兵参军，迁任镇右始兴王的谘议参军，因父亲去世而离职。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the title of Tongzhiro. Soon after, he joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier of the Light Chariot Jinan King, and was transferred to the advisory army of the Zhenwuxixing King. He left the army due to the death of his father.

古文：服阕，袭封永昌县侯，出为轻车南平王长史、襄阳太守。
现代文：服丧期满后，袭封为永昌县侯，出任轻车童王王的长史、襄阳郡太守。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was enthroned as the marquis of Yongchang County, served as the long history of the light car boy Wang Wang, and became the governor of Yangyang County.

古文：转假节、明威将军、竟陵太守。
现代文：转任假节、明威将军、竟陵郡太守。
English: He was transferred to the posts of the False Festival, General Mingwei, and the Governor of Jingting County.

古文：在郡和理，为吏民所称。
现代文：在郡任上为政宽和有条理，为官吏和人民所称赞。
English: The political governance has been smooth and harmonious, and has been praised by officials and the people.

古文：六年，大举北伐，以放为贞威将军，与胡龙牙会曹仲宗进军。
现代文：六年，军队大规模北伐，任命韦放为贞威将军，与塑垄迂会同萱健塞向北进军。
English: In the sixth year, the army made a large-scale northern expedition, appointed Wei Fang as General Zhenwei, and marched north with Pu Ruan Duan Association and Jian Ce.

古文：七年，夏侯亶攻黎浆不克，高祖复使帅军自北道会寿春城。
现代文：七年，夏麦皇进攻鳖奖没有成功，高祖梁武帝又派他统率军队从北道到寿春城会合。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Xia Mei's attack on Shou was not successful, and Emperor Gaozhu Liangwu sent him to lead the army from the North to join Shuchuncheng.

古文：寻迁云麾南康王长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：不久，韦放迁任云麾亩尘王的长史、要垦瞪太守。
English: Soon, Wei Fuxiang was appointed as the long history of the king of the clouds and the dust, and became the emperor.

古文：放累为籓佐，并著声绩。
现代文：皇茎多次辅助藩王的工作，每次都以成绩著名。
English: On many occasions, the prince assisted the work of the king of the domain, and each time he was famous for his achievements.

古文：普通八年，高祖遣兼领军曹仲宗等攻涡阳，又以放为明威将军，帅师会之。
现代文：普通八年，高祖梁武帝派遣兼领军茎倥塞等进攻涡阳，又任命韦放为明威将军，统率军队，会合曹仲宗。
English: In the ordinary eight years, Emperor Gaozhu Liangwu dispatched and led the army to attack Turbuyang, and appointed Wei Fang as Mingwei General to lead the army and meet Cao Zhongzong.

古文：魏大将费穆帅众奄至，放军营未立，麾下止有二百余人。
现代文：蕴军大将壹垄率领大军突然来到，而涡阳的军营还没建立起来，麾下祇有二百多人。
English: General Yun Rong suddenly arrived with a large army, while the military camp of Turbuyang had not yet been established, with only more than two hundred people under his command.

古文：放从弟洵骁果有勇力，一军所仗，放令洵单骑击刺，屡折魏军，洵马亦被伤不能进，放胄又三贯流矢。
现代文：韦放的堂弟韦洵勇猛果敢有力量，是整个军队的依靠，童墓命令韦回单人匹马，用戈矛去突击蕴军，结果多次挫败魏军，韦洵的坐骑也因受伤不能前进，这时韦茎的头盔上中了三枝乱箭。
English: Wei Fang's cousin Wei Xuan was brave and courageous and had strength, which was the reliance of the entire army. The Children's Grave ordered Wei to go back on a single horse and use a spear to attack the Hun army. As a result, he repeatedly defeated the Wei army. Wei Xuan's horse could not advance due to injury. At this time, three arrows were shot at Wei Zhu's helmet.

古文：众皆失色，请放突去。
现代文：众人都惊慌失色，请韦放突围出去。
English: Everyone panicked and lost their composure. Wei Fang was asked to break out of the circle.

古文：放厉声叱之曰： 今日唯有死耳。 
现代文：韦放厉声斥责他们说： 今天祇有拼死作战了。 
English: Wei Fang harshly reprimanded them, saying, "Today, we have to fight to the death.

古文：乃免胄下马，据胡床处分。
现代文：他取下头盔跳下马来，就坐在交椅上指挥作战。因此。
English: He took off his helmet, jumped off his horse, and sat in a chair to direct the battle. So.

古文：于是士皆殊死战，莫不一当百。
现代文：士兵们全都殊死作战，无不以一当百。
English: The soldiers all fought to the bitter end, all to the death.

古文：魏军遂退，放逐北至涡阳。
现代文：魏军于是开始撤退，童茎追赶逃兵一直追到涡阳。
English: The Wei army then began to retreat, and Tong Zi chased the deserters all the way to Wuyang.

古文：魏又遣常山王元昭、大将军李奖、乞佛宝、费穆等众五万来援，放率所督将陈度、赵伯超等夹击，大破之。
现代文：魏军又派遣常山王元昭、大将军李奖、乞佛实、费穆等人率领五万大军前来援助，韦放率他所领的大将陈度、趟伯超等夹击魏军，把魏军打得大败。
English: The Wei army also sent Changshan Wang Yuan Zhao, the great generals Li Ying, Qian Fuxi, Fei Mu and others to come to the aid of the 50,000-strong army. Wei Fang led his generals Chen Du and Wai Bo Chao to attack the Wei army, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：涡阳城主王纬以城降。
现代文：涡阳城的城主王纬献城投降。
English: Wang Wei, the lord of Vortex City, surrenders the city.

古文：放乃登城，简出降口四千二百人，器仗充牜刃；又遣降人三十，分报李奖、费穆等。
现代文：韦放就登上城墙，在投降的人中挑选出四千二百人，给他们每人都发放了武器；又派遣三十个投降的人，分别去向李奖、费穆等人报告消息。
English: Wei Fang went up to the city wall and selected 4,200 people from those who had surrendered, and issued weapons to each of them. He also sent 30 people who had surrendered to report the news to Li Xuan, Feimu and others.

古文：魏人弃诸营垒，一时奔溃，众军乘之，斩获略尽。
现代文：魏军士兵听到这个消息，立时就崩溃瓦解，四处奔逃，这时韦放的大军乘胜追击，把魏军几乎全部斩杀俘虏。
English: When the Wei soldiers heard this news, they immediately collapsed and fled in all directions. At this time, Wei Fang's large army took advantage of the victory to pursue and killed almost all the prisoners of the Wei army.

古文：擒穆弟超，并王纬送于京师。
现代文：抓住了费穆的弟弟费超，把他和王纬一起押送到京师。
English: He caught Fei Mu's younger brother Fei Chao and sent him to Beijing together with Wang Wei.

古文：还为太子右卫率，转通直散骑常侍。
现代文：皇茎回到京师后，任太子右卫率，转任通直散骑常侍。
English: After the prince returned to the capital, he was appointed as the prince's right guard, and was transferred to the position of a commoner's equerry.

古文：出为持节、督梁、南秦二州诸军事、信武将军、梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：又出任持节、督梁州、南秦州二州的诸军事、信武将军、梁州、南秦州二州的刺史。
English: He also served as the military commander of Ji Jie, the governor of Liangzhou and the two states of South Qin Province, the general of Xinwu, and the chief historian of Liangzhou and the two states of South Qin Province.

古文：中大通二年，徙督北徐州诸军事、北徐州刺史，增封四百户，持节、将军如故。
现代文：中大通二年，改任督诸军事、北徐州刺史，增加封邑四百户，持节、将军之职照旧。
English: In the second year of Zhongdazhong, he was reappointed as the governor of the military and the history of northern Xuzhou, increased the number of fiefs by 400 households, and continued to hold the festival and the post of general.

古文：在镇三年，卒，时年五十九。
现代文：在任三年后，韦放去世，终年五十九岁。
English: After three years in office, Wei Fang died at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：谥曰宜侯。
现代文：谧号宜侯。
English: Long may it continue.

古文：放性弘厚笃实，轻财好施，于诸弟尤雍睦。
现代文：韦放性格宽厚实在，把钱财看得很轻，喜好施舍，与他的几个弟弟尤其和睦。
English: Wei Fang's character is generous and honest. He regards money lightly, likes to give alms, and is especially harmonious with his younger brothers.

古文：每将远别及行役初还，常同一室卧起，时称为 三姜 。
现代文：每次他远行或者外出打仗刚回来，总要和兄弟们在一间屋裹住和睡，当时人们称他们是 三姜 。
English: Every time he went on a long journey or went out to fight and just returned, he always had to wrap up and sleep in a room with his brothers. At that time, people called them the three Jiangs.

古文：初，放与吴郡张率皆有侧室怀孕，因指为婚姻。
现代文：当初，韦放和呈型人亟空的小妾都怀有身孕，因此他们指腹为婚。
English: At first, both Wei Fang and the concubine of the model were pregnant, so they got married.

古文：其后各产男女，未及成长而率亡，遗嗣孤弱，放常赡恤之。
现代文：后来两位小妾各自生下了男孩和女孩，还没有长大，张率就去世了，留下了寡妇和孤幼的孩子，韦放经常去帮助抚恤他们。
English: Later, each of the two concubines gave birth to a boy and a girl. Before they grew up, Zhang Rui passed away, leaving behind a widow and orphaned children. Wei Fang often went to help care for them.

古文：及为北徐州，时有势族请姻者，放曰： 吾不失信于故友。 
现代文：韦放任北徐州长官后，当时有一个势力很大的家族想和韦放联姻，童趑说： 我不能失信于我死去的老朋友。 
English: After Wei Fang was appointed governor of Beixu, there was a powerful family that wanted to marry Wei Fang. Tong Tong said: I can't betray my dead old friend.

古文：乃以息岐娶率女，又以女适率子，时称放能笃旧。
现代文：他就让自己的儿子韦岐娶了张率的女儿，又把自己的女儿嫁给张率的儿子，当时人们都称赞韦放能够念旧，忠实于老朋友。
English: He let his son Weiqi marry Zhang Quan's daughter, and let his own daughter marry Zhang Quan's son. At that time, people praised Wei Fang for his ability to remember the past and be loyal to old friends.

古文：长子粲嗣，别有传。
现代文：韦放的长子韦粲继嗣，另外有传。
English: Wei Fang's eldest son, Wei Wei, is the heir, and there is another legend.

古文：史臣曰：裴邃之词采早著，兼思略沉深，夏侯禀之好学辩给，夔之奢豪爱士，韦放之弘厚笃行，并遇主逢时，展其才用矣。
现代文：史臣曰：裴邃的诗词文采早就著名，更兼有深沉的思想谋略，夏侯宜的好学和能言善辩，夏室塑的奢侈豪华喜爱结交士人，韦放的宽厚和踏实的行为，他们都遇到了明主，生逢其时，得以展示他们的才华和能力。
English: Shichen said: Pei Xuan's poetry and prose have been famous for a long time, and he also has a profound ideological strategy, Xia Houyi's eagerness to learn and can speak well, Xia Shuxiu's luxury and luxury like to make friends, and Wei Fang's generous and steadfast behavior. They all met the Lord, and were born at the right time, and were able to show their talents and abilities.

古文：及牧州典郡，破敌安边，咸著功绩，允文武之任，盖梁室之名臣欤。
现代文：至于担任州郡官职主持其事，破敌安边，都很有功劳和成绩，确实符合他们的文武之职位，他们应该是梁王朝的名臣了吧。
English: As for the state and county officials who presided over the matter and defeated the enemy and secured the border, they all have great merits and achievements, which is indeed in line with their positions in literature and martial arts. They should be the famous ministers of the Liang Dynasty.

