古文：韦桃符李敬武公干吴行鲁李鹄捧砚捧剑归秦段章上清李锜婢
现代文：韦桃符李敬武公干吴行鲁李鹄捧砚捧剑归秦段章上清李锜婢
English: Wei Taofu Li Jingwu Gong Gan Wu Xinglu Li Zhe holding a scepter and holding a sword belongs to Qin Duan Chapter Upper Qing Li Zhe Handi

古文：李福女奴却要
现代文：李福女奴却要
English: But Li Fu's slave girl wants to leave.

古文：韦桃符隋开皇中，京兆韦衮，有奴曰桃符，每征讨将行，有胆力。
现代文：韦桃符隋文帝开皇年间。京兆尹韦衮有个奴仆叫桃符，每次出征打仗都带着他随军从行，桃符很有胆识，又有勇力。
English: Wei Taofu During the reign of Emperor Sui, there was a servant of Emperor Jing Zhaoying named Wei Zhaoying. Every time he went to war, he went with the army. He was brave and courageous.

古文：衮至左卫中郎，以桃符久从驱使，乃放从良。
现代文：韦衮官至左卫中郎后，因为桃符多年跟从自己，听从驱遣使用；便解除奴仆身份放他去作庶人平民。
English: After Wei Xuan's promotion to the rank of Middle Palace Guard, because Taofu had followed him for many years and obeyed his orders, he was relieved of his status as a slave and allowed to become a commoner.

古文：符家有黄牸牛，宰而献之，因问衮乞姓。
现代文：桃符家有头黄母牛，他把牛宰了献给韦衮，便向他问自己应该姓什么。
English: The Taofu family had a yellow cow. He slaughtered the cow and dedicated it to Wei Wei, and then asked him what his surname should be.

古文：衮曰：止从我姓为韦氏。
现代文：韦衮说：只能跟我姓韦。
English: Wei Wei said: I can only go by my surname Wei.

古文：符叩头曰：不敢与郎君同姓。
现代文：桃符叩头说道：不敢与郎君同姓。
English: Taofu kowtows and says: I dare not have the same surname as my husband.

古文：衮曰：汝但从之，此有深意。
现代文：韦衮说：你只管跟着我姓韦，这里面自有深意。
English: Wei Wei said: You just follow my surname Wei, there is a deep meaning in it.

古文：故至今有黄犊子韦，即韦庶人其后也。
现代文：所以如今称为黄犊子韦的，就是韦庶人桃符的后裔。
English: Therefore, those who are now called Huangzhu Zi Wei are the descendants of Wei commoner Peach Charm.

古文：不许异姓者，盖虑年深代远，子孙或与韦氏通婚。
现代文：当时韦衮不许他姓别姓，大概是担心将来年代久远，桃符的子孙说不上能有与韦家通婚的。
English: At that time, Wei Xuan did not allow him to have a different surname, probably because he was worried that it would be a long time in the future, and the descendants of the peach charm could not be said to have married into the Wei family.

古文：此其意也。李敬
现代文：这就是韦衮所谓的深意。李敬
English: This is the so-called deep meaning of Wei Wei.

古文：李敬者，本夏侯孜之傭也。
现代文：李敬原来是夏侯孜的童仆。
English: Li Jing used to be Xia Houzhe's servant.

古文：孜久厄塞名场，敬寒苦备历。
现代文：夏侯孜长年困塞于仕途，屡试不第，李敬陪伴他备尝了饥寒之苦。
English: Xia Houzhi has been stuck in his career for a long time, and he has tried many times. Li Jing accompanied him and experienced the suffering of hunger and cold.

古文：或为其类所引曰：当今北面官人，入则内贵，出则使臣。
现代文：有些童仆指点李敬道：当今北面称臣的达官贵人，入则为朝廷显贵，出则为州郡使臣。
English: Some of the servants pointed out to Li Jing: Today's dignitaries in the north are called courtiers, while those in the south are called imperial dignitaries, and those in the south are called provincial and county envoys.

古文：到所在，打风打雨，尔何不从之。
现代文：到他们那里去，可以打秋风吃贿赂。
English: If you go to them, you can expect to be bribed.

古文：而孜孜事一个穷措大，有何长进耳？
现代文：你为什么不去跟随这些人，而苦巴苦夜地侍候一个穷措大，这有什么长进呢？
English: Why don't you follow these people and work hard to serve a destitute person, what's the gain?

古文：纵其不然，堂头官人，丰衣足食，所往无不克。
现代文：纵使不去跟这些当大官的，侍候堂吏也落个丰衣足食，处处得点克扣。
English: Even if they didn't go with these dignitaries, the palace attendants were well-fed and clothed, and they got a discount everywhere.

古文：敬冁然曰：我使头及第，还拟作西川留后官。
现代文：李敬笑着说：我家主人及第之后，还要作西川留后官呢。
English: Li Jing said with a smile, "After becoming the head of my family, I still have to serve as Nishikawa's retainer."

古文：众皆非笑。
现代文：别人听了都嗤笑他。
English: Everyone else laughed at him.

古文：时孜于壁后闻其言。
现代文：当时夏侯孜在墙后面听到了这番对话。
English: At the time, Xia Houzhe heard the conversation from behind the wall.

古文：凡十余岁，孜自中书出镇成都，临行，有以邸吏托者，一无所诺。
现代文：经过十几年的刻苦奋斗，夏侯孜终于及第，自中书官职出任成都节度使。离京赴任时，有要去随做属员的，概不应诺。
English: After more than ten years of hard struggle, Xia Houzé finally won the first place, and served as the Chengdu Festival Delegate from the position of the Chinese Calligrapher. When leaving Beijing for the post, if you want to be a member, you should not promise.

古文：至镇，用敬知进奏，而鞅掌极矣。
现代文：到了成都镇所，任用李敬负责道知禀报一事，处处都要烦劳李敬。
English: When he arrived at the Chengdu Town Hall, he appointed Li Jing to be in charge of the Dao Zhisheng report. Li Jing had to be bothered everywhere.

古文：向之笑者，率多伏敬。
现代文：以前嗤笑他的那些人，大都表示敬伏。
English: Those who used to sneer at him are mostly in awe.

古文：初孜未遇，伶俜风尘，所跨蹇驴，无故坠井，及朝士之门，或逆旅舍，常多龃龉时人号曰不利市秀才。
现代文：当年夏侯孜未得官位时，孤独地挣扎在人生途中，骑着一头瘦驴，又无端跌进井里，每到达官贵人门庭，或者驻足逆旅途中，常常遇到阻碍和麻烦，时人称他为出息不了的秀才。
English: In the summer of that year, when he had not yet obtained his official position, he struggled alone on the road of life, riding a thin donkey and falling into a well for no reason. Whenever he arrived at the courtyards of officials and dignitaries, or stopped on his journey, he often encountered obstacles and troubles. At that time, people called him a brilliant talent.

古文：竟登将相。
现代文：后来竟然官登将相之位。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of shogun.

古文：武公干
现代文：武公干
English: Wu Gong Gan

古文：武公干者常事蒯希逸秀才，十余岁，异常勤干。
现代文：武公干长期侍奉蒯希逸秀才，十多年来，他是那样的勤奋肯干。
English: For more than ten years, Mr. Wu has been a long-term servant of Ms. Gao Xiyi. He is so diligent and willing to work.

古文：洎希逸擢第，干辞以亲在，乞归就养。
现代文：等到希逸进士及第晋升高官时，武公干便以双亲俱在为由，请求回家赡养老人。
English: When Xi Yat-sen entered the priesthood and was promoted to the second-highest official, Wu Gong-dan requested to go home to support the elderly on the grounds that his parents were still alive.

古文：希逸监留不住，既嘉其忠孝，以诗送之，略曰：山险不曾离马后，酒醒长见在床前。
现代文：希逸坚决挽留，但他执意不再留下。为表彰他的忠孝美德，希逸写了一首诗送给他，大致的意思是山险不曾离马后，酒醒长见在床前之类。
English: In recognition of his loyalty and filial piety, Xi Yat wrote a poem for him, which roughly translates to "the mountain never leaves the horse" and "drunkenness is never far from the bed."

古文：同人醵绢赠行，皆有继和。
现代文：同人也都积钱买绢相赠，以作留念，并且都写诗与希逸唱和，一致称许他的忠孝。
English: His classmates also pooled their money to buy gifts for each other as mementos, and they all wrote poems and songs praising his loyalty and filial piety.

古文：吴行鲁
现代文：吴行鲁
English: Wu Xinglu

古文：吴行鲁尚书，彭州人。
现代文：吴行鲁尚书是彭州人。
English: Wu Xinglu Shangshu is from Pengzhou.

古文：少年事理官西门思恭，小心畏慎。每夜，常为温溺器以奉之，深得中尉之意。
现代文：他在年轻时侍奉理官西门思恭，小心谨慎，尽心尽力，每当夜晚，常常把小便器弄热乎了再送给主人，所以深得西门中尉之意。
English: When he was young, he served the magistrate, Simon Sikyong. He was careful and conscientious. Whenever it was night, he would often warm up the urinal and give it to his master. That is why he was so fond of Lieutenant Simon.

古文：一日为中尉洗足，中尉以足下文理示之曰：如此文，争教不作军容使。
现代文：有一天，他为中尉洗脚，中尉指着自己脚底下的纹理对他说：就凭这样的脚纹，怎能不做上军容使！
English: One day, he was washing the lieutenant's feet, and the lieutenant pointed to the texture under his feet and said to him: "With such footprints, how can you not be a military commander!"

古文：行鲁拜曰：此亦无凭。
现代文：行鲁向他施礼道：这是不能作为凭据的。
English: Gyaru bowed to him and said, "This cannot be used as evidence."

古文：西门曰：何也？
现代文：西门中尉说：为什么？
English: Lieutenant Simon said: "Why?

古文：鲁曰：若其然者，某亦有之，何为常执仆厮之役。
现代文：行鲁答道；如果真是这样的话，我的脚也有这样的纹理，为什么我却一直当仆役呢？
English: If that is so, and my feet have such a texture, why have I always been a servant?

古文：乃脱履呈之。
现代文：于是脱下鞋来让西门中尉察看。
English: So he took off his shoes and let Lieutenant Simon take a look.

古文：西门嗟叹，谓曰：汝但忠孝，我当为汝成之。
现代文：西门中尉感慨地说：你只管忠心耿耿地侍奉，我会成全你的。
English: Lieutenant Simon said with emotion, "Just serve loyally, and I will make you perfect."

古文：尔后假以军职，除彭州刺史。
现代文：后来，西门便赠给他一个军衔，再后来他就升任了彭州刺史。
English: Later, Ximen gave him a military rank, and later he was promoted to the post of Pengzhou chief historian.

古文：卢耽表为西川行军司马，御蛮有功，历东川、山南二镇节度使。
现代文：卢耽表做西川行军司马，行鲁抗击蛮寇有功，曾历任东川与山南两镇的节度使。
English: Lu Tanbo served as the Sima of the West River Marching Corps, and played a significant role in the fight against the barbarian invaders. He was a delegate to the festivals of Dongchuan and Shannan.

古文：初行鲁之在东川也，历图南为西川副使，随府罢。行鲁欲延辟之。
现代文：在行鲁节镇东川时，厉图南任西川的副使，当图南随着西川府的撤销而失去职位时，行鲁打算延聘他。
English: When he was in Dongchuan, Xinglu Festival Town, Yi Tunan was the deputy envoy of Xichuan. When Tunan lost his position with the cancellation of Xichuan Prefecture, Xinglu planned to re-hire him.

古文：厉素薄行鲁，闻之大笑曰：不能剪头剃面，而趋事健儿乎！
现代文：但图南向来瞧不起行鲁，听说要延聘他后，放声大笑道：我可不能剪短了头发剃光了脸，去侍候健儿呵！
English: But Tunan had always looked down on Xinglu. When he heard that he was to be hired, he laughed out loud: I can't cut my hair short and shave my face to wait on Jian Er!

古文：自使院乘马，不归私第，直出北郭。
现代文：他从官署骑上马，没有回家，直接出了北城门而去。
English: He rode a horse from the government office, did not go home, and went directly out of the north gate.

古文：家人遽结束而追之。
现代文：家人知道后，急忙打点行李去追赶他。
English: After the family found out, they hurriedly packed some luggage to catch up with him.

古文：张云为成都少尹，常出轻言，为行鲁鸩杀之。
现代文：有个叫张云的，是成都少尹，经常说轻薄话，挖苦行鲁，便被行鲁用毒酒把他杀死了。
English: There was a man named Zhang Yun, a Chengdu Shaoyun, who often said frivolous things and was sarcastic to Xinglu. Xinglu killed him with poisoned wine.

古文：李鹄卢钧子肃，贞简有父风。
现代文：卢肃及第后，李鹄仍如以往那样为其奔走操劳，等到操办完了一年的事情之后，他便辞职走了。
English: After Lu Sui and the second, Li Xuan still worked hard for him as before, and when he had completed the operation for one year, he resigned and left.

古文：捧砚
现代文：捧砚
English: 捧

古文：捧砚者，裴至德之家童也。其母曰春红，配驺人高璠而生。
现代文：捧砚是裴至德的家童，他母亲叫春红，春红配给马官高璠后生的他。
English: Huping is the son of Pei Zhide. His mother's name is Chunhong. Chunhong is assigned to the offspring of Ma Guan Gaoqin.

古文：一岁时，夏日浴之，裸卧于廊庑间，有卑脚犬曰青花，忽来。
现代文：一岁的时候，夏天，刚给他洗完澡，光溜溜地躺在下屋里，有一只短腿狼狗叫青花忽然走过来，咬下小孩的小便来吃了。
English: When he was one year old, in the summer, just after he had been bathed and was lying naked in the lower room, a short-legged wolf-dog called Blue Flower suddenly came over and ate the child's urine.

古文：啮儿阴食之。春红闻啼声，狼忙而至，则血流盈席矣。
现代文：春红听见孩子哭，急急忙忙地跑过来只见鲜血流满了床。
English: When Chunhong heard the child crying, she hurried over and saw blood flowing all over the bed.

古文：赖至德有良药封之，百日如故。
现代文：幸好裴至德有良药，将伤口封上，一百天后便愈合了。
English: Fortunately, Pei Zhi De had a good medicine, sealed the wound, and it healed after a hundred days.

古文：明年夏，寝之前轩，青花伺人隙复来，并卵又食讫。
现代文：第二年夏天，小孩子睡在前屋里，青花乘大人不在的空隙，又过去把两只卵子咬下来吃了。
English: The following summer, when the children were asleep in the front room, Blue Flower took advantage of the absence of the adults and went over to bite down two eggs and eat them.

古文：宛转于地而死，又以前食之药傅之，及愈为宦者焉。
现代文：孩子疼得在地下打滚，休克了，又用先前那种药敷在伤处。等到伤口愈合后，已成为一个小太监了。
English: The child rolled around on the ground in pain, went into shock, and applied the same medicine as before. By the time the wound had healed, he had become a little eunuch.

古文：字之曰捧砚，委以内竖之职。
现代文：裴至德给他起了个字号叫捧砚，让他担任宫内侍从之职。
English: Pei Zhide gave him a nickname called Huping, and let him serve as a palace attendant.

古文：至光启丙午年，十余岁矣。
现代文：到光启丙午年时，他已十多岁了。
English: By the time of the Guangqi Year of the Horse, he was already more than ten years old.

古文：裴使外出，遇盗于郑郊见害。
现代文：这年裴至德公使外出，在郑郊遇上盗贼被杀害了。
English: This year, when Minister Pei Zhide went out, he met a thief in Zhengjiao and was killed.

古文：噫。
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：捧砚童儿也，再残而无恙，裴以一出而不回者，其故何哉？捧剑
现代文：捧砚是个小小的家童，两次遭到残害而安全无恙，裴至德是朝廷大臣，一次外出却命丧黄泉，这是什么缘故呢？捧剑
English: Huping is a small family child. He was twice injured and is safe and sound. Pei Zhide is a minister of the imperial court, but once he went out, he died. What is the reason for this? Huping

古文：咸阳郭氏者，殷富之室也，仆媵且众。
现代文：咸阳有个姓郭的，家里极富，仆婢成群。
English: In Xianyang, there was a man surnamed Guo. His family was extremely rich, and they had many servants and maids.

古文：其间有一苍头，名曰捧剑，不事音乐，尝以望水眺云，不遵驱策，虽每遭鞭捶，终所见违。
现代文：其中有个奴仆名叫捧剑，不会唱歌奏乐，常常欣赏山水和游云，不听从主人驱使，虽然常遭鞭打，始终不肯听话。
English: Among them, there was a servant named Hou Jian, who could not sing or play music, often enjoyed the scenery and clouds, did not listen to his master's urging, and although he was often whipped, he still refused to obey.

古文：一旦，忽题诗一篇，其主益怒。
现代文：一天，他忽然写起诗来，主人更为恼怒。
English: One day, he suddenly began to write poetry, which made his master even more angry.

古文：诗曰：青鸟衔蒲菊，飞上金井栏。
现代文：他在诗中写道：青鸟衔蒲菊，飞上金井栏。
English: He wrote in his poem: "The bluebird hovers over the chrysanthemum and flies to the golden well."

古文：美人恐惊去，不敢卷帘看。
现代文：美人恐惊去，不敢卷帘看。
English: The beauty is afraid to go, and does not dare to look behind the curtain.

古文：儒士闻而竞观，以为协律之词。
现代文：书生们知道后争相传阅，都以为此诗极合韵律。
English: When the students read the poem, they all thought that it was in perfect rhythm.

古文：其主稍容焉。
现代文：主人于是对他稍为宽容了些。
English: His master was a little more lenient with him.

古文：又《题后堂牡丹花》曰：一种芳菲出后亭，却输桃李得佳名。
现代文：他又写了一首《题后堂牡丹》：一种芳菲出后亭，却输桃李得佳名。
English: He also wrote a song "Theme Backyard Peony": a kind of fan fiction out of the back porch, but losing the peach got a good name.

古文：谁能为向天人说，从此移根近太清。
现代文：谁能为向天人说，从些移根近太清。
English: Who can say to the gods that it is too clear to move from here to there?

古文：捧剑私启宾客曰：愿作夷狄之鬼，耻为世俗苍头。
现代文：捧剑私下告诉宾客道：愿作夷狄之鬼，耻为世俗家奴。
English: Holding a sword, he told the guests in private: "I would like to be a demon of the Yidi, I am ashamed to be a secular house slave."

古文：其后将窜，复留诗曰：珍重郭四郎，临行不得别。
现代文：后来他要逃跑，又留下一首诗道：珍重郭四郎，临行不得别。
English: Later, when he wanted to escape, he also left behind a poem: "Treasure Guo Shiro, I must leave before I go."

古文：晓漏动离心，轻车冒残雪。
现代文：晓漏动离心，轻车冒残雪。
English: A light-duty truck is stuck in the snow.

古文：欲出主人门，零涕暗鸣咽。
现代文：欲出主人门，零涕暗鸣咽。
English: Wanting to get out of the master's door, Zero Han silently swallowed.

古文：万里隔关山，一心思汉月。
现代文：万里隔关山，一心思汉月。
English: A thousand miles away from the mountain, thinking of Han Yue.

古文：归秦
现代文：归秦
English: Return to Qin

古文：沈询有嬖妾，其妻害之，私以配内竖归秦，询不能禁。
现代文：沈询有个婢妾，他妻子很妒忌，私下把她配给了家人归秦，沈询制止不了。
English: Shen Ying has a slave mistress. His wife is very jealous and secretly gave her to her family to return to Qin. Shen Ying can't stop her.

古文：既而妾犹侍内，归秦耻之，乃挟刃伺隙，杀询及其夫人于昭仪使衙。
现代文：事后，这个婢妾仍然到内室侍奉沈询。归秦感到是件耻辱事，便带着刀寻找机会，要在昭仪使府衙内杀死沈询及其夫人。
English: Afterwards, this concubine still went to the inner room to serve Shen Ying. Gui Qin felt it was a disgrace, so he took a knife and looked for an opportunity to kill Shen Ying and his wife in the courtyard of Zhaoyi's residence.

古文：是夕，询尝宴府中宾友，乃便歌著词令曰：莫打南来雁，从他向北飞。
现代文：这天晚上，沈询宴请府内宾客幕友，他即席唱了一首词令道：莫打南来雁，从他向北飞。
English: That evening, Shen held a banquet for guests of the prefectural government. He sang an impromptu song: "Don't let the geese fly south, let them fly north."

古文：打时双打取，莫遣两分离。
现代文：打时双打取，莫遣两分离。
English: When you play doubles, you can't separate the two.

古文：及归而夫妻併命焉。
现代文：等他回家后，夫妻二人双毙命。
English: When he got home, he and his wife were both dead.

古文：时咸通四年也。
现代文：当时是咸通四年。
English: At that time, Hamdang was four years old.

古文：段章
现代文：段章
English: Paragraphs

古文：段章，咸通十年，事前进士司空图。
现代文：段章在咸通十年给进士司空图当仆役。
English: Duan Zhang worked as a servant for the conscript Sikuotu in Hamdang for ten years.

古文：初，章以自僦为驭者，亦无异于他佣。
现代文：开始，他自己租车驾驶，这跟花钱雇赶车的也没什么两样。
English: At first, he rented a car and drove it himself, which was no different from paying someone to drive the car.

古文：是年夏，图归蒲久，以乏力，不足赒给，章乃谢去。
现代文：这年夏天，司空图回到老家蒲州，日子久了，因为没钱养活仆役，便把段章辞了。
English: This summer, Siu Kuo-tu returned to his hometown of Puzhou. After a long time, because he had no money to feed his servants, he resigned his position.

古文：广明庚子岁，冬十二月，寇犯京，图寓居崇义里。九日，自里豪杨琼所，转匿常平仓下。将出，群盗继至。
现代文：唐僖宗广明庚子年阴历十二月，黄巢的军队进犯京都，司空图当时住在西安崇义里，十二月九日，他从里豪杨琼家里转移为常平仓下藏匿，当他要出门时，一群起义军兵士相继到来。
English: In December of the year of Emperor Guangming of the Tang Dynasty, the troops of the Yellow Nest invaded Kyoto. At that time, Siku lived in Chongyi, Xi'an. On December 9, he was transferred from Yang Qiong's home to hide under the Changping warehouse. When he was about to leave the house, a group of rebel soldiers arrived one after another.

古文：有拥戈拒门者，孰视良久，乃就持图手曰：某段章也，系掳而来，未能自脱。
现代文：有个持枪推门的人，对他仔细打量了半天，便走上前去拉着司空图的手说：我是段章呀！自从被他们抓掳了去后，一直没能逃脱。
English: A man with a gun, who was pushing the door, looked at him carefully for half a day, then walked up and took Skyta's hand and said: "I'm Duan Zhang! I haven't been able to escape since I was captured by them.

古文：然顾怀优养之仁，今乃相遇，天也！
现代文：但我时常怀念您从前对我优厚养育的好处，今天能够相遇，实在是天意啊！
English: But I often miss the benefits of your generous upbringing for me in the past. Being able to meet you today is truly God's will!

古文：某所主曰张将军，喜下士，且幸他往，必亡他。
现代文：我的主人叫张将军。喜欢礼贤下士，暂且跟他一块儿去，将来必能取他而代之。
English: My master's name is General Zhang. I like Corporal Li Xian, so I'll go with him for the time being, and I'll be able to replace him in the future.

古文：然且决免于暴横矣。
现代文：这样又可绝对免于遭受暴横的灾祸的。
English: In this way, they can be absolutely free from the scourge of tyranny.

古文：图誓以不辱，章惘然泣下，导至通衢，即别去。
现代文：司空图表示誓不辱节，段章怅然泪下，把他领到大道上，便与他分手了。
English: Siku said that he would not disgrace the festival, Duan Zhang burst into tears, led him to the avenue, and broke up with him.

古文：图因此得自开远门宵遁。
现代文：司空图因此能够自开城门乘夜逃出城去。
English: As a result, Sikuthu was able to escape from the city by night.

古文：至咸阳桥，复遇榜者韩钧济之，乃抵鄠县，因达于行在。
现代文：到了咸阳桥，又遇到船夫韩钧把他渡过了河，于是到了鄠县，到达皇上行宫所在的地方。
English: When he arrived at Xianyang Bridge, he met the boatman Han Zheng, who took him across the river, and then he arrived at Jixian County, where the imperial carriage was located.

古文：上清
现代文：上清
English: Upper Qing Dynasty

古文：贞元壬申岁春三月，丞相窦参居光福里第。月夜，闲步于中庭。有常所宠青衣上清者，乃曰：今启事，须到堂前方敢言之。
现代文：唐德宗贞元申岁春季三月，丞相窦参住在光福里的相府里，在一个明月当空的夜晚，闲步于庭院之中，有个平日宠爱的奴婢叫上清的，对他说：我现在要告诉您件事，必须到堂前才敢说出来。
English: In the spring of March of the ninth year of the ninth month of the Tang and De Zong Dynasties, the prime minister Dou Sheng lived in the prime minister's residence in Guangfu, and on a night when the moon was empty, he was strolling in the courtyard. One of his favorite servants, Shang Qing, said to him: "I want to tell you something now. I have to come before the court before I dare to say it."

古文：窦亟上堂，上清曰：庭树上有人，恐惊郎，请谨避之。
现代文：窦参急忙上堂，上清道：院内树上有人，我怕您受惊吓，请您谨慎回避。
English: Dou San hurried to the hall. Shang Qing said, "There are people in the trees in the courtyard. I'm afraid you'll be frightened. Please be careful to avoid them."

古文：窦曰：陆贽久欲倾夺吾权位，今有人在庭树上，即吾祸之将至矣。
现代文：窦参说：陆贽早就想夺取我的权位，现在有人在庭院的树上，这是我的灾祸要临头了。
English: Dou San said: Lu Yao has long wanted to seize my position of power, and now there are people in the trees in the courtyard. This is my impending disaster.

古文：且此事将奏与不奏。皆受祸，必窜死于道路。
现代文：而这件事无论是否对皇上奏明，都要遭殃，定要被放逐而死在途中。
English: And whether or not the matter was made clear to the emperor, he was doomed to be exiled and die on the way.

古文：汝於辈流中不可多得，吾身死家破，汝定为宫婢。
现代文：你是同辈中不可多得的人，等我身死家破之后，你肯定会成为皇宫的女婢。
English: You are a rare person among your peers, and after I die, you will surely become a maidservant of the Imperial Palace.

古文：圣居如顾问，善为我辞焉。
现代文：到那时，圣上如果问起我的事，你要好好为我解释。
English: At that time, if His Holiness asks about me, you must explain it to me well.

古文：上清泣曰：诚如是，死生以之。
现代文：上清哭着说：真要如此，我一定不计生死而为之。
English: She cried and said, "If this is true, I will do it regardless of whether I live or die."

古文：窦下阶大呼曰：树上人应是陆贽使来，能全老夫性命，敢不厚报？
现代文：窦参走下台阶来，大声喊道：树上的人该是陆贽指使你来的吧！若能保全老夫的性命，定当厚报。
English: Dou San came down the steps and shouted loudly, "The person in the tree must have been sent by Lu Yao. If you can save the old man's life, you will be rewarded handsomely."

古文：树上人应声而下，乃衣粗者也，曰：家有大丧，贫甚，不办葬礼。
现代文：树上人应声而下，乃是一个身穿粗布丧服的人。他说：我家老人去世，十分贫穷，不能操办葬礼。
English: The man in the tree answered, a man dressed in a coarse burial cloth, and said, "An old man in my family died, and we are too poor to have a funeral.

古文：伏知相公推诚济物，所以卜夜而来，幸相公无怪。
现代文：我知道相爷向来诚心接济别人，所以乘夜而来，希望相爷不要见怪。
English: I know that my father-in-law has always sincerely helped others, so I came at night, hoping that my father-in-law would not be surprised.

古文：窦曰：某罄所有，堂封绢千匹而已，方拟修私庙次，今日辄赠可矣。
现代文：窦参说道：我家倾其所有，不过是堂封丝绢一千匹而已，正打算用它修造自己的庙堂，今天我赠给你吧！
English: Dou San said, "My family has everything, but it's just a thousand silk worms. I'm planning to use it to build my own temple. I'll give it to you today!"

古文：粗者拜谢，窦答之如礼。
现代文：身穿丧服的人施礼致谢，窦参也以礼回敬。
English: People in mourning clothes bowed in thanks, and Dou Sang returned the courtesy.

古文：又曰：便辞相公。
现代文：此人又道：马上就告辞相爷。
English: This person also said, "I will say goodbye to my husband immediately."

古文：请左右齐所赐绢，掷于墙外。某先于街中俟之。
现代文：请让家人拿着所赠的丝绢，扔到墙外，我先到外面大街上等着。
English: Please let the family members take the silk cocoons and throw them outside the wall. I will wait outside on the street.

古文：窦依其请，命仆人侦其绝踪且久，方敢归寝。
现代文：窦参照他的请求，命令仆人把绢扔到外面，并侦查到此人已经离去好长时间了，自己才敢进屋就寝。
English: Referring to his request, Dou ordered the servant to throw the shovel outside and discovered that the man had been gone for a long time before he dared to enter the house and go to bed.

古文：翌日，执金吾先奏其事，窦公得次，又奏之。
现代文：第二天上朝后，执金吾首先奏禀别的事情，然后轮到窦参，他便将昨天晚上发生的事奏明了皇上。
English: On the morning of the next day, Kingu first reported something else, and then it was Dou Sang's turn to report to the emperor what had happened the night before.

古文：德宗厉声曰：卿交通节将，蓄养侠刺，位崇台鼎，更欲何求？
现代文：德宗听后厉声说道：你竟勾通藩镇节将，蓄养侠士刺客！你已身居宰相高位，还想要求什么！
English: After listening to him, Dezong said sharply, "You are actually colluding with the commander of the Han town festival and raising knight assassins! You are already in the high position of prime minister, what else do you want to ask for!

古文：窦顿首曰：臣起自刀笔小才，官已至贵，皆陛下奖拔，实不因人。
现代文：窦参连连叩头道：臣起自刀笔小吏，如今官位已经极为尊贵，这都是陛下奖掖裁培的结果，实在不是借助了别人。
English: Dou San Lian Lian kowtowed, saying, "I started out as a petty official, but now I've been promoted to a very high-ranking position. This is all the result of His Majesty's awards and training, and I didn't get it from others."

古文：今不幸至此，抑乃仇家所为耳。
现代文：如不幸出现此事，恐怕是他家所为而已。
English: If something unfortunate happens, I'm afraid it's just his family's fault.

古文：陛下忽震雷霆之怒，臣便合万死。
现代文：陛下忽发雷霆之怒，为臣使当万死！
English: His majesty suddenly flew into a rage and ordered his vassal to be killed!

古文：中使下殿宣曰：卿且归私第，待候进止。
现代文：中使下殿宣告说：卿且回归私宅，听候裁决发落。
English: The middle envoy announced to the lower court: Sir, please return to your private residence and wait for the ruling.

古文：越月，贬柳州别驾。
现代文：一个月后，窦参被贬为柳州刺史的佐史。
English: A month later, Dou Zhan was relegated to being a subordinate of Liuzhou Zhishi.

古文：会宣武节度刘士宁通好于柳州，廉使条疏上闻，德宗曰：交通节将，信而有徵。
现代文：正赶上宣武节度使刘士宁与柳州节度使互通友好，廉使上疏奏报了皇上，德宗便说：判你勾通藩镇节将，已经有事实验证，可见罪名属实。
English: Just in time for the Xuanwu Festival, Liu Shining and Liuzhou Festival made a friendly exchange, and Liang made Shang Shou report to the emperor. De Zong said: You have been convicted of colluding with the general of the Han town festival. The facts have been verified, and it can be seen that the charge is true.

古文：流窦于欢州，没入家资，一簪不遗身。
现代文：于是将窦参流放欢州，没收其全部家产，连头上戴的发簪也不留下。
English: As a result, Dou Guanzhong was exiled to Hanzhou, his entire family property was confiscated, and even the hairpin he wore on his head was not left behind.

古文：竟未达流所，诏赐自尽。
现代文：后来未等他到达欢州，又下诏书赐他自尽。
English: Later, before he reached Hanzhou, he issued another edict ordering him to commit suicide.

古文：上清果隶名掖庭且久，后数年，以善应对，能煎茶，数得在帝左右。
现代文：上清果然长时期名列掖庭，几年之后，因为善于应对，又长于煎茶，所以常常能到皇帝身边侍事。
English: For a long period of time, the Upper Qing Dynasty was indeed ranked as a court, and a few years later, because it was good at coping and better than sencha, it was often able to attend to the emperor.

古文：德宗谓曰：宫内人数不少，汝大了事，从何得至此？
现代文：德宗对她说：宫中婢女为数甚多，很少有人像你这么懂事的，你是从什么地方到这里来的？
English: Dezong said to her, "There are many maidservants in the palace, but few are as knowledgeable as you. Where did you come from?

古文：上清曰：妾本故宰相窦参家女奴，窦参妻早亡，故妾得陪扫埽。
现代文：上清答道：奴婢本是已故宰相窦参家的女奴，窦参妻子早亡，奴婢因此成了他的宠妾。
English: Shang Qing replied: The slave was originally the female slave of the late Prime Minister Dou Sang Jia, Dou Sang's wife died early, so the slave became his favorite concubine.

古文：乃窦参家破，幸得填宫，既奉龙颜，如在天上。
现代文：等到窦参家破之后，有幸将我安排在皇宫。既能侍奉龙颜，妾身如登九天。
English: After Dou Sang Jia's death, I had the honor of being placed in the imperial palace. I was able to serve Longyan, and I felt like a concubine for nine days.

古文：德宗曰：窦参之罪，不止养侠刺，兼亦甚有赃污，前时纳官银器至多。
现代文：德宗说道：窦参之罪，不止于蓄养侠士刺客，同时还有贪赃的事实，以前没收家产时，收到的银器非常多。
English: Dezong said: Dou Sang's crime is not only the cultivation of knights and assassins, but also the fact of greed. In the past, when the family property was confiscated, a lot of silverware was received.

古文：上清流涕而言曰：窦参自御史中丞，历度支户部监铁三使，至宰相，首尾六年，月入数十万，前后非时赏赐，当亦不知纪极。
现代文：上清流泪说道：窦参从任御史中丞起，历任度支、户部、盐铁三司的使臣，后来官至宰相。前后六年之久，每月收入数十万；朝廷随时的赏赐，该也不计其数。
English: Shangqing shed tears and said, "From the time Dou Sang was appointed to the position of Vice-Minister of History, he has successively served as an envoy to the provincial branch, the household department, and the three departments of salt and iron, and later as an official to the prime minister. For six years, he has been earning hundreds of thousands of yuan a month; the rewards given by the imperial court at any time are countless.

古文：乃者彬州送所纳官银器，皆是恩赐。当部录日，妾在彬州，亲见州县希陆贽恩旨，尽刮去，所进银器上刻藩镇官衔姓名，诬为赃物。
现代文：当时彬州送来由官府所收纳的银器，全是朝廷恩赐的，吏部登记入册时我就在现场，亲眼看见州县官吏迎合陆贽的恩旨，将御赐字样全部刮掉，在送进朝银器上刻下了藩镇的官衔姓名，供以诬称的赃物。
English: At that time, the silverware sent from Binzhou and received by the government office was all donated by the imperial court. I was on the scene when the registration of the personnel department was registered. I saw with my own eyes that the state and county officials catered to Lu Wei's benevolence, scraped off all the words of donation, and engraved the official title and name of the town on the silverware sent to the imperial court to provide the falsely named stolen goods.

古文：伏乞下验之。
现代文：请求圣上下令检验。
English: Request a sanity check.

古文：於是宣索窦参没官银器，覆视其刮字处，皆如上清之言。
现代文：德宗于是要来窦参没收充公的银器，俯下身子察看上面刮字的地方，全跟上清所说的一样。
English: De Zong therefore wanted to come to Dou Zang to confiscate the silverware of the Zeng Gong, and bent down to inspect the place where the words were scratched on it, all of which was the same as what Gao Jianqing had said.

古文：时贞元十二年。
现代文：这时是贞元十二年。
English: At this time, it was the twelfth year of Zhenyuan.

古文：德宗又问养侠刺事，上清曰：本实无，此悉是陆贽陷害，使人为之。
现代文：德宗又问蓄养侠士刺客一事，上清说：其实并无此事，这全是陆贽为了陷害窦参，指使人做的。
English: Dezong also asked about the matter of raising a knight assassin, Shang Qing said: In fact, there is no such thing, this is all done by Lu Wei in order to frame Dou Zhen.

古文：德宗至是大悟，因怒陆贽曰：老獠奴，我脱却伊绿衫，便与紫着，又常呼伊作陆九。
现代文：德宗这时恍然大悟。于是怒斥陆贽：老奴才！我脱去了你绿衣衫，让你穿上大紫袍，又常常称呼你 陆九儿 。
English: At this time, Dezong suddenly came to his senses. So he angrily rebuked Lu Wei: Old slave! I took off your green shirt, made you wear a big purple robe, and often called you Lu Jiuer.

古文：我任使窦参，方称意次，须教我杀却他。
现代文：我任命和使唤窦参，刚好称我的心意，你却教我杀掉他。
English: I appointed and summoned Dou Zhen, just as my heart desired, but you taught me to kill him.

古文：乃至权入伊手，其为软弱，甚於泥团。
现代文：乃至大权落入他人之手，此人软弱无能连泥团都不如！
English: Even if the supreme power falls into the hands of someone else, this person is so weak and incompetent that he is no better than a lump of mud!

古文：乃下诏雪窦参冤。
现代文：德宗便颁下诏书，为窦参平反昭雪。
English: Emperor Dezong then issued an edict, and Dou Sanping rebelled against Zhao Xue.

古文：时裴延龄探知陆贽恩衰，得恣行媒蘖，乘间攻之。贽竟受谴不回。
现代文：这时裴延龄探知陆贽已经失宠，便极力唆使别人乘机攻击陆贽，陆贽终于遭贬被逐，终身不回。
English: At this time, Pei Yanling detected that Lu Yao had fallen out of favor, and he tried his best to instigate others to attack Lu Yao. Lu Yao was finally demoted and expelled, and would never return.

古文：上清特敕削丹书，度为女道士，终嫁为金忠义妻。
现代文：德宗皇帝又为上清特颁丹书，度她为女道士。后来她嫁给金忠义为妻。
English: Emperor Dezong also issued a special certificate for Shangqing, making her a female Taoist. Later, she married Kim Zhongyi.

古文：世以陆贽门生名位多显达者，世不可传说，故此事绝无人知。
现代文：世人因为陆贽的门徒们多为名位显达者，有关他的上述事情不可流传，所以此事很少有人知道。
English: Because the disciples of Lu Xun were mostly prominent people, the above-mentioned things about him could not be spread, so few people knew about it.

古文：李锜婢
现代文：李锜婢
English: Li Yuhi

古文：李锜之擒也，侍婢一人随之。锜夜自裂衣襟，书已冤。
现代文：李锜被捕后，有个侍婢跟随着他，他在夜里撕下自己的衣襟，在上面书写自己的冤曲和治理军政的功绩，申明自己是被张子良出卖的。
English: After Li Xi was arrested, he was accompanied by a servant. At night, he tore off his shirt collar and wrote on it his grievances and achievements in military and political governance, affirming that he had been betrayed by Zhang Ziliang.

古文：管榷之功，言为张子良所卖，教侍婢曰：结之于带。吾若从容赐对。当为宰相，杨、益节度使；若不从容，受极刑矣。
现代文：写完之后告诉侍婢道：把这份状子结在裙带上。我若有机会当堂申辩，就会成为宰相，杨、益的节度使；如果没有申辩机会，就要受极刑了。
English: After he finished writing, he told his servant: "Tie this title to your maidservant's belt. If I have the opportunity to defend myself in court, I will become the prime minister, Yang, and Yi's special envoy; if I do not have the opportunity to defend myself, I will be sentenced to capital punishment."

古文：我死，汝必入内，上必问汝，汝当以是进。
现代文：我死之后，你定能选入内宫，皇上必然会问你，到时候你就把这份状子呈上。
English: After my death, you will certainly be able to be elected to the inner palace. The emperor will certainly ask you, and then you will present this letter.

古文：及锜伏法，京城大雾，三日不解，或闻鬼哭。
现代文：李锜含冤受刑之时，京城大雾弥漫，连续三日不散，有人还听到了鬼哭。
English: At the time of Li Xuanhan's wrongful imprisonment, the capital was covered in fog for three days in a row. Some people even heard the ghost crying.

古文：宪宗又于侍婢得帛书，颇疑其冤，内出黄衣数袭，赐锜及子弟，敕京兆府收葬之。
现代文：宪宗又从这位侍婢那里得到了那份写在丝布上的自白书，心中很怀疑李锜的案子是冤枉的，于是从皇宫里拿出四件专供皇室穿用的黄衣服，赐给李锜及其子弟，又颁令给京兆府收葬李锜的尸体。
English: Gensong also obtained the confession written on a silk cloth from this servant. He was very suspicious that Li Lan's case was unjust, so he took out four pieces of yellow clothing from the imperial palace exclusively for the royal family to wear and gave them to Li Lan and his children. He also issued an order to Jingzhao Prefecture to bury Li Lan's body.

古文：李铦，锜之从父弟也。
现代文：李铦是李锜叔父的儿子，是李锜的堂弟，当时任宋州刺史。
English: Li Yao was the son of Li Yao's uncle and cousin of Li Yao, who was appointed as the Songzhou chief historian at that time.

古文：为宋州刺史，闻锜反状，恸哭，驱妻子奴婢，无老幼，量颈为枷，自拘于观察使。
现代文：听说李锜谋反的状告报表，失声恸哭，强令妻子儿女及奴婢，不论老幼，一律根据脖子的尺寸制作枷锁戴上，自己将他们拘押到观察使面前，一起接受制裁。
English: Hearing of Li Xuan's complaint report of plotting a rebellion, he burst into tears, forced his wife, children and slaves, whether old or young, to wear shackles made according to the size of their necks, and detained them in front of the observation envoy to receive sanctions together.

古文：朝廷悯之，因为薄贬。
现代文：朝廷同情他，所以从轻发落，贬得较轻。
English: The court sympathized with him, so he was given a lighter sentence.

古文：按李锜宗属，亟居重位，颇以尊豪自奉，声色之选，冠绝于时。
现代文：李锜的同家亲属大都官居要职，过着养尊处优的奢华生活，挑选的歌妓婢妾都是当时最漂亮的。
English: Most of Li Yao's relatives in the same family held important positions in government and lived a luxurious life of indulgence. The selected geisha maids and concubines were the most beautiful at the time.

古文：及浙西之败，配掖庭者，曰郑、曰杜。
现代文：他到浙西吃了败仗之后，没收后配在掖庭的婢妾中，有个姓郑的，还有个姓杜的。
English: After he went to western Zhejiang and suffered a defeat, there was a maidservant and a concubine surnamed Zheng and a maidservant and a concubine surnamed Du who were confiscated and assigned to Xingting.

古文：郑得幸于宪宗，是生宣宗皇帝，实为孝明皇太后，次即杜，杜名秋，亦建康人也，有宠于穆宗。
现代文：姓郑的受到唐宪宗宠幸，于是生下了宣宗皇帝，她实际上是孝明皇太后。其次是那个姓杜的，她叫杜秋，也是建康人，深得唐穆宗宠爱。
English: The surname Zheng was favored by Tang Xianzong and gave birth to Emperor Xuanzong, who was actually Empress Dowager Xiaoming, followed by the surname Du, who was also a Jiankang person and was deeply favored by Tang Muzong.

古文：穆宗即位，以为皇子漳王傅姆。
现代文：穆宗即位后，用她做皇子漳王的褓姆兼教师。
English: After Emperor Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he used her as a nanny and teacher for his son, Emperor Yao.

古文：中书舍人杜牧为诗以谚之曰：荆江水清滑，生女白如脂，其间杜秋者，不劳朱粉施。
现代文：荆江水清滑，生女白如脂。其间杜秋者，不劳朱粉施。
English: The water of the Jing River is clear and smooth, and the birth of a girl is as white as butter.

古文：老濞即山铸，庭后千蛾眉，秋持玉斝醉，与唱金缕衣。
现代文：老濞即山铸，庭后千蛾眉。秋持玉斝醉，与唱金缕衣。
English: The old woman is a mountain cast, the garden is a thousand moth brows. Autumn is holding a jade bracelet, and is wearing a golden wreath.

古文：濞既白首叛，秋亦红泪滋。
现代文：濞既白首叛，秋亦红泪滋。
English: When the rooster crows, the autumn leaves turn red.

古文：吴江落日渡，灞上绿杨垂。
现代文：吴江落日渡，灞上绿杨垂。
English: The sun sets over the Wujiang River, with green poplars hanging from the rafters.

