古文：赵韩王为相，置二大瓮于坐屏后，凡有人投利害文字，皆置其中，满即焚之于通衢。
现代文：原文宋朝赵普任宰相时，在座位后面放置了两个大缸，凡是有人送上建议国家利害的疏奏，大都被扔入缸中，等装满缸后就在通道上把文书烧掉。
English: When Zhao Pu was the prime minister of the Song Dynasty, two large jars were placed behind the seat. Whenever someone sent a suggestion of national interests, most of them were thrown into the jars. After filling the jars, the documents were burned in the passage.

古文：李文靖曰： 沆居相位，实无补万分；唯中外所陈利害，一切报罢，聊以补国尔。
现代文：李文靖说： 我任相国时，对国事实在没有大的补益，只在众人所陈述的利害建议方面，一切都不予采取，这也算是对国家的一点贡献吧。
English: Li Wenjing said: When I served as a foreign minister, I did not add much to the country's reality, but I did not accept anything in terms of the interests and suggestions made by many people. This is also a little contribution to the country.

古文：今国家防制，纤悉具备，苟轻徇所陈，一一行之，所伤实多。
现代文：当今国家的各种制度，已经非常详尽完备，如果轻率地采纳各方的建议，一一推行改革，必定会产生很多伤害。
English: The various systems of today's country are already very detailed and complete. If we rashly adopt the suggestions of all parties and carry out reforms one by one, it will certainly cause a lot of harm.

古文：佥人苟一时之进，岂念民耶？ 
现代文：小人一念之间的进言，怎么会真正关心到老百姓的长远利益呢？ 
English: How is it possible for a villain to be genuinely concerned about the long-term interests of the people?

古文：陆象山云： 往时充员敕局，浮食是惭。
现代文：陆象山说： 以往朝廷冗员充斥，我也是白支俸禄的官员之一，心中实在是很惭愧。
English: Lu Xiangshan said: In the past, the imperial court was overstaffed, and I was also one of the officials who received a salary. I was really ashamed.

古文：惟是四方奏请，廷臣面对，有所建置更革，多下看详。
现代文：但是遇到有人建议各种改革事项，便都在朝廷上讨论，看看有什么不良影响。
English: However, when someone suggested various reforms, they were all discussed in the imperial court to see what adverse effects there were.

古文：其贰书生贵游，不谙民事，轻于献计；一旦施行，片纸之出，兆姓蒙害。
现代文：书生和贵族这一类人，不熟悉民情，随便献策；一旦遵照施行，一纸命令容易，但却使万民受害。
English: Such people as scholars and aristocrats, who are not familiar with the people's conditions, offer suggestions at will; once they are implemented, it is easy to issue a paper order, but it will make all the people suffer.

古文：每与同官悉意论驳，朝廷清明，尝得寝罢；编摩之事，稽考之勤，何足当大官之膳？
现代文：我每每和同僚尽力议论驳回，好在圣上清明，常常采纳我们的意见而将献议作罢；我们所做的，只是编辑、考查一类的功夫，如何担当得起领取大官的俸禄呢？
English: I always try my best to discuss and refute with my colleagues, so that we can have a clear conscience, and we often adopt our opinions and abandon the proposal; what we have done is only editing, examination and other work, how can we afford to receive the salary of a senior official?

古文：庶几仅此可以偿万一耳！ 
现代文：大约只值得万分之一罢了。 
English: It's worth about one in 10,000.

古文：罗景纶曰： 古云： 利不什，不变法 ，此言更革建置之不可轻也。
现代文：评译罗景纶说： 古人有言： 利益不足就不要改变现行的法令。 这说明：改旧革新的事十分重大，绝不可以轻易忽视。
English: Commenting on the translation, Luo Jingyao said: The ancients said: Do not change the current laws and regulations if the profits are insufficient. This shows that reforming the old and innovating is very important and must not be easily ignored.

古文：或疑若是则将坐视天下之弊而不之救欤？
现代文：有人怀疑，这岂不是坐视天下的弊病而不加拯救吗？
English: Some people wonder, isn't this just looking at the ills of the world and not doing anything to help?

古文：不知革弊以存法可也，因弊而变法不可也；不守法而弊生，岂法之生弊哉！
现代文：他们这些人不知道既改革弊病且同时保存旧法是可以的，只因为弊病而实施变法却不可行；因为不守法而产生的弊病，难道是法律本身的弊病吗？
English: These people do not know that it is possible to reform the ills and preserve the old law at the same time, but it is not feasible to change the law just because of the ills; is the ills caused by non-compliance with the law the ills of the law itself?

古文：韩、范之建明于庆历者，革弊以存法也。荆公之施行于熙宁者，因弊而变法也，一得一失。
现代文：韩琦、范仲淹在仁宗庆历年间的革新变法，就是既革除了弊端而又保存了法律；王安石在神宗熙宁年间的变法措施，则是因为弊病而改变法律却导致民怨沸腾。一得一失相比较，就能看得十分清楚了。 
English: Han Zheng and Fan Zhongdong's innovation and change of law during the period of Ren Zong's celebration is to eliminate the drawbacks and preserve the law; Wang Anshi's change of law during the period of Shensong Xining is to change the law because of the drawbacks but cause the people's resentment to boil. A gain and a loss can be seen very clearly in comparison.

