古文：说狐
现代文：说狐
English: Says the fox

古文：狐五十岁，能变化为妇人。百岁为美女，为神巫，或为丈夫与女人交接，能知千里外事，善盅魅，使人迷惑失智。
现代文：狐狸活五十岁就能变成妇人，一百岁就能变化成美女，变化成神巫，或者变化成成年男子与女人发生性行为，能知道千里之外的事，善于盅惑迷人，使人丧失理智。
English: At the age of fifty, a fox can turn into a woman, and at the age of one hundred, it can turn into a beautiful woman, a witch, or an adult man who has sex with a woman, can know things thousands of miles away, and is good at bewitching and charming, making people lose their minds.

古文：千岁即与天通，为天狐。
现代文：狐狸活到一千岁就能和天沟通，叫做 天狐 。
English: If a fox lives to be a thousand years old, it will be able to communicate with the heavens. It is called the Heavenly Fox.

古文：瑞应
现代文：瑞应
English: Rui Ying

古文：九尾狐者，神兽也。
现代文：九尾狐是神兽。
English: The nine-tailed fox is a divine beast.

古文：其状赤色，四足九尾。出青丘之国。
现代文：它的身体是红色的，四条腿九只尾巴，出自青丘国。
English: Its body is red, with four legs and nine tails, and it comes from Qingqiu country.

古文：音如婴儿。
现代文：它叫起来声音象婴儿。
English: He screamed like a baby.

古文：食者令人不逢妖邪之气，及盅毒之类。
现代文：吃了九尾狐的人，不能遇上妖邪之气和毒虫什么的。
English: Those who have eaten the nine-tailed fox cannot encounter evil spirits and poisonous insects.

古文：周文王
现代文：周文王
English: Zhou Wenwang

古文：周文王拘羑里，散宜生诣涂山得青狐以献纣，免西伯之难。
现代文：周文王被拘禁在羑里，散宜生到涂山去弄到一只青色狐狸，把它献给商纣王，就免除了周文王的灾难。
English: Zhou Wen Wang was detained in Shili, and San Yiren went to Tu Mountain to get a blue fox and offered it to the merchant Wang, which spared Zhou Wen Wang from disaster.

古文：汉广川王
现代文：汉广川王
English: Han Guangchuan King

古文：汉广川王好发冢。
现代文：汉朝广川王喜欢挖掘坟墓。
English: King Hirokawa of the Han Dynasty liked to dig up graves.

古文：发栾书冢，其棺柩盟器，悉毁烂无余。唯有白狐一头，见人惊走。
现代文：一次，挖开栾书的坟墓，里边的棺木器物全都烂光了，只有一只白狐狸，见了人吓跑了。
English: Once, when digging up the grave of Zou Shu, all the coffin ware inside had rotted away, except for a white fox, which was scared away by the sight of people.

古文：左右逐之不得，戟伤其足。
现代文：左右的人去追没追上，用戟伤了它的一只脚。
English: People on both sides chased and caught up with it, and bruised one of its feet.

古文：是夕，王梦一丈夫须眉尽白，来谓王曰： 何故伤吾左足？ 
现代文：这天晚上，广川王梦见一位胡须和眉毛全白的男子来对他说： 为什么伤我的左脚？ 
English: That night, Guangchuan Wang had a dream in which a man with a full beard and white eyebrows came to him and said, "Why did you hurt my left foot?

古文：以杖叩王左足。
现代文：那男子用手杖敲广川王的左脚。
English: The man tapped Hirokawa-Wang's left foot with a cane.

古文：王觉肿痛，因生疮，至死不差。
现代文：广川王醒之后，左脚肿痛，就生了疮，到死也没治好。
English: After Guangchuan Wang woke up, his left foot was swollen and painful, and he developed sores, which did not heal until his death.

古文：陈羡
现代文：陈羡
English: Chen En

古文：后汉建安中，沛国郡陈羡为西海都尉。
现代文：后汉建安年间，沛国郡人陈羡是西海都尉。
English: During the post-Han Jian'an period, Chen En, a resident of Peiguo County, was the captain of the West Sea.

古文：其部曲士灵孝无故逃去，羡欲杀之。
现代文：他的部下有一个叫灵孝的，此人是个寡闻陋见的人，无缘无故就逃跑了。陈羡想要杀了他。
English: One of his subordinates was named Ling Xiao. He was an obscure person who ran away without any reason. Chen En wanted to kill him.

古文：居无何，孝复逃走。
现代文：过了不久，灵孝又跑了。
English: Soon after, Ling Xiao ran away again.

古文：羡久不见，囚其妇。
现代文：陈羡很长时间见不到灵孝，就把灵孝的妻子囚禁起来。
English: Chen En could not see Ling Xiao for a long time, so he imprisoned Ling Xiao's wife.

古文：其妇实对，羡曰： 是必魅将去，当求之。 
现代文：灵孝的妻子说了实话。陈羡说： 这一定是被鬼魅弄去了，应该出去找找。 
English: Ling Xiao's wife told the truth. Chen En said: This must have been bewitched by a ghost, we should go out and look for it.

古文：因将步骑数十，领猎犬，周旋于城外求索。
现代文：于是他就率领几十名骑兵，领着猎狗，在城外周旋寻找。
English: So he led dozens of horsemen and hunting dogs to search outside the city.

古文：果见孝于空冢中，闻人犬声怪避。
现代文：果然发现灵孝在一个空坟墓里。灵孝听到人和狗的声音，感到奇怪而躲避。
English: Ling Xiao was indeed found in an empty tomb. Hearing the sounds of people and dogs, Ling Xiao felt strange and hid.

古文：羡使人扶以归，其形颇象狐矣。
现代文：陈羡让人把他扶回来，他那样子很象狐狸了。
English: Chen En had someone hold him back. He looked like a fox.

古文：略不复与人相应，但啼呼索阿紫，阿紫雌狐字也。
现代文：一点也不再和人相适应，只哭着喊着找阿紫。 阿紫 是一只雌性狐狸的名字。
English: No longer compatible with humans at all, she only cried and called out for Ah Zi. Ah Zi is the name of a female fox.

古文：后十余日，乃稍稍了寤。
现代文：十几天之后，才渐渐清醒了些。
English: After a dozen days, I gradually came to my senses.

古文：云： 狐始来时，于屋曲角鸡栖间作好妇形，自称阿紫，招我。
现代文：他说： 狐狸刚来的时候，在屋拐角鸡窝旁边变化成一位美妇人的样子，自称阿紫，向我招手。
English: He said: When the fox first came, he changed into a beautiful woman next to the chicken coop on the corner of the house. He called himself Ah Zi and beckoned to me.

古文：如此非一，忽然便随去。
现代文：如此不止一回两回。忽然有一天就跟她去了。
English: This happened more than once or twice. Suddenly, one day, I went fishing with her.

古文：即为妻，暮辄与共还其家。
现代文：就把她当妻子，天黑就和她一起回到她家。
English: He took her as his wife and went back to her house with her in the dark.

古文：遇狗不觉。
现代文：遇上狗狗也发觉不了。 
English: You wouldn't know it if you met a dog.

古文：云，乐无比也。 
现代文：他说与阿紫在一起其乐无比。
English: He said he had a lot of fun with Ah Zi.

古文：道士云： 此山魅。
现代文：道士说这是山怪。
English: The priest said it was a mountain monster.

古文：狐者先古之淫妇也，名曰阿紫，化为狐。故其怪多自称阿紫也。 管辂
现代文：狐狸是先古的一位淫妇，名叫阿紫。变成了狐狸，所以这一类鬼怪大多自称阿紫。管辂
English: The fox was an ancient prostitute named A Zi. She turned into a fox, so most of these ghosts call themselves A Zi.

古文：魏管辂常夜见一小物状如兽，手持火，向口吹之，将爇舍宇。
现代文：魏时管辂曾经在一天夜里发现一个样子象兽的小东西，手里拿着火，用口吹着，要点着房屋。
English: Wei Shiguang once found a small thing that looked like an animal one night. He held a fire in his hand and blew with his mouth to light the house.

古文：辂命门生举刀奋击，断腰，视之狐也。
现代文：管辂让门生举刀用力击打，砍断了它的腰，一看，是一只狐狸。
English: Guan Yu let his protégé raise the knife and hit it hard, cutting off its waist. At first glance, it was a fox.

古文：自此里中无火灾。
现代文：从此这条街上没有火灾。
English: Since then, there have been no fires in the street.

古文：习凿齿
现代文：习凿齿
English: Learning chisel teeth

古文：晋习凿齿为桓温主簿，从温出猎。
现代文：晋朝时习凿齿是桓温的主簿。他跟着桓温出去打猎。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, Jixi Chisel Teeth was the master of Kuanwen. He went out hunting with Kuanwen.

古文：时大雪，于临江城西，见草雪上气出。觉有物，射之，应弦死。
现代文：当时正下着大雪。在临江城西，发现草雪上冒出气来，觉出其中有东西，就用箭射。那东西应弦而死。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily. In the west of Linjiang City, a wolf found air rising from the grass and snow, and sensed that there was something in it, and shot it with an arrow. The thing died in response to the string.

古文：往取之，乃老雄狐，脚上带绛缯香囊。
现代文：去取出来一看，是一只老公狐狸，脚上带着一个绛红色丝绸香囊。
English: When I went to take it out, I saw that it was a male fox with a crimson silk perfumed pouch on its foot.

古文：陈斐
现代文：陈斐
English: Chen Fei

古文：酒泉郡，每太守到官，无几辄死。
现代文：酒泉郡，每位太守到任，都不久就死。
English: In Jiuquan County, every new governor died soon after taking office.

古文：后有渤海陈斐见授此郡，忧愁不乐。
现代文：后来有一位渤海人陈斐被授为酒泉郡守。他忧愁不乐。
English: Later, a person from Bohai, Chen Fei, was awarded the title of Jiuquan County Governor. He was sad and unhappy.

古文：将行，卜吉凶。
现代文：要启程的时候，他去占卜吉凶。
English: When he was about to leave, he went to see a fortune-teller.

古文：日者曰： 远诸侯，放伯裘。能解此，则无忧。 
现代文：卜者说： 远诸侯，放伯裘，能解此，则无忧。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "Far away from the provinces, let Bo Qiu go. If he can solve this, there will be no worries."

古文：斐不解此语。
现代文：陈斐不理解这话。
English: Chen Fei did not understand this.

古文：卜者曰： 君去，自当解之。 
现代文：卜者说： 你去了，自然就理解了。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "If you go there, you will naturally understand."

古文：斐既到官，侍医有张侯，直医有王侯，卒有史侯、董侯。
现代文：陈斐到任以后，侍医有一个叫张侯的，直医有一个叫王侯的，士卒中有一个叫史侯的，一个叫董侯的。
English: After Chen Fei took office, there was a personal physician called Zhang Hou, a direct physician called Wang Hou, and there was a soldier called Shi Hou and a soldier called Dong Hou.

古文：斐心悟曰： 此谓诸侯。
现代文：陈斐心里明白了，这就是所说的 诸侯 。
English: Chen Fei understood in his heart that this was the so-called princes.

古文：乃远之。即卧，思放伯裘之义，不知何谓。
现代文：于是他就和这些人保持距离，不亲近他们。一天晚上，他躺在床上，心里想着 放伯裘 的意思，不知说的是什么。
English: So he kept his distance from these people, he didn't get close to them, and one night he was lying in bed and he thought to himself, I don't know what he meant by "Let it go."

古文：夜半后，有物来斐被上。
现代文：半夜以后，有一个东西来到陈斐被上，他便用被把它蒙上捉住了它。
English: After midnight, something came onto Chen Fei's quilt, and he caught it with a quilt cover.

古文：便以被冒取之，物跳踉訇訇作声。外人闻，持火入，欲杀之。
现代文：那东西一跳一跳地发出哄哄的响声，外面的人听到了，拿着灯火进来，要杀它。
English: The thing hopped and skipped and made a whooshing sound, and the people outside heard it and came in with lights to kill it.

古文：鬼乃言曰： 我实无恶意，但府君能赦我，当深报君耳。 
现代文：它就说话了： 我其实没有恶意，只要府君能饶我，我一定重重地报答。 
English: It spoke: I actually have no ill will, as long as the governor can spare me, I will surely repay him.

古文：斐曰： 汝为何物，而忽干犯太守？
现代文：陈斐说： 你是什么东西？为什么忽然来冒犯太守？ 
English: Chen Fei said: What are you? Why did you suddenly offend the Emperor?

古文：魅曰： 我本千岁狐也，今字伯裘有年矣。
现代文：它说： 我本来是一只千岁的狐狸，现在名叫伯裘，已经好多年了。
English: It said: I used to be a thousand-year-old fox, but I've been called Bo-Jo for years now.

古文：若府君有急难，若呼我字，当自解。 
现代文：如果府君有急难，喊我的名字，就能化解。 
English: If the prefect has an emergency and calls my name, it can be resolved.

古文：斐乃喜曰： 真 放伯裘 之义也。 
现代文：陈斐就高兴地说： 可真是 放伯裘 的意思！ 
English: Chen Fei said happily, "What a mean thing to do!

古文：即便放之。
现代文：于是就放了伯裘。
English: So he let Bo Qiu go.

古文：忽然有光赤如电，从户出。
现代文：忽然有一道红光象电一样，从窗口飞出去。
English: Suddenly, a red beam of light shot out of the window like electricity.

古文：明日，夜有击户者。斐曰： 谁。 
现代文：第二天夜里，有敲门的，陈斐问： 谁？ 
English: The next night, someone knocked on the door, and Chen Fei asked: Who?

古文：曰： 伯裘也。 
现代文：外边有人说： 是伯裘。 
English: Some people outside said, "It's Bo Qiu."

古文：曰： 来何为？ 
现代文：陈斐问： 来干什么？ 
English: Chen Fei asked: What are you here for?

古文：曰： 白事。
现代文：伯裘说： 说一件事。
English: Boqiu said, "Tell me one thing.

古文：北界有贼也。 
现代文：北边有贼！ 
English: There are thieves to the north!

古文：斐验之果然。
现代文：陈斐去查验一下，果然有贼。
English: Chen Fei went to check, and sure enough, there was a thief.

古文：每事先以语斐，无毫发之差，而咸曰圣府君。
现代文：每次有事，伯裘都先来告诉陈斐，没有一丝一毫的差错。人们都说陈斐是一位圣明的府君。
English: Every time something happened, Boqiu came first to tell Chen Fei, and there was not the slightest mistake. People said that Chen Fei was a saintly prefect.

古文：月余，主簿李音私通斐侍婢。既而惧为伯裘所白，遂于诸侯谋杀斐。
现代文：一个多月以后，主簿李音和陈斐的婢女私通，而后他就怕伯裘告诉陈斐，于是他就和诸侯谋划要杀死陈斐。
English: After more than a month, the master bookkeeper Li Yin and Chen Fei's maidservant had sexual intercourse, and then he was afraid that Boqiu would tell Chen Fei, so he plotted with the lords to kill Chen Fei.

古文：伺旁无人，便使诸侯持杖入，欲格杀之。
现代文：瞅准一个旁边无人的机会，他便让诸侯拿着棍棒进屋，想要打死陈斐。
English: Seizing an opportunity when no one else was around, he had the lords enter the house with clubs to beat Chen Fei to death.

古文：斐惶怖，即呼 伯裘来救我！ 。
现代文：陈斐恐惧，就大喊： 伯裘快来救我！ 
English: Panicked, Chen Fei shouted, "Bo Qiu, come and save me!"

古文：即有物如曳一疋绛，剨然作声。
现代文：立即有一个东西象扯起来的一疋红绸子，带着响声飞进来。
English: Immediately, something resembling a bundle of red silk flew in with a loud noise.

古文：音、侯伏地失魂，乃缚取考讯之，皆服。
现代文：李音、诸侯吓得趴在地上，丢了魂一样。陈斐就把他们绑起来审讯。
English: Li Yin and the princes were so scared that they fell to the ground, as if they had lost their souls. Chen Fei tied them up and interrogated them.

古文：云： 斐未到官，音已惧失权，与诸侯谋杀斐。会诸侯见斥，事不成。 
现代文：他们都服罪，说，陈斐到官，李音就已经怕失去权力，与诸侯谋划杀陈斐，赶上诸侯被排斥，事没成。
English: They all pleaded guilty, saying that when Chen Fei became an official, Li Yin was already afraid of losing power, plotted with the lords to kill Chen Fei, caught up with the lords and was ostracized, but nothing happened.

古文：斐即杀音等。
现代文：陈斐就把他们杀了。
English: Chen Fei killed them.

古文：伯裘乃谢斐曰： 未及白音奸情，乃为府君所召。虽效微力，犹用惭煌。 
现代文：伯裘就向陈斐谢罪说： 我没来得及向府君报告李音的奸情，就被府君召来，尽管尽了一点力，还是很惭愧很不安。 
English: Bo Qiu said to Chen Fei Xie Sin: I did not have time to report Li Yin's adultery to the governor, so I was summoned by the governor. Although I did my best, I was still very ashamed and uneasy.

古文：后月余，与斐辞曰： 今后当上天，不得复与府君相往来也。 
现代文：一个多月以后，伯裘向陈斐告辞，说： 今后我应该上天了，不能再与府君来往了。 
English: After more than a month, Boqiu bid farewell to Chen Fei and said, "In the future, I should go to heaven, and I can no longer have dealings with Fujun."

古文：遂去不见。
现代文：于是就逝去不见了。
English: And he passed away and was no more.

古文：孙岩
现代文：孙岩
English: Sun Yan

古文：后魏有挽歌者孙岩，取妻三年，妻不脱衣而卧。
现代文：后魏时，有一个以唱挽歌为职业的人，名叫孙岩。他娶妻三年，妻子一直不脱衣服睡觉。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Sun Yan who sang elegies for a living. He had been married to his wife for three years, and she had never taken off her clothes to sleep.

古文：岩私怪之。
现代文：孙岩心里很奇怪。
English: Sun Yan felt very strange.

古文：伺其睡，阴解其衣，有尾长三尺，似狐尾。
现代文：有一回他见妻子睡了，他就偷偷地解开她的衣服，见她有一个三尺长的尾巴，象狐狸尾巴。
English: Once, when he saw his wife asleep, he secretly undid her dress and saw that she had a three-foot-long tail, like a fox's tail.

古文：岩惧而出之。
现代文：孙岩害怕就休弃了她。
English: Afraid, Sun Yan abandoned her.

古文：甫临去，将刀截岩发而走。
现代文：刚要离开，妻子拿起剪刀剪掉他的头发就跑了。
English: As he was about to leave, his wife took a pair of scissors and cut off his hair and ran away.

古文：邻人逐之，变为一狐，追之不得。
现代文：邻居去追她，她变成一只狐狸，追不上了。
English: A neighbour chased her, but she turned into a fox and could not be caught.

古文：其后京邑被截发者一百三十人。
现代文：这以后京城里被剪去头发的有一百三十人。
English: Since then, 130 people in the capital have had their hair cut off.

古文：初变为妇人，衣服净妆，行于道路。
现代文：狐狸先变成一位妇人，打扮得花枝招展，走在路上。
English: The fox first turned into a woman, dressed up to the nines, and walked down the road.

古文：人见而悦之，近者被截发。
现代文：人见了都很喜欢她，走近她的就被剪去头发。
English: People liked her very much, and when they approached her, they cut off her hair.

古文：当时妇人着彩衣者，人指为狐魅。
现代文：那时候凡是穿彩衣的妇人，人们都指为狐妖。
English: At that time, any woman wearing a colorful dress was referred to as a fox demon.

古文：夏侯藻
现代文：夏侯藻
English: Summer algae

古文：夏侯藻母病困，将诣淳于智卜。
现代文：夏侯藻的母亲病得很厉害，他将要到淳于智那去占卜。
English: Xia Houmao's mother is very ill, and he is going to Chunyu to do divination.

古文：有一狐当门，向之嗥叫。
现代文：有一只狐狸面对他家门口嗥叫，他非常惊惧。
English: He was terrified when a fox howled in front of his house.

古文：藻愕惧，遂驰诣智。
现代文：于是他就跑到淳于智那儿去。
English: So he ran to Jun Yu Zhi.

古文：智曰： 祸甚急，君速归！在嗥处，拊心啼哭，令家人惊怪，大小毕出。
现代文：淳于智说： 灾祸来得非常急，你赶快返回去，在狐狸嗥叫的地方，拍着胸口啼哭，让全家人感到吃惊、奇怪，大大小小都出来。
English: Chun Yu Zhi said: The disaster came very suddenly. You should quickly return to the place where the fox was howling, beat your chest and wail. The whole family was surprised and puzzled. Everyone came out, big and small.

古文：一人不惧，啼哭勿休。
现代文：有一个人不出来，你的哭声也不要停止。
English: If one person doesn't come out, your crying won't stop.

古文：然其祸仅可救也。 
现代文：这样，你的祸便可以免除了。 
English: In this way, your misfortune can be spared.

古文：藻如之，母亦扶病而出。家人既集，堂屋五间，拉然而崩。
现代文：夏侯藻照办了。他的母亲也带着病走出来，全家人都集中到外边来了。这时候，五间堂屋，轰然一声倒塌了。
English: Xia Houma complied. His mother also came out with illness, and the whole family gathered outside. At this time, five courtyards collapsed with a bang.

古文：胡道洽
现代文：胡道洽
English: Hu Daochao

古文：胡道洽，自云广陵人，好音乐医术之事。
现代文：胡道洽，自己说他是广陵人，喜欢音乐、医术一类事情。
English: Hu Daochao said that he was from Guangling and liked music, medicine and other things.

古文：体有臊气，恒以名香自防。
现代文：他身上有臊味，自己经常用名香防止。
English: He has a salty taste in his body, and he often uses famous incense to prevent it.

古文：唯忌猛犬。
现代文：他只忌怕厉害的狗。
English: He's only afraid of dangerous dogs.

古文：自审死日，戒弟子曰： 气绝便殡，勿令狗见我尸也。 
现代文：他自己弄清了死的日子，嘱咐弟子们说： 我一咽气就出殡，不要让狗见到我的尸体。 
English: He himself ascertained the date of his death and instructed his disciples: "I will be buried as soon as I breathe my last breath. Don't let the dogs see my body."

古文：死于山阳，敛毕，觉棺空。
现代文：他死在山阳。入殓之后，人们觉得棺木很轻，就打开看。
English: He died in the mountains. After he was buried, people thought the coffin was very light, so they opened it to see.

古文：即开看，不见尸体。
现代文：棺中没有他的尸体了。
English: His body is no longer in the coffin.

古文：时人咸谓狐也。
现代文：当时人们都认为他是狐狸。
English: At the time, people thought he was a fox.

古文：北齐后主
现代文：北齐后主
English: Beiqi Houzhong

古文：北齐后主武平中，朔州府门，无故有小儿脚迹，及拥土为城雉之状。察之乃狐媚。
现代文：北齐后主武平年间，朔州府门外，无缘无故出现了小孩的脚印儿以及堆土作城墙的样子，经观察是狐狸作怪。
English: During the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Ping's reign, the footprints of a child and the appearance of a mound of earth as a city wall appeared for no reason outside the gate of the Shuozhou government. Upon observation, it was a fox acting strangely.

古文：是岁，南安王，起兵于北朔。宋大贤
现代文：这一年，南安王在北朔发起兵变。宋大贤
English: In the same year, King Nan'an launched a mutiny in Beishuo. Song Daxian

古文：隋南阳西郊有一亭，人不可止，止则有祸。
现代文：隋朝南阳西郊有一所亭楼，人不能在里边过夜。
English: There was a pavilion in the western suburb of Nanyang in the Sui Dynasty. People were not allowed to spend the night there.

古文：邑人宋大贤以正道自处，尝宿亭楼，夜坐鼓琴。忽有鬼来登梯，与大贤语。
现代文：在里边过夜就会有祸事发生。本邑人宋大贤坚持正义之道，曾经宿在亭子里。夜里，他坐在那里弹琴，忽然有一个鬼从楼梯下面走上来，和宋大贤说话。
English: If you spend the night there, something bad will happen to you. Song Da Xian, a native of this village, insisted on the path of righteousness and once stayed in a pavilion. At night, he was sitting there playing the piano, when suddenly a ghost came up from under the stairs and spoke to Song Da Xian.

古文：聍目磋齿，形貌可恶。
现代文：那鬼咬牙瞪眼，样子很可怕。
English: The ghost clenched his teeth and stared, looking very scary.

古文：大贤鼓琴如故，鬼乃去，于市中取死人头来还，语大贤曰： 宁可少睡耶？ 
现代文：宋大贤弹琴如旧，并不害怕。鬼就离去，到外面去找了一个死人头回来，对宋大贤说： 难道你能睡着吗？ 
English: Song Da Xian played the piano as before, and was not afraid. The ghost then left, went outside to look for a dead man's head, and came back and said to Song Da Xian, "Can you really fall asleep?

古文：因以死人头投大贤前。
现代文：于是就把死人头扔到宋大贤眼前。
English: So he threw the dead man's head in front of Song Daxian.

古文：大贤曰： 甚佳。
现代文：宋大贤说： 很好。
English: Song Daxian said: Very good.

古文：吾暮卧无枕，正欲得此。 
现代文：我夜里睡觉没有枕头，正想要弄个玩艺儿。 
English: I go to bed at night without a pillow and I'm trying to do something.

古文：鬼复去，良久乃还。曰： 宁可共手搏耶？ 大贤曰： 善。 
现代文：鬼又离去，好久才回来，说： 难道你敢和我搏斗吗？ 宋大贤说： 好！ 
English: The ghost left again and did not return for a long time, saying, "Don't you dare to fight me?" Song Daxian said, "Good!

古文：语未竟，在前。
现代文：话没说完，鬼已来到他的面前。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the ghost had already appeared in front of him.

古文：大贤便逆捉其腰。
现代文：他便迎上去捉住鬼的腰。
English: He went up to catch the ghost's waist.

古文：鬼但急言死。大贤遂杀之。
现代文：鬼只是焦急地说了个 死 字，宋大贤就把它杀死了。
English: The ghost just said the word "death" anxiously, and Song Da Xian killed it.

古文：明日视之，乃是老狐也。
现代文：第二天一看，竟是一只老狐狸。
English: The next day, it turned out to be an old fox.

古文：自此亭舍更无妖怪。
现代文：从此这亭舍里再也没有妖怪了。
English: Since then, there have been no more monsters in the pavilion.

古文：长孙无忌
现代文：长孙无忌
English: The eldest grandson of Mubi

古文：唐太宗以美人赐赵国公长孙无忌，有殊宠。忽遇狐媚。
现代文：唐太宗把一个美人赐给赵国公长孙无忌。这美人受到非常的恩宠，但她忽然被狐狸迷住了。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty gave a beautiful woman to the eldest grandson of Zhao Guogong. This beautiful woman was very favored, but she was suddenly fascinated by a fox.

古文：其狐自称王八。身长八尺余，恒在美人所。
现代文：那狐狸自称叫王八，身长高八尺有余，经常呆在美人的住所里。
English: The fox, who claimed to be called Wangpachong, was more than eight feet tall and often stayed at the beauty's residence.

古文：美人见无忌，辄持长刀斫刺。
现代文：美人见到长孙无忌，就拿着长刀砍他。
English: When the beautiful woman saw her eldest grandson, she grabbed a long knife and slashed him.

古文：太宗闻其事，诏诸术士。前后数四，不能却。
现代文：唐太宗听说这事以后，诏来诸术士，前前后后好几次，也不能把狐狸赶走。
English: After Emperor Taizong heard about this, he sent out magicians several times, but they could not drive the fox away.

古文：后术者言： 相州崔参军能愈此疾。 
现代文：后来术士们说，相州的崔参军能治好这病。
English: Later, the sorcerers said that Cui Shengjun from Xiangzhou could cure the disease.

古文：始崔在州，恒谓其僚云： 诏书见召，不日当至。 
现代文：当初崔参军在州里对同僚们说： 皇帝下诏书召见我，不几天诏书就能到。 
English: At first, Cui Sanjun said to his colleagues in the prefecture, "The emperor has summoned me with an imperial edict, and the imperial edict will arrive in a few days.

古文：数日敕至，崔便上道。
现代文：几天后诏书果然送到。崔参军便起程回京。
English: A few days later, the imperial edict was delivered. Cui then joined the army and headed back to Beijing.

古文：王八悲泣，谓美人曰： 崔参军不久将至，为之奈何？ 
现代文：王八悲伤地哭泣，对美人说： 崔参军不久就要到了，怎么办啊？ 
English: Wang Ba cried sadly and said to the beautiful woman, "Cui is going to join the army soon, what should we do?"

古文：其发后止宿之处，辄具以白。
现代文：崔参军出发后，他的止宿之处，王八总是详细地告诉美人。
English: After Cui's departure to join the army, Wang Bax always told Beauty in detail where he was staying.

古文：及崔将达京师，狐便遁去。
现代文：等到崔参军要到达京城的时候，狐狸便逃跑了。
English: By the time Cui's army was about to reach the capital, the fox had fled.

古文：既至，敕诣无忌家。
现代文：崔参军到达后，皇上让他到长孙无忌家里去。
English: After Cui joined the army, the emperor asked him to go to the home of his eldest grandson.

古文：时太宗亦幸其第。
现代文：当时唐太宗也来到长孙无忌的家中。
English: At that time, Tang Taizong also came to the home of his eldest grandson Muji.

古文：崔设案几，坐书一符。
现代文：崔参军摆放了几案，坐下书了一道符。
English: Cui Shengjun laid out several cases, sat down and wrote a poem.

古文：太宗与无忌俱在其后。
现代文：唐太宗和长孙无忌都坐在他的后面。
English: Tang Taizong and his eldest grandson were sitting behind him.

古文：顷之，宅内井灶门厕十二辰等数十辈，或长或短，状貌奇怪，悉至庭下。
现代文：不一会儿，宅子里井、灶、门、厕及十二辰宿等几十人，或高或矮，奇形怪状，全站在院子里。
English: In a short while, dozens of people, tall or short, oddly shaped, all standing in the yard, including wells, stoves, doors, toilets, and twelve-hour lodgings.

古文：崔呵曰： 诸君等为贵官家神，职任不小，何故令媚狐入宅？ 
现代文：崔参军呵斥他们说： 你们作为这一家的家神，责任不小，为什么让一只妖狐进到家里来？ 
English: Cui Shanjun shouted at them, "You, as the family god of this family, have a great responsibility. Why did you let a demon fox come into the house?

古文：神等前白云： 是天狐，力不能制，非受赂也。 
现代文：神们上前说道： 这是一只天狐，我们的能力制不住它，并没有受贿赂。 
English: The gods came forward and said: This is a heavenly fox, our ability can not control it, and did not accept bribes.

古文：崔令捉狐去。
现代文：崔参军让他们去捉拿那妖狐。
English: Cui joined the army and told them to catch the fox.

古文：少顷复来，各著刀箭，云： 适已苦战被伤，终不可得。 
现代文：片刻他们又回来了，说，刚才已经苦战过，被狐狸打伤，始终不能捉到它。
English: After a while they came back and said that they had just fought hard and were wounded by the fox, but they still couldn't catch it.

古文：言毕散去。
现代文：说完他们便散去。
English: After saying this, they dispersed.

古文：崔又书飞一符。天地忽尔昏暝。
现代文：崔参军又写了一道符，这道符飞上天去，天地忽然间昏暗下来。
English: Cui Shanjun also wrote a sign, which flew up to the sky, and the sky and the earth suddenly became dark.

古文：帝及无忌惧而入室。
现代文：唐太宗和长孙无忌吓得退到屋里去。
English: Terrified, Tang Taizong and his eldest grandson retreated indoors.

古文：俄闻虚空有兵马声。
现代文：不一会儿听到半空里有兵马的声音。
English: A moment later, the sound of soldiers and horses could be heard in mid-air.

古文：须臾，见五人，各长数丈，来诣崔所，行列致敬。
现代文：立刻，出现五个人，各有几丈高，来到崔参军面前，站成一行行礼。
English: Immediately, five people appeared, each several feet tall, came to Cui Shanjun and stood in a line to salute.

古文：崔乃下阶，小屈膝。寻呼帝及无忌出拜庭中。诸神立视而已。
现代文：崔参军就下到阶下，稍微屈一下腿，请皇帝和长孙无忌到院子里来与诸神见面，诸神只是站在那里看着他们罢了。
English: Cui Sanjun went down to the steps, bent his leg slightly, and invited the emperor and his eldest grandson to come to the courtyard to meet the gods. The gods just stood there and looked at them.

古文：崔云： 相公家有媚狐，敢烦执事取之。 
现代文：崔参军说： 赵国公家里有一只妖狐，烦请各位去把它捉来。 
English: Cui Shanjun said, "There is a fox in Zhao Guogong's home, please go and catch it."

古文：诸神敬诺，遂各散去。
现代文：诸神答应一声，就各自散去了。
English: The gods agreed and dispersed.

古文：帝问何神，崔云： 五岳神也。 
现代文：皇帝问是什么神，崔参军说是五岳神。
English: The emperor asked what god it was, and Choe Sang Jun said it was the Five Mountain Gods.

古文：又闻兵马声，乃缠一狐坠砌下。
现代文：又听到兵马声，就有一只被绑的狐狸被扔到墙下。
English: When the soldiers and horses were heard again, a tied fox was thrown under the wall.

古文：无忌不胜愤恚，遂以长剑斫之。
现代文：长孙无忌不胜愤怒，就用长剑去砍。
English: The eldest grandson was so angry that he used a long sword to cut it down.

古文：狐初不惊。
现代文：那狐狸一开始并不害怕。
English: The fox wasn't scared at first.

古文：崔云： 此已通神，击之无益，自取困耳。 
现代文：崔参军说： 这狐狸已经通神，打它没好处，自讨麻烦罢了。 
English: Cui Sanjun said, "This fox has been hypnotized, it's no good to beat it, it's just asking for trouble."

古文：乃判云： 肆行奸私，神道所殛，量决五下。 
现代文：于是他宣判道： 你任意作奸淫之事，按神道是应该处死的，现在酌情裁决，打你五下。 
English: So he pronounced the sentence: "You have committed adultery at will, and according to Shinto, you should be put to death. Now, judge as you see fit, and beat you five times."

古文：狐便乞命。
现代文：狐狸便乞求饶命。
English: The fox then begged to be spared.

古文：崔取东引桃枝决之，血流满地。
现代文：崔参军便用东引桃枝打它五下。狐狸血流满地。
English: Cui Sanjun then hit it five times with an east-drawn peach branch. The fox's blood streamed all over the ground.

古文：无忌不以为快，但恨杖少。
现代文：长孙无忌不大高兴，只恨打得太少。
English: The eldest grandson is not very happy, but he hates to play too little.

古文：崔云： 五下是人间五百，殊非小刑。
现代文：崔参军说： 五下是人间的五百下，绝对不是小刑罚。
English: Cui Sanjun said, "Five strokes of the cane is 500 strokes of the cane in the real world, and it is definitely not a small punishment.

古文：为天曹役使此辈，杀之不可。 
现代文：因为天府要使用它，杀了是不行的。 
English: Because the heavenly government wants to use it, killing it is not possible.

古文：使敕自尔不得复至相公家，狐乃飞去。
现代文：他下令从此以后不准狐狸再到长孙无忌家来。狐狸便飞去。
English: He ordered that from now on the fox should no longer be allowed to come to the eldest grandson's house. The fox then flew away.

古文：美人疾遂愈。
现代文：美人的病便好了。
English: Beauty's illness was cured.

古文：狐神
现代文：狐神
English: The Fox God

古文：唐初已来，百姓多事狐神。房中祭祀以乞恩。
现代文：唐朝初年以来，百姓大多都信奉狐神，在屋里祭祀狐狸以求狐狸施恩。
English: Since the first year of the Tang Dynasty, most of the people have believed in the fox god, sacrificing foxes in the house to ask the fox for favors.

古文：食饮与人同之。
现代文：狐狸吃的喝的和人一样。
English: Foxes eat and drink the same as humans.

古文：事者非一主。
现代文：各家供奉的不是一样的牌位。
English: The ranks offered by each house are not the same.

古文：当时有谚曰： 无狐魅，不成村。 
现代文：当时有这样的谚语： 无狐魅！不成村。 
English: There was a saying at the time: "No foxes, no village."

古文：张简
现代文：张简
English: Zhang Jian

古文：唐国子监助教张简，河南缑氏人也。
现代文：唐朝国子监助教张简，是河南缑氏县人。
English: Zhang Jian, the assistant teacher of the Tang Dynasty tutor, is a native of Jinshi County, Henan Province.

古文：曾为乡学讲《文选》。
现代文：他曾经在乡学讲《文选》。
English: He once lectured on "Wenxuan" at his hometown school.

古文：有野狐假简形，讲一纸书而去。
现代文：有一只野狐狸变化成张简的样子，讲了一课书之后走了。
English: A wild fox changed into Zhang Jian and walked away after reading a book.

古文：须臾简至，弟子怪问之。
现代文：不一会儿张简来了，弟子们奇怪，问他是怎么回事。
English: Not long after, Zhang Jian arrived. The disciples were puzzled and asked him what was going on.

古文：简异曰： 前来者必野狐也。 
现代文：张简惊异地说： 前面来的那个定是野狐。 
English: Zhang Jian said in surprise: The one in front must be a wild fox.

古文：讲罢归舍，见妹坐络丝，谓简曰： 适煮菜冷，兄来何迟？ 
现代文：讲完课回到家里，见妹妹坐在那里缠线。妹妹对张简说： 刚才做的莱都凉了，哥哥为什么回来晚了？ 
English: When she returned home after the lecture, she saw her younger sister sitting there, twisting the thread. Her sister said to Zhang Jian, "The rye bread you just made is getting cold. Why did your brother come back late?

古文：简坐，久待不至，乃责其妹。
现代文：张简坐在那里等妹妹端上饭菜来，等了半天也没端上来。张简就责备妹妹。
English: Zhang Jian sat there waiting for her sister to bring the food, but after waiting for half a day, the food did not arrive. Zhang Jian then scolded her sister.

古文：妹曰： 元不见兄来，此必是野狐也。更见即杀之！ 
现代文：妹妹说： 我根本不知道哥哥回来了，这一定是野狐狸装的，哥哥再见了应该杀了她！ 
English: The younger sister said, "I didn't even know my brother had come back. This must be a trick of the wild fox. My brother should have killed her!"

古文：明日又来。
现代文：第二天，张简回来了，见妹妹坐在那里缠线。
English: The next day, Zhang Jian came back and found her sister sitting there, twisting the thread.

古文：见妹坐络丝，谓简曰： 鬼魅适向舍后。 
现代文：妹妹对张简说： 妖怪刚才到房后去了。 
English: My sister said to Zhang Jian, "The monster just went to the back of the room.

古文：简遂持棒。见真妹从厕上出来，遂击之。妹号叫曰： 是儿。 
现代文：张简就拿了棒子，见他真妹妹从厕所里出来，张简举棒就打，妹妹号叫说： 是我！ 
English: Zhang Jian took the stick and saw his real sister coming out of the toilet. Zhang Jian raised the stick and hit her. Her sister shouted: "It's me!

古文：简不信，因击杀之。
现代文：张简不信，就把她打死了。
English: Zhang Jian didn't believe her and beat her to death.

古文：问络丝者，化为野狐而走。
现代文：回去问那个缠线的妹妹，缠线的妹妹变成一只狐狸跑了。
English: Go back and ask the sister who was entangled in the thread. The sister who was entangled in the thread turned into a fox and ran away.

古文：僧服礼
现代文：僧服礼
English: The monk's robe ceremony

古文：唐永徽中，太原有人自称弥勒佛。
现代文：唐朝永徽年间，太原有一个人自称是弥勒佛。
English: During the Yonghui era of the Tang Dynasty, a man in Taiyuan claimed to be Maitreya Buddha.

古文：礼谒之者，见其形底于天，久之渐小，才五六尺，身如红莲花在叶中。
现代文：礼拜他的人见他的身形高入云天，过一会儿就渐渐变小了，才五六尺高，身体就象红莲花在莲叶当中。
English: His worshipers saw his stature soar into the sky, and after a while he gradually became smaller, only five or six feet tall, and his body was like a red lotus in the middle of the lotus leaves.

古文：谓人曰： 汝等知佛有三身乎？
现代文：他对人们说： 你们知道佛有三个身子吗？
English: He said to the people, "Do you know that the Buddha has three bodies?

古文：其大者为正身。 
现代文：其中最大的是正身。 
English: The largest of these is the foreskin.

古文：礼敬倾邑。
现代文：全城的人都祭祀他，尊敬他。
English: The whole city worships him and respects him.

古文：僧服礼者，博于内学。叹曰： 正法之后，始入像法。像法之外，尚有末法。末法之法，至于无法。
现代文：和尚服礼精通佛学，他叹道： 释迦矣尼得佛法之后，才进入像法，像法之外，还有末法，末法的 法 ，到了 无法 的程度。
English: The monk, who is well-versed in Buddhist studies, lamented, "After Shakyamuni attained Buddhahood, he entered the Image Dharma. In addition to the Image Dharma, there is also the Final Dharma, the Final Dharma, to an impossible degree.

古文：像法处乎其间者，尚数千年矣！
现代文：像法处于其间，差不多几千年了。
English: The image has been there for almost a thousand years.

古文：释迦教尽，然后大劫始坏。
现代文：释迦牟尼的教到头了，然后大劫才毁坏。
English: Sakyamuni's teaching came to an end, and then the Great Calamity destroyed it.

古文：劫坏之后，弥勒方去兜率，下阎浮提。
现代文：大劫毁坏之后，弥勒佛才去兜率天，到阎浮提去。
English: After the destruction of the calamity, Maitreya Buddha went to lead the sky, to go to Yan Fu Ti.

古文：今释迦之教未亏，不知弥勒何遽下降？ 
现代文：现在释迦牟尼的教并没有亏缺，不知弥勒佛为什么竟然下来了？ 
English: Now, Shakyamuni's teachings are not lacking, I wonder why Maitreya Buddha came down?

古文：因是虔诚作礼，如对弥勒之状。
现代文：于是他就虔诚的行礼，就象对弥勒佛行礼那样。
English: So he bowed reverently, just as he had bowed to Maitreya.

古文：忽见足下是老狐，幡花旄盖，悉是冢墓之间纸钱尔。
现代文：忽然看到脚下是一只老狐狸，旗幡花盖等等，全是坟墓之间的纸钱。
English: Suddenly, I saw an old fox at my feet, a flag, a flower cover, etc. It was all paper money between the graves.

古文：礼抚掌曰： 弥勒如此耶？ 
现代文：服礼拍着手说： 弥勒佛就是这个小样吗？ 
English: He clapped his hands and began to say: Is Maitreya Buddha this small model?

古文：具言如状，遂下走，追之不及。
现代文：他详细地说了这些眼见之物。狐狸就往下跑去，服礼追它没追上。
English: He described in detail what he had seen, and the fox ran down the hill, outrunning him.

古文：上官翼
现代文：上官翼
English: Shangguan Ying

古文：唐麟德时，上官翼为绛州司马。
现代文：唐朝麟德年间，上官翼是绛州司马。
English: During the Lingde era of the Tang Dynasty, the highest-ranking official was Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：有子年二十许，尝晓日独立门外。有女子，年可十三四，姿容绝代，行过门前。
现代文：他有一个二十来岁的儿子。他这个儿子曾经有一天独自站在门外，有一个十三四岁，姿色绝美的女子打门前路过。
English: He has a son in his twenties. This son of his was once standing alone outside the door, when a thirteen- or fourteen-year-old girl with an extremely beautiful appearance knocked on the door.

古文：此子悦之，便尔戏调，即求欢狎。
现代文：他儿子很喜欢这女子，就和她调戏，寻欢作乐。
English: And his son loved her very much, and he used to play with her and make her laugh.

古文：因问其所止，将欲过之。
现代文：他儿子问女子家住哪里，想要到她家去一趟。
English: His son asked the woman where she lived and wanted to visit her home.

古文：女云： 我门户虽难，郎州佐之子，两俱形迹，不愿人知。
现代文：女子说： 我家虽然很艰难，你是州官的儿子，两方面的形迹，我都不想让人知道。
English: The woman said: Although my family is very difficult, you are the son of a state official, and I don't want people to know about both aspects.

古文：但能有心，得方便，自来相就。 
现代文：只要你能有真心，有机会我就来找你。 
English: As long as you can have a true heart, I will come to you when I have a chance.

古文：此子邀之，期朝夕。
现代文：上官翼的儿子邀请她来，从早到晚地盼望。
English: Shangguan Ying's son invited her to come, and she looked forward to it from morning till night.

古文：女初固辞，此子将欲便留之，然渐见许。
现代文：女子一开始的时候坚决地推辞。上官翼的儿子想要把她留住。后来渐渐地她就答应了。
English: At first, the woman firmly refused. The son of Shangguanling wanted to keep her. Later, she gradually agreed.

古文：昏后徙倚俟之。如期果至。
现代文：黄昏后，他在徘徊留连地等她，到时候她果然来了。
English: He lingered after dusk, waiting for her, when she finally arrived.

古文：自是每夜常来。
现代文：从此后，她常常在夜间前来。
English: From then on, she often came at night.

古文：经数日，而旧使老婢于牖中窥之，乃知是魅。
现代文：几天后，被一位老婢女从窗口看见了，便知道是妖怪。
English: A few days later, an old maid saw it through the window and knew it was a monster.

古文：以告翼，百方禁断，终不能制。
现代文：老婢女把这事告诉了上官翼。上官翼千方百计地禁止，始终不能禁得住。
English: The old servant girl told Shangguan Ying about this. Shangguan Ying did everything he could to forbid it, but he couldn't.

古文：魅来转数，昼夜不去。
现代文：而且那妖怪来得更频了，白天黑夜不离开。
English: Moreover, the specter is coming more frequently and does not leave day or night.

古文：儿每将食，魅必夺之杯碗，此魅已饱，儿不得食。
现代文：儿子每当要吃东西的时候，妖怪就夺去碗筷杯子什么的。妖怪已经吃饱了，而儿子还没吃。
English: Whenever my son wants to eat, the yokai takes away his bowl, chopsticks, cups, etc. The yokai has had enough to eat, but my son hasn't eaten yet.

古文：翼常手自作啖，剖以贻儿。至手，魅已取去。
现代文：上官翼曾经亲自做吃的，分给儿子吃，刚送到，东西已被妖怪拿去。
English: Shangguan Ying used to make food himself, give it to his son to eat, and it had just been delivered when the monster took it.

古文：翼颇有智数，因此密捣毒药。
现代文：上官翼很有智慧。他因此偷偷地捣细一些毒药。
English: Shangguan Ying was very clever, so he secretly prepared some poison.

古文：时秋晚，油麻新熟。
现代文：当时是晚秋，油麻刚成熟。
English: It was late autumn, and the oil poppies were just ripe.

古文：翼令熬两叠，以一置毒药，先取好者作啖，遍与妻子，末乃与儿一啖，魅便接去。
现代文：上官翼就让人熬了两叠油麻，把其中的一叠放了毒药。先拿那叠好的吃，妻子儿女全都吃过之后，最后才给儿子吃。未等儿子接去，妖怪先接了去。
English: Shangguan Ying then had someone boil two piles of linseed oil, and put poison in one of the piles. He first took the pile of good food, and after his wife and children had all eaten, he finally gave it to his son. Before his son could pick it up, the monster picked it up first.

古文：次以和药者作啖，与儿，魅亦将去。
现代文：这时候便把有毒的拿过来，递给儿子，又被妖怪接了去。
English: At this time, he took the poisoned fish and handed it to his son, who was then taken away by the yokai.

古文：连与数啖，忽变作老狐，宛转而仆。
现代文：一连给了几次。妖怪忽然变成一只老狐狸，跌跌撞撞地倒了下去。
English: He gave it several times in a row. The monster suddenly turned into an old fox and stumbled down.

古文：擒获之，登令烧毁讫，合家欢庆。
现代文：上官翼让人把它捉住，立刻把它烧毁。全家欢庆。
English: Shangguan Ying had someone catch it and burn it immediately. The whole family celebrated.

古文：此日昏后，闻远处有数人哭声，斯须渐近，遂入堂后，并皆称冤，号擗甚哀。
现代文：这天黄昏之后，听到远处有几个人的哭声，片刻之间渐渐靠近，于是就进到堂屋后边，一齐喊冤，捶着胸口号哭，很是悲哀。
English: After dusk on this day, I heard the cries of several people in the distance, and they were getting closer and closer between moments, so I went into the back of the hall, shouted together, and cried with slogans on my chest. It was very sad.

古文：中有一叟，哭声每云： 若痛老狐，何乃为喉咙枉杀腔幢？ 
现代文：其中有一个老头，哭着说： 你痛死老狐了！为什么竟然为了口欲而枉杀了身子呢？ 
English: One of them, an old man, wept and said: "You have killed the old fox! Why did you kill him for the sake of your appetite?

古文：数十日间，朝夕来家，往往见有衣衰绖者，翼深忧之。
现代文：几十天当中，这些狐妖一早一晚都到上官翼家里来，常常看到有穿丧服的。上官翼非常忧虑。
English: Over the course of dozens of days, these fox demons came to Shangguan Ying's home every morning and night, and were often seen wearing mourning clothes. Shangguan Ying was very worried.

古文：后来渐稀，经久方绝，亦无害也。
现代文：后来渐渐来得少了，时间久了便断绝，不再来了，也没有别的危害。
English: Later, the number of arrivals gradually decreased, and after a long period of time, they stopped coming, and there was no other harm.

古文：大安和尚
现代文：大安和尚
English: Daan Monk

古文：唐则天在位，有女人自称圣菩萨。人心所在，女必知之。
现代文：唐朝武则天在位的时候，有一个女人自称是圣菩萨，人的意念在什么地方，她一定知道。
English: During the reign of Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, there was a woman who claimed to be a holy bodhisattva. She must know where people's thoughts are.

古文：太后召入宫，前后所言皆验，宫中敬事之。
现代文：武则天把她召入宫中，她前后说的都很准。宫中对她很敬重。
English: Wu Zetian called her into the palace, and she was very accurate in what she said. The palace respected her very much.

古文：数月，谓为真菩萨。
现代文：几个月之后，称她为真菩萨。
English: A few months later, he called her a true bodhisattva.

古文：其后大安和尚入宫，太后问见女菩萨未？
现代文：后来大安和尚入宫，太后问他见过女菩萨没有。
English: Later, when the Daan monk entered the palace, the empress dowager asked him if he had ever seen a female bodhisattva.

古文：安曰： 菩萨何在？
现代文：大安说： 菩萨在哪？
English: Da'an said, "Where is the Bodhisattva?"

古文：愿一见之。 
现代文：请让我见一见。 
English: Let me have a look, please.

古文：敕令与之相见。
现代文：武则天就让他们相见。
English: Wu Zetian let them see each other.

古文：和尚风神邈然。
现代文：相见之后，大安和尚表现出藐视的神彩。
English: After the meeting, Daan Monk showed contempt.

古文：久之，大安曰： 汝善观心，试观我心安在？ 
现代文：许久，大安和尚说： 你善于观察人的意念，请看看我的意念在哪儿。 
English: For a long time, Daan monk said: You are good at observing people's thoughts, please look at where my thoughts are.

古文：答曰： 师心在塔头相轮边铃中。 
现代文：女人回答说： 大师的意念在塔顶相轮边铃之中。 
English: The woman replied, "The master's thoughts are in the bells at the top of the tower.

古文：寻复问之。曰： 在兜率天弥勒宫中听法。 
现代文：不一会儿又问，她说： 在兜率天弥勒佛宫中听法。 
English: After a while, she asked again and said, "Listening to the Dharma in the temple of Amitabha Buddha."

古文：第三问之，在非非想天。 皆如其言。
现代文：第三次问她，她说： 在非非想天。 她说得全对。
English: Asked a third time, she said: "It's wishful thinking. She's absolutely right."

古文：太后忻悦。
现代文：武则天很高兴。
English: Bu Zetian was very happy.

古文：大安因且置心于四果阿罗汉地，则不能知。
现代文：大安于是暂且把意念放在四果阿罗汉地，她便不知道了。
English: Therefore, Daan temporarily put her thoughts in the four realms of the arahants, and she did not know.

古文：大安呵曰： 我心始置阿罗汉之地，汝已不知。若置于菩萨诸佛之地，何由可料！ 
现代文：大安呵斥道： 我的意念才放在阿罗汉地你已经不知道了，如果放到菩萨诸佛之地，你怎么可能知道？ 
English: Da'an rebuked, "You don't know that my thoughts were first placed in the land of Arahants. If they were placed in the land of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, how could you possibly know?

古文：女词屈，变作牝狐，下阶而走，不知所适。
现代文：女人词穷，变成一只母狐狸，下阶跑了，不知到什么地方去了。
English: At a loss for words, the woman turned into a female fox, and the young fox ran off to I don't know where.

