古文：竹永通宜城民韦庆植赵太李信谢氏王珍王会师解奉先童安玗刘自然李明府刘钥匙上公施汴公乘通僧审言
现代文：竹永通宜城民韦庆植赵太李信谢氏王珍王会师解奉先童安玗刘自然李明府刘钥匙上公施汴公乘通僧审言
English: Zhu Yongtong, Yicheng, Wei Qingzhi, Zhao Tai, Li Xin, Xie Shi, Wang Zhen, Wang Hui, Shi Debong, Qian Tong, Liu Zhizhong, Li Mingfu, Liu Ke, Shang Gong, Shihong, Shihong, Zhao Tai, Li Xin, Xie Shi, Wang Zhen, Wang Zhen, Wang Zhen,

古文：竹永通
现代文：竹永通
English: Takenaga-dori Street

古文：隋并州盂县竹永通，曾贷寺家粟六十石，年久不还。
现代文：隋朝时并州盂县有个叫竹永通的人，曾经向寺院里借了六十石粮食，许多年了不还给寺院。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a man named Zhu Yongtong in Yinzhou County, who once borrowed sixty kilos of grain from the temple and did not return it to the temple for many years.

古文：索之，云： 还讫。 
现代文：后来寺院向他讨粮，他却说已经偿还了。
English: Later, the temple asked him for grain, but he said he had already repaid it.

古文：遂于佛堂誓言云： 若实未还，当与寺家作牛。 
现代文：于是就在佛堂前发誓说： 我如果当真没有偿还，那么，我来生当给寺院做牛。 
English: So he swore in front of the Buddhist temple, saying, "If I really did not repay, then in my next life I should become a cow for the temple."

古文：此人死后，寺家生一黄犊，足有白文，后渐分明，乃是竹永通字。
现代文：这个人死了以后，寺院里的一头母牛就生下了一头小牛犊。这头小牛犊的脚上有白色的花文，后来渐渐看清楚了，原来却是 竹永通 三个字。
English: After this man died, a cow in the temple gave birth to a calf. This calf had white flowers on its feet, which gradually became clear, but it turned out to be the three characters "竹永通."

古文：乡人渐知，观者日数千。
现代文：这件事渐渐地被乡里的人知道了，每天都有好几千人来观看这头小牛犊。
English: The story gradually became known in the village, and every day thousands of people came to see the calf.

古文：此家已知，遂用粟百石，于寺赎牛，别立一屋，事之如生。
现代文：竹永通家里的人也已经知道了这件事，就用一百石粮食把这头牛犊买了回来，另外盖了一间房子，就象竹永通活着一样，精心地喂养着这牛犊。
English: Bamboo Yongtong's family already knew about this, so they bought the calf back with a hundred stone of grain, built another house, and carefully fed the calf as if Bamboo Yongtong was still alive.

古文：仍为造像写经，月余遂死。
现代文：结果一个多月后，这头牛犊就死了。
English: As a result, the calf died more than a month later.

古文：宜城民
现代文：宜城民
English: Residents of Gyeongnam City

古文：隋大业八年，宜州城东南里民姓皇甫，其家兄弟四人，大兄小弟，并皆勤事生业。
现代文：隋朝大业八年，宜州城东南面的一个村里，有个百姓家姓皇甫。那家有弟兄四个，老大和老三、老四都勤勤恳恳地从事劳动持家过日子。
English: In the eighth year of the Sui Dynasty, in a village southeast of Yizhou City, there was a family with the surname of Wang Fu. There were four brothers in that family. The eldest, the second eldest, and the third and fourth eldest were all diligently engaged in labor and keeping house.

古文：其第二弟名迁，交游恶友，不事生活。
现代文：只有名叫迁的老二，整天和一些不三不四的人在一起鬼混，不务正业。
English: Only the second son, whose name was Qian, spent the whole day fooling around with some unscrupulous people and did not do his duty.

古文：母尝取钱，欲令市买，且置床上。
现代文：有一次，他的母亲拿出钱来，想叫人去集市上买些东西，将钱放在床上。
English: Once, his mother took out some money to buy something at the market and put it on the bed.

古文：母向舍后，迁从外来，入堂不见人，便偷钱去。
现代文：他母亲这时去了后院，老二从外面回来。他进屋后看见没有人在屋，就偷着把钱拿了出去。
English: His mother then went to the backyard and the boy came back from outside. When he entered the house and saw that no one was there, he stole the money.

古文：母还，觅钱不得，遂勘合家良贱，并云不知。
现代文：他的母亲回来后，发现床上的钱不见了，就把全家人都召集起来查问。大家都说不知道。
English: When his mother returned and found the money missing from the bed, she called the whole family together to investigate. They all said they didn't know.

古文：母怒，悉加鞭捶，大小皆怨。
现代文：母亲非常生气，就把大家狠狠地鞭打了一顿，全家大小都怨气冲天。
English: My mother was very angry, so she whipped everyone severely, and the whole family was furious.

古文：至后年迁亡，其家猪生一狘子，八月社至，卖与远村社家，遂托梦于妇曰： 我是汝夫，为盗取婆钱，枉及合家，浪受楚拷。
现代文：到了后年，叫迁的老二死了，他们家养的一头母猪产下了一头猪崽。八月的社日到了，家人就将这头猪崽卖给了远村的一个社官的家里。就在这天晚上，叫迁的老二就给他的妻子托梦说： 我是你的丈夫，因为偷了你婆婆的钱，使全家人都跟着受了冤枉，挨了鞭打。
English: In the following year, the second son died, and a sow they raised gave birth to a piglet. When the August social day arrived, the family sold the piglet to the family of a social official in a distant village. On this very night, the second son told his wife in a dream: "I am your husband, because I stole your mother-in-law's money, so the whole family was wronged and whipped."

古文：今我作猪来偿债，将卖与社家，缚我欲杀。
现代文：现在我托生猪来偿还这笔债。可是你们却把我卖给了社官的家里。明日社日，他把我捆绑起来，想要杀了我用来祭祀。
English: Now I am relying on a pig to repay this debt, but you have sold me to the official's house. Tomorrow, the day of the meeting, he will tie me up and try to kill me to use as a sacrifice.

古文：汝是我妇，何忍不语男女赎我。 
现代文：你是我的妻子，怎么忍心不告诉家里的人，叫他们把我赎回来。 
English: You are my wife, how can you not tell the people at home and ask them to buy me back?

古文：妇初梦，忽寤，仍未信之。
现代文：他的妻子刚刚做了这个梦，就忽然吓醒了，还有些不信，就又睡着了。
English: His wife had just had this dream when she suddenly woke up with a start and, still in disbelief, went back to sleep.

古文：复眠，其梦如初，因起报姑。
现代文：接着又做了一个和刚才一样的梦。因此就起来把梦中的情景告诉了婆婆。
English: Then she had another dream like the previous one, so she got up and told her mother-in-law about the dream.

古文：姑曰： 吾梦亦如之。 
现代文：婆婆说： 我也做了一个这样的梦。 
English: My mother-in-law said, "I also had a dream like this.

古文：迟明，令兄赍钱诣社官，收赎之，后二年方死。
现代文：天还没亮，婆婆就叫皇南迁的哥哥拿着钱，到社官家里，把卖出去的猪又买了回来。事情发生后的第二年那头猪才死。
English: Before dawn, the mother-in-law told the brother who had moved to Huanan to take the money, go to the official's house, and buy back the pig that had been sold. The pig only died the following year after the incident.

古文：长安弘法寺静琳师，是迁之邻里，亲见其猪，尝话其事焉。
现代文：长安弘法寺静琳师父，是皇甫迁的邻居，他亲眼看过那头猪，所以曾经说起这件事。
English: Master Jinglin of Chang'an Gongpo Temple, a neighbor of the Emperor's residence, saw the pig with his own eyes, so he once talked about it.

古文：韦庆植
现代文：韦庆植
English: Wei Qing Zhi

古文：唐贞观中，魏王府长史韦庆植有女先亡，韦夫妇痛惜之。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间，魏王府长史韦庆植有个女儿死了，韦庆植夫妇二人非常悲痛惋惜。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, the governor of the Wei King, Shi Wei Qing Zhi, had a daughter who died. The two Wei Qing Zhi couples were very sad and regretful.

古文：后二年，庆植将聚亲宾客，备食，家人买得羊，未杀。
现代文：二年后，韦庆植要把亲朋好友请到家里做客，准备了饭菜，手下的人还买了一只羊。
English: Two years later, Wei Qingzhi wanted to invite relatives and friends to his home, prepared meals, and his staff also bought a sheep.

古文：夜，庆植妻梦见亡女，着青练裙白衫，头发上有一双玉钗，是平生所服者，来见母，涕泣言： 昔常用物，不语父母，坐此业报，今受羊身，来偿父母命。
现代文：羊还没等杀，就在这天夜里，韦庆植的妻子梦见了死去的女儿，穿着青色的柔软的丝裙和洁白的上衣，头发上戴着一双玉钗，是平时她所喜欢佩带的。只见女儿来到她的面前哭泣着说： 女儿活着的时候，使用家里的东西，没有跟父母说就偷着拿走了，所以遭了这样的报应。现在我变成了羊，来偿还父母的债。
English: Before the sheep was killed, that very night, Wei Qingzhi's wife dreamed of her dead daughter, dressed in a blue soft silk skirt and a white blouse, with a pair of jade bracelets in her hair, which she usually liked to wear. She saw her daughter come to her crying and saying: "When my daughter was alive, she used things from home and stole them without telling her parents, so she suffered such retribution. Now I have become a sheep to pay off my parents' debt."

古文：明旦当见杀，青羊白头者是，特愿慈恩，垂乞性命。 
现代文：明天天亮我就要被杀掉了，那只青色身子白头的羊就是我。今天特来向母亲请求，希母亲能慈悲、开恩，可怜女儿，救我一命。 
English: Tomorrow morning I will be killed. I am the sheep with a blue body and a white head. Today I have come to ask my mother to have mercy, to be kind, to have pity on her daughter, and to save my life.

古文：母惊寤，旦而自往观，果有青羊，项膊皆白，头侧有两条白，相当如玉钗形。
现代文：母亲吃惊地醒来，天亮就亲自去看那只羊，果然是一头青羊、脖子往上全是白色的毛。头的两边还有两条白道，就和玉钗的形状相似。
English: The mother was surprised to wake up, and in the morning she went to see the sheep for herself. It was indeed a green sheep, with white hair all the way up the neck, and two white stripes on either side of the head, similar to the shape of a jade scepter.

古文：母对之悲泣，止家人勿杀，待庆植至，放送之。
现代文：母亲对着那只羊悲痛地哭了，阻止家人不要杀那只羊，等着韦庆植回来说明情由，好把这只羊放了。
English: The mother wept bitterly over the sheep, preventing the family from killing the sheep, and waited for Wei Qingzhuang to come back and explain the reason, so that the sheep could be released.

古文：俄而植至催食，厨人白言： 夫人不许杀青羊。 
现代文：不一会，庆植就来了，催着厨师赶快准备好饭菜，厨师告诉他说： 夫人不允许杀那只羊。 
English: After a while, the celebrant arrived and urged the cook to quickly prepare the meal. The cook told him: "Madam, you are not allowed to kill that sheep.

古文：植怒，即令杀之。
现代文：庆植大怒，就命令宰夫赶紧把羊杀了。
English: Celebrating his great anger, he ordered Zhaifu to kill the sheep immediately.

古文：宰夫悬羊欲杀，宾客数人已至，乃见悬一女子，容貌端正，诉客曰： 是韦长史女，乞救命。 
现代文：宰夫就把羊吊了起来准备要杀，这时就有不少的宾客已经到了。就看见吊着的是一个女子，长得很端正。向客人诉说： 我是韦长史的女儿，乞求你们救我一命。 
English: Zayf then hung up the sheep and prepared to kill it. By this time, many guests had arrived. He saw that the one hanging was a woman, who looked very respectable. She told the guests: I am Wei Changshi's daughter, I beg you to save my life.

古文：客等惊愕，止宰夫。宰夫惧植怒，但见羊鸣，遂杀之。
现代文：客人们都十分惊讶，制止宰夫不要杀羊，可是宰夫害怕庆植发怒，只听见羊的叫声，并没有听见说什么话，于是就把羊杀死了。
English: The guests were very surprised and stopped Zafu from killing the sheep, but Zafu was afraid of celebrating and getting angry. He only heard the sheep's cries, but did not hear what was said, so he killed the sheep.

古文：既而客坐不食，植怪问之，客具以言。
现代文：过了一会，饭菜都摆在了桌上，可是宾客们坐在哪里谁都不吃。庆植非常奇怪，就问他们不吃的原因，宾客们就把刚才的事全都说了。
English: After a while, the food was placed on the table, but no one ate where the guests were sitting. The celebration was very strange, they asked why they didn't eat, and the guests told them everything that had just happened.

古文：庆植悲痛发病，遂不起。
现代文：庆植听后悲痛欲绝就得了重病，一病就再没有起来。
English: After listening to Qing Zhi's lament, he fell seriously ill and never recovered.

古文：京下士人多知此事。
现代文：京城里的士大夫阶层不少人都知道这件事。
English: Many people in the scholar-doctor class in the capital know about this.

古文：赵太
现代文：赵太
English: Zhao Taizong

古文：唐长安市里风俗，每岁至元日已后，递饮食相邀，号为传坐。
现代文：在唐朝长安市里有一秒风俗，每年的元旦这天以后，亲朋们都要轮流请客，人们把这种习俗叫做 传坐 。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a custom in Chang'an City. Every year after New Year's Day, relatives and friends would take turns to invite guests. People called this custom "passing the torch."

古文：东市笔生赵太，次当设之。
现代文：有一天，东市有个笔生，叫赵太，轮到他设宴请客了。
English: One day, there was a pen student in Dongshi, called Zhao Tai, and it was his turn to host a banquet.

古文：有客先到，勿后，见其碓上有童女，年十三四，着青衫白帽，以急索系颈，属于碓柱，泣泪谓客曰： 我主人女也，往年未死时，盗父母钱，欲买脂粉，未及而死。
现代文：用一条绳子紧紧地勒着脖子，绑在石臼的架柱子上，哭泣着对来客说： 我是这家主人的女儿。过去没死的时候，偷了父母的钱，想要买脂粉，可是没有来得及买就死了。
English: With a rope tightly around her neck, she was tied to the pillar of the stone mill, crying and saying to the visitors: I am the owner's daughter. In the past, when she was still alive, she stole her parents' money to buy powdered fat, but she died before she could buy it.

古文：其钱今在舍厨内西北角壁中，然我未用。
现代文：那钱现在还在我家厨房里西北角的墙壁中。
English: That money is still in my kitchen in the northwest corner of the walls.

古文：既以盗之，坐此得罪，今当偿父母命。 
现代文：虽然我没有花，可是我已经是把钱偷了出来，做了这种事，就有罪，现在就应当偿还父母的这笔债。 
English: Even though I didn't spend it, I had already stolen the money, and by doing such a thing, I was guilty, and now I should repay this debt to my parents.

古文：言毕，化为青羊白头。
现代文：说完，就变成了一只白头的青羊。
English: After saying this, he turned into a white-headed sheep.

古文：客惊告主人，主人问其形貌，乃是小女，死已二年矣。
现代文：客人惊讶，就把这件事告诉了主人。主人问清楚了那女童长的模样，正是自己的女儿，她已经死了二年了。
English: Surprised, the guest told his host, who asked what the little girl looked like. It was his daughter, who had been dead for two years.

古文：于厨壁取得钱，似久安处。
现代文：于是主人就在厨房的墙壁中找到了钱，象是放在那里很长时间了。
English: So the owner found the money in the walls of the kitchen, as if it had been there for a long time.

古文：于是送羊僧寺，合门不复食肉。
现代文：于是主人就把羊送到了寺院里，全家人从此也不再吃肉了。
English: So the owner sent the sheep to the temple, and the whole family stopped eating meat.

古文：李信
现代文：李信
English: Li Xin

古文：唐居士李信者，并州文水县之太平里人也，身为隆政府卫士。
现代文：唐朝有个居士叫李信，他是并州文水县太平里的人。在隆政府担任卫士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a layman named Li Xin, who was from Taiping Village, Wenshui County, and served as a guard in the Long government.

古文：至显庆年冬，随例往朔州赴审，乘赤草马一匹，并将草驹。
现代文：到了显庆年的冬天，随着主管去朔州赴审，他骑了一匹红色的马，还带着它的小马驹。
English: In the winter of the auspicious year, he rode a red horse with its foal as the supervisor went to Shuozhou for trial.

古文：是时岁晚凝阴，风雪严厚，行十数里，马遂不进。
现代文：这时正是年末，凝云蔽日，风大雪厚，天寒地冻。走了十多里路，马就不能走了。
English: At this time, it was the end of the year, the clouds covered the sun, the wind was heavy and the snow was thick, and it was freezing cold. After walking more than ten miles, the horse could not walk.

古文：信以程期逼促，挝之数十下。
现代文：李信因为路程需要的时间很紧，就连打了这匹马几十下，马就象人似的说起话来。
English: Li Xin even beat the horse a few dozen times because the travel time was very tight, and the horse began to speak like a human.

古文：马遂作人语，语信曰： 我是汝母，为生平避汝父，将石余米与女，故获此报，此驹即是汝妹也。
现代文：马告诉李信说： 我是你的母亲，因一生中背着你父亲，把一石多米给了我的女儿，所以得到了这样的报应。这个小马驹就是你的妹妹。
English: The horse told Li Xin, "I am your mother, and because I carried your father on my back all my life and gave more than a stone to my daughter, I received such retribution. This foal is your sister."

古文：以力偿债向了，汝复何苦敦逼如是！ 
现代文：我们凭着力气来偿还过去的债，你又为什么这样的逼迫我们。 
English: Why do you persecute us like this, when we have paid our past debts with our strength?

古文：信兄弟等见之，悲哀相对，别为厂枥养饲，有同事母，屈僧营斋，合门莫不精进。
现代文：马于是就向前走，李信背着鞍辔，跟着马到了家里。李信的兄弟门看见了马，都悲痛哀伤的互相看着，并另外盖了一个马棚，把马饲养起来，就象侍奉母亲一样。他们又请来和尚烧香念佛，大搞斋戒。全家没有一个不精诚向佛的。
English: The horse then went forward, and Li Xun, with his saddle on his back, followed the horse to his home. When Li Xun's brothers saw the horse, they all looked at each other with grief and sorrow, and built another stable to raise the horse, just like serving their mother. They also invited a monk to burn incense, chant the Buddha's name, and fast. There was no one in the whole family who was not devoted to the Buddha.

古文：乡闾道俗，咸叹异之。
现代文：乡里的人们听说这件事，都非常感叹。
English: When the people in the village heard about this, they were very surprised.

古文：时工部侍郎孙无隐，岐州司司法张金庭为丁艰在家，闻而奇之，故就信家顾访，见马犹在，问其由委，并如所传。
现代文：这时工部侍郎孙元隐和岐州司司法张金庭都因为父母亡故在家里服丧，听说了这事都感到奇怪，所以就去李信家看望访问，看见那马还在。问李信事情的经过，就象人们传说的一样。
English: At this time, Sun Yuanyin, the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, and Zhang Jinting, the Judicial Secretary of Qizhou, were both in mourning at home because of the death of their parents. They were all surprised to hear about this, so they went to visit Li Xin's house and saw that the horse was still there. Ask Li Xin how things went, just like people's legends.

古文：谢氏
现代文：谢氏
English: Mr. Xie

古文：唐雍州万年县阎村，即灞渭之间也。
现代文：唐朝雍州万年县阎村，在灞水和渭水之间。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Yan Village, Wannian County, Yongzhou, was located between Surabaya and Surabaya.

古文：有妇女谢，适周县元氏，有女适回龙村人来阿照。
现代文：村里有个妇女姓谢，嫁到了周县一个姓元的家里。她的女儿嫁给了回龙村一个叫来阿照的人。
English: A woman surnamed Xie in the village married into a family surnamed Yuan in Zhou County, and her daughter married a man named Ashao from Huilong Village.

古文：谢氏永徽末亡，龙朔元年八月，托梦于来氏女曰： 我生时酤酒，小作升，乃取价太多，量酒复少，今坐此罪，子北山下人家为牛。
现代文：谢氏在永徽末年死了。龙朔元年的八月，她托梦给女儿来氏说： 我活着的时候卖酒，用小的量酒器具卖，收人家的钱太多而给的酒太少，现在我犯了这样的罪，所以在北山下的一个人家里托生为牛。
English: Xie died at the end of the year in Yonghui. In August of the first year of Longshao, she told her daughter about a dream: "When I was alive, I sold wine, using a small amount of wine equipment to sell, and I received too much money from people and gave too little wine. Now I have committed such a crime, so I was born as a cow in a person's home under the North Mountain."

古文：近被卖与法界寺夏侯师，今将我向城南耕稻田，非常辛苦。 
现代文：最近又被卖给了法界寺夏侯师傅，现在他将要把我带到城南耕种稻田，非常辛苦。 
English: Recently, I was sold again to Master Xia Hou of the Hokeiji Temple, and now he is going to take me to the south of the city to farm rice paddies, which is very hard.

古文：乃寤，其女涕泣为阿照言之。
现代文：等醒后，谢氏的女儿就哭泣着对丈夫阿照说了这件事。
English: After waking up, Xie's daughter cried and told her husband, Asher, about the incident.

古文：至二年正月，有法界寺尼至阿照村，女乃问尼，尼报云： 有夏侯师是实。 
现代文：到了龙朔二年正月的一天，有一个法界寺的尼姑来到阿照的村子里，谢氏的女儿就向尼姑打听，尼姑告诉她说： 法界寺确实有个夏侯师傅。 
English: One day in the first month of the second year of the Long Shuo, a nun from the Hokyo-ji Temple came to the village of Azho. Mr. Xie's daughter asked the nun about it, and the nun told her: The Hokyo-ji Temple does indeed have a summer master.

古文：女即就寺访之，云： 近于北山下买得一牛，见在城南耕地。 
现代文：谢氏的女儿就去寺里探访他。夏侯师傅说： 最近在北山下买到了一头牛，现在正在城南耕地 。
English: Mr. Xie's daughter went to the temple to visit him. Master Xia Hou said: Recently, I bought a cow at the foot of the North Mountain, and now I am cultivating the land in the south of the city.

古文：其女涕泣求请，寺尼乃遣人送其女就之。此牛平常唯一人禁制，若遇余人，必陆梁抵触。
现代文：谢氏的女儿哭着请求要去看看，寺中的尼姑就派人把她送到了城南地里，这头牛平常只有一个人能驯服它，如果遇见别的人，一定反抗冲撞乱蹦乱跳。
English: Mr. Xie's daughter cried and begged to go see it, and the nun at the temple sent someone to take her to the southern part of the city. Normally, only one person can tame this cow, and if you meet someone else, it will certainly rebel and run around.

古文：见其女至，乃舐其遍体，又流泪焉。
现代文：但是看见女儿来了，就用舌头遍舐她的全身，并且还流下了眼泪。
English: But when he saw his daughter coming, he licked her all over with his tongue and shed tears.

古文：女即是就夏侯师赎之，乃随其女去。
现代文：就这样谢氏的女儿找到了夏侯师傅买回了那头牛。牛就跟着它女儿去了。
English: In this way, Mr. Xie's daughter found Mr. Xia Hou and bought back the cow. The cow followed her daughter.

古文：今现在阿照家养饲，女常为阿娘承奉不阙。
现代文：现在在阿照家里饲养着。谢氏的女儿侍奉这个变成了牛的母亲，十分尽心，什么也不缺。
English: Now kept at Asho's home, Xie's daughter serves the cow-turned-mother with all her heart, wanting for nothing.

古文：京师王侯妃媵，多令召视，竞施财物。
现代文：京师里的王侯嫔妃，常叫人召来看她，竞相施舍财物给予帮助。
English: Princes and concubines in Beijing often called for people to come and see her, and they competed to give alms and help.

古文：王珍
现代文：王珍
English: Wang Zhen

古文：唐定州安嘉县人王珍，能金银作。
现代文：唐朝定州安嘉县里，有个叫王珍的人，他能做金银活计。
English: In Anjia County of Dingzhou in the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Zhen, who could make gold and silver work.

古文：曾与寺家造功德，得娟五百疋，同作人私费十疋，王珍不知。
现代文：曾经给寺院里做些涂金抹银的活，得到了五百疋的绢。和他一起做活的人，私下里用了十疋绢。王珍却不知道。
English: Wang Zhen once did some gold-painting and silver-painting work for a temple and received 500 baht. The people who worked with him secretly used 10 baht. But Wang Zhen didn't know.

古文：此人死，后王家有礼事，买羊未杀间，其羊频跪无数，珍已怪之。
现代文：这个人已死了。后来王珍家里要办事情，就买了一只羊准备待客，还没等杀，那羊见了王珍就连连下跪无数。王珍感到非常奇怪，晚上把它绑在柱子上。
English: The man was dead. Later, when Wang Zhen's family needed to run an errand, they bought a sheep to prepare for a guest. Before killing it, when Wang Zhen saw the sheep, she knelt down countless times. Wang Zhen felt very strange and tied it to a post in the evening.

古文：夜系于柱，珍将寝，有人扣房门甚急，看之无所见。
现代文：王珍准备睡觉，就听见有急促的叩门声，起来一看，什么也没有看见。
English: Wang Zhen was about to go to sleep when she heard a quick knock on the door. She got up and looked around, but saw nothing.

古文：珍复卧，又闻之，起看还无所见，怪之。
现代文：王珍又重新躺下，又听到有叩门的声音。起来一看，还是什么也没有看见。
English: Wang Zhen lay down again and heard the sound of someone knocking on the door. When she got up, she still didn't see anything.

古文：遂开门卧，未睡，见一人云： 昔日与公同作功德，偷十疋绢私用，公竟不知，今已作羊，公将杀之，叩头乞命。 
现代文：王珍认为很奇怪，就把门开着躺下了。还没睡，就看见一个人对他说： 过去我和你在寺院里一起做活，偷了十疋绢自己用了，你却不知道。现在我已经托生了一只羊，你就要杀了我来款待客人，我向你磕头请求饶命。 
English: Wang Zhen thought it was very strange, so he opened the door and lay down. Before he fell asleep, he saw a man say to him: "In the past, I worked with you in the temple and stole ten yaks to use for myself, but you didn't know. Now that I have given birth to a lamb, you want to kill me for entertaining guests. I beg you to spare my life."

古文：再三恳苦，言讫，出房门，即变作羊。
现代文：再三的苦苦地恳求，说完就走出了房门，即刻变成了一只羊。
English: After repeated and painful entreaties, he walked out of the door and immediately turned into a sheep.

古文：王珍妹于别所，见此人叩头，一如珍所见，遂放羊作长生。
现代文：王珍的妹妹住在别的屋子里，也看见这个人磕头恳求，就象王珍所看见的一样。于是就把羊放了生，从此王珍和妹妹都不吃肉了。
English: Wang Zhen's sister, who lived in another house, also saw the man begging with his head bowed, just as Wang Zhen had seen. So she let the sheep live, and from then on Wang Zhen and her sister did not eat meat.

古文：珍及妹家即断食肉，珍以咸亨五年，入海运，船上无菜，人皆食肉，珍不食，唯餐空饭而已。
现代文：王珍在咸亨五年，到海上搞运输，船上没有菜吃，人们都吃肉，王珍却不吃。只是光吃饭罢了。
English: Wang Zhen has been in Hamhung for five years. When he went to the sea to do transportation, there was no food on the boat. People ate meat, but Wang Zhen did not eat. He just ate.

古文：王会师
现代文：王会师
English: Wang Hui-shih

古文：唐京都西市北店，有王会师者，母亡，服制已毕，其家乃产一青黄牝狗。
现代文：唐朝京都西市北店，有个叫王会师的人，母亲死了，丧期已完，他家的母狗就产下了一条青黄色的小母狗，会师的妻子因为小狗偷吃东西，就用木棒打了它几下。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Hui Shi in the North Shop of the West City of Kyoto. His mother had died and the period of mourning had ended. His female dog gave birth to a blue-yellow female dog. The wife of Hui Shi hit the dog with a wooden stick several times because the dog was stealing food.

古文：会师妻为其盗食，乃以杖击之数下，狗遂作人语曰： 我是汝姑，新妇杖我大错。
现代文：小狗就象人说话那样告诉她说： 我是你的婆婆，你这做媳妇的用木杖打我是非常错误的。
English: The little dog said to her, as one might say, "I am your mother-in-law, and it is very wrong of you, my daughter-in-law, to beat me with a stick."

古文：我为严酷家人过甚，遂得此报。
现代文：我因为严厉残酷，虐待家人特别过火，才得到这样的报应。
English: I received this retribution because I was harsh and cruel and abused my family members to an extreme degree.

古文：今既被打，羞向汝家。 
现代文：现在既然被你所打，我羞愧留在你家。 
English: Now that I have been beaten by you, I am ashamed to stay in your house.

古文：因即走出。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：会闻而涕泣，抱以归家，而复还去，凡经四五。
现代文：会师听说了这件事，痛哭流涕，他把小狗抱回了家。可是小狗又走了。就这样的共有四五次。
English: When the teacher heard about this, he burst into tears and took the puppy home. But the puppy ran away again. This happened four or five times.

古文：会师见其意正乃于市北己店大墙后，作小舍安置，每日送食。
现代文：会师看那狗一定要离开这里，就在市北自己开的店铺的大墙后面，造了个小屋，把小狗安放到了那里，每天都给小狗送饭吃。
English: Seeing that the dog must leave here, he built a small house behind the wall of the store that Shihoku opened, put the puppy there, and brought food to the puppy every day.

古文：市人及行客就观者极众，投饼与者，不可胜数。
现代文：市里的人以及路过的行人，去观看的特别多，给狗扔食品吃的人数也数不尽。
English: Many people from the city and passers-by came to watch, and the number of people who threw food to the dogs was endless.

古文：此犬恒不离此舍，过斋时即不食。
现代文：这条狗总也不离开这个小屋。每当斋戒之日，它就不吃东西。
English: The dog never leaves the shed, and whenever it is fasting day, it does not eat.

古文：经一二岁，莫知所之。
现代文：后来没有人能知道这条狗那里去了。
English: No one could find out where the dog had gone.

古文：解奉先
现代文：解奉先
English: Resign first

古文：洛阳画工解奉先为嗣江王家画像壁，未毕而逃。
现代文：洛阳有个画工叫解奉先，他给嗣江姓王的家里画壁像，没等画完就逃走了。
English: In Luoyang, there was a painter named Xie Bongxian. He painted a mural for the family of a man surnamed Wang, but fled before he could finish.

古文：及见擒，乃妄云： 功直已相当。 
现代文：等被抓住了，他却胡乱说： 作工的工时和你给的工钱正合适。 
English: When he was caught, he said, "The working hours and the pay are just right."

古文：因于像前誓曰： 若负心者，愿死为汝家牛。 
现代文：于是就在象前发誓说： 我如果是违背良心，死后愿做你家的牛。 
English: So he swore in front of the elephant and said, "If it is against my conscience, I would like to be your family's cow after I die."

古文：岁余，奉先卒，卒后，王家牸牛产一騂犊，有白毛于背，曰 解奉先 。
现代文：一年多，奉先就死了。他死了以后，王家的母牛就产下了一头红色的小牛，在背上还长有白毛，像 解奉先 的字形。
English: After he died, the Wang family's cow gave birth to a red calf, with white hair growing on its back, like the glyph of Xie Bongxian.

古文：观者日夕如市焉。
现代文：观看的人从早到晚络绎不绝，就象市场一样热闹。
English: People watching from morning to night are endless, just as lively as the market.

古文：童安玗
现代文：童安玗
English: Tong An Estate

古文：唐大中末，信州贵溪县乳口镇有童安玗者，乡里富人也。
现代文：唐室宗大中末年，信州贵溪县乳口镇有个叫童安玗的，是乡里有钱的人。
English: Toward the end of Tang Shuzong's junior high school years, there was a rich man in the village of Tong'anqiu, in the town of Niukou, Guixi County, Shinshu.

古文：初甚贫窭，与同里人郭珙相善，珙尝假借钱六七万，即以经贩，安玗后遂丰富。
现代文：当初很贫困，和同乡人郭珙要好，郭珙曾经借给他六七万钱。他就用这些钱来经营贩卖。
English: At first, he was very poor, but he was better off than his fellow villager, Guo Wei, who had lent him sixty or seventy thousand yuan. He used this money to run the business.

古文：及珙征所借钱，安玗拒讳之。
现代文：后来，他就成了乡里的富翁了。
English: Later, he became a wealthy man in the countryside.

古文：珙焚香告天曰： 童安玗背惠忘义，借钱不还，倘神理难诬，愿安玗死后作牛，以偿某。 
现代文：可是等郭珙向他讨要所借的那笔钱的时候，安玗不承认，拒绝给郭，郭珙气愤地烧香对天祷告说： 童安玗，忘恩负义，借钱不还。倘若上天有灵，希望安玗死后变成牛，来偿还我的债。 
English: However, when Guo Yao asked him for the money he had borrowed, An Yao did not acknowledge it and refused to give it to Guo. Guo Yao angrily burned incense and prayed to the heavens, saying, "Tong An Yao, you are ungrateful and do not pay back the money you borrowed. If there is a spirit in heaven, I hope that after An Yao's death, it will turn into a cow to pay off my debt."

古文：词甚恳苦，安玗亦绐言曰： 某若实负郭珙钱，愿死作一白牛，以偿珙债。 
现代文：言词特别虔诚恳切。安玗也用欺诈的言词说： 我如果真的欠郭珙的钱，愿死后变成一头白牛来偿还郭珙的债。 
English: His words were particularly pious and earnest. An Hao also used fraudulent words to say: If I really owe Guo Yao money, I would like to become a white cow after death to repay Guo Yao's debt.

古文：未逾月，安玗死。
现代文：没过一个月，安玗就死了。
English: Less than a month later, Anjun died.

古文：死后半年，珙家牸牛，生一白牯犊，左肋有黑毛，作字曰 童安玗 ，历历然。
现代文：他死后半年，郭珙家里的母牛产下了一头白色的小公牛。小牛的左肋下长着黑色的毛，清清楚楚地形成了 童安玗 三个字。
English: Half a year after his death, the cow in Guo Yan's family gave birth to a white calf. The black hair under the calf's left rib clearly formed the three characters "Tong An Xuan" (童安).

古文：远迩闻之，观者云集。
现代文：远近的人们听说了这件事，成群结队地跑来观看。
English: People from near and far heard about it and flocked to see it.

古文：珙遣人告报安玗妻，玗妻子并亲属等往视之，大以为耻，厚纳金帛，请收赎之。
现代文：郭珙派人告诉了安玗的妻子，他的妻子、孩子以及亲属们都前去看视，感到特别耻辱，愿用很高的价钱请求买回这头牛。
English: Guo Yao sent someone to tell Anyao's wife. Anyao's wife, children and relatives all went to see the cow. They felt particularly humiliated and were willing to ask for a high price to buy the cow back.

古文：郭珙愤其欺负，终不允许，以牛母并犊，别栏喂饲。
现代文：郭珙记恨安玗对他的欺骗，没有答应。就把母牛和小牛养在另一个牛栏里。
English: Guo Bingji hated Antao's deception and did not agree. He kept the cow and the calf in another corral.

古文：安玗家率童仆，持白梃劫取。
现代文：这时安玗家带着仆人，拿着木棍来抢劫。
English: At this time, the Anhui family took their servants and came to rob with wooden sticks.

古文：珙多置人守御，竟不能获。
现代文：郭珙就安排了很多人看守抵御。最终安玗家没有获得这头牛。
English: Guo Yao arranged for many people to guard and defend the cow. In the end, the Anyao family did not get the cow.

古文：刘自然
现代文：刘自然
English: Liu Zhengrong

古文：唐天佑中，秦州有刘自然者，主管义军桉。
现代文：唐昭宗天佑年间，秦州有个叫刘自然的人，主管义军案卷文书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Zhizhen in Qin Province who was in charge of the documents of the rebel army.

古文：因连帅李继宗点乡兵捍蜀，成纪县百姓黄知感者，妻有美发，自然欲之，谓知感曰： 能致妻发，即免是行。 
现代文：因为连帅李继宗要招集乡兵保卫四川，成纪县的老百姓，有个叫黄知感的，他的妻子长了一头的秀发，刘自然就想要它。他对黄知感说： 如果你能把妻子的头发拿来，我就免除你去当乡兵。 
English: Because the commander-in-chief, Li Jizong, wanted to call up local soldiers to defend Sichuan, the people of Chengji County, there was a man named Huang Zhixuan. His wife had grown a head of beautiful hair, and Liu naturally wanted it. He said to Huang Zhixuan: If you can bring your wife's hair, I will exempt you from being a local soldier.

古文：知感之妻曰： 我以弱质托于君，发有再生，人死永诀矣。君若南征不返，我有美发何为焉？ 
现代文：知感将此事告诉了妻子，他的妻子说： 我把自己微弱的身体都托付给你了，头发剪去还可以长出来，人如果死了，就永远不能再见了，你如果去南边打仗不能回来，我的头发再秀美又有什么用呢？ 
English: His wife said, "I have entrusted my weak body to you. If you cut my hair, it will grow back. If I die, I will never see you again. If you go to the south to fight, you won't be able to come back. What good is my beautiful hair?"

古文：言讫，揽发剪之，知感深怀痛愍，既迫于差点，遂献于刘。
现代文：说完，就搂起头发用剪刀把头发剪了下来，知感心里十分的痛悔和忧愁，又被征兵所逼迫，就只好将头发献给了刘自然。
English: Having said that, she pinned up her hair and cut it off with scissors. Feeling very remorseful and sad, and being persecuted by conscription, she had no choice but to give her hair to Liu Zhenru.

古文：知感竟亦不免繇戍，寻殁于金沙之阵，黄妻昼夜祷天号诉。
现代文：但是知感最终也没有免除彼征召，只好去当了乡兵。不久就在金沙之战中死去了。他的妻子昼夜对着天祷告，号哭着向苍天诉说此事。
English: However, Zhixuan did not exempt him from conscription in the end, and he had to become a villager. He soon died in the Battle of Jinsha. His wife prayed to heaven day and night, crying and crying to heaven about this.

古文：是岁，自然亦亡。
现代文：这一年，刘自然也死了。
English: This year, Liu naturally also died.

古文：后黄家牝驴，忽产一驹，左胁下有字，云 刘自然 。
现代文：后来黄家的一头母驴生下了一个驴驹，在左肋下写着字。是 刘自然 。
English: Later, a female donkey of the Huang family gave birth to a donkey colt, with the words "It's Liu Chieng" written under its left rib.

古文：邑人传之，遂达于郡守。
现代文：城里的人们把这件事传扬开去。于是被郡守知道了，郡守就把刘自然的妻子和孩子叫来辨认。
English: People in the city spread the news, and the county magistrate heard about it. The magistrate called Liu Nianren's wife and child to identify them.

古文：郡守召其妻子识认，刘自然长子曰： 某父平生好饮酒食肉，若能饮啖，即是某父也。 
现代文：刘自然的大儿子说： 我父亲一生喜欢喝酒吃肉，如果它能够饮酒吃肉，就是我的父亲。 
English: Liu Nian's eldest son said, "My father liked to drink alcohol and eat meat all his life. If it can drink alcohol and eat meat, it is my father."

古文：驴遂饮酒数升，啖肉数脔，食毕，奋迅长鸣，泪下数行。
现代文：郡守让人搬来了酒肉，结果那驴驹喝了好几升酒，吃了好多块肉。吃完，就兴奋得鸣叫起来，然后又流下了几行眼泪。
English: The county magistrate had the wine and meat brought in, and as a result, the donkey calf drank several liters of wine and ate many pieces of meat. After eating, he chirped with excitement and then shed a few tears.

古文：刘子请备百千赎之，黄妻不纳，日加鞭捶，曰： 犹足以报吾夫也。 
现代文：刘自然的儿子准备了百千钱请求买回这头小驴，但黄知感的妻子却不接受这个要求，并且每天用鞭子抽打它，说： 这足可以给我丈夫报仇了。 
English: Liu Nian's son prepared a hundred thousand money request to buy back the little donkey, but Huang Zhixuan's wife did not accept this request, and beat it with a whip every day, saying: This is enough to avenge my husband.

古文：后经丧乱，不知所终，刘子竟惭憾而死。
现代文：后来经过丧乱，也就不知道这头驴的下落了。刘自然的儿子后来也因惭愧遗憾而死了。
English: Later, after the tragedy, the whereabouts of the donkey was unknown. Liu Nian's son later died of shame and regret.

古文：李明府
现代文：李明府
English: Li Mingfu District

古文：唐前火井县令李明府，经过本县，馆于押司录事私第。
现代文：唐朝前火井县令李明府，经过本县，住在押司录事的私宅里。
English: Li Mingfu, the governor of Huai County before the Tang Dynasty, passed through this county and lived in the private home of the secretary.

古文：主人将设酒馔，欲刲一白羊，方有胎。
现代文：主人准备拿酒食招待他，想要杀一头白羊。
English: The owner was preparing to treat him to food and drink, and wanted to kill a white sheep.

古文：其夜李明府梦一素衣妇人将二子拜明府乞命，词甚哀切，李不测其由，云： 某不曾杀人。 
现代文：这头羊正怀了胎，那天晚上，李明府就梦见了一个穿着白色衣服的妇女带着两个小孩，跪拜在他的面前请求救命。说得非常悲哀恳切。李明府不知道是怎么回事，就说： 我不曾杀过人。 
English: That night, Li Mingfu had a dream about a woman dressed in white with two children, who knelt in front of him and begged for help. She spoke very sadly and earnestly. Li Mingfu didn't know what was going on, so he said, "I have never killed anyone."

古文：妇人哀祈不已。
现代文：那个妇人仍然苦苦地哀求，李明府从梦中醒来，想了一想，没有头绪，就又睡着了。
English: The woman was still pleading in pain. Li Mingfu woke up from his dream, thought for a while, had no clue, and then fell asleep again.

古文：李睡觉，思惟无端倪，又寝，复梦前妇人乞命，称 某命在须臾，忍不救也。 
现代文：接着又梦见了先前梦见的那个妇人乞求救命。并说： 我马上就要死了，你怎么忍心不救我呢？ 
English: And I dreamed again, and behold, the woman of my dream was pleading for her life, saying, "I am about to die. How can you refuse to save me?"

古文：李竟不谕其意，但惊怛不已。
现代文：李时府竟然不明白她的意思。只是惊怕悲苦得不得了。
English: Li Shifu didn't understand what she meant. He was just so shocked and saddened.

古文：再寝，又梦前妇人曰： 长官终不能相救，某已死讫，然亦偿债了。
现代文：接着就又睡着了。又梦见那个妇人说： 长官，你最终不能救我了，我已经死了，这样也算我偿还欠债了。
English: Then I fell asleep again, and dreamed that the woman said to me, "Sir, you can't save me after all, I'm dead, and I've paid my debt."

古文：某前身即押司录事妻，有女仆方妊，身怀二子，时某嫉妒，因笞杀之，绐夫云： 女仆盗金钗并盒子，拷讯致毙。 
现代文：我的前身是押司录事的妻子，有个女佣人有了孕是双胎，当时我很嫉妒她，就用竹板子把她打死了。我欺骗我的丈夫说： 女佣人偷了金钗和盒子，我拷打讯问她，将她打死了。 
English: My predecessor was the wife of a secretary, there was a maid who was pregnant with twins, at that time I was jealous of her and beat her to death with a bamboo board. I lied to my husband and said: The maid stole the gold ingot and the box, I tortured and interrogated her and beat her to death.

古文：今获此报，然已还其冤债。
现代文：现在我得到了这样的报应，也算还清了她的冤枉债。
English: Now that I have received such retribution, I have also paid off her unjust debt.

古文：其金钗并盒子，在堂西拱枓内。为某告于主人，请不食其肉，为作功德。 
现代文：那金钗和盒子在堂的拱枓里，替我告诉主人，请求不要吃我的肉，这也算是很大的功德。 
English: The gold ingot and the box are in the vault of the hall. It is a great merit to tell my master for me and ask him not to eat my flesh.

古文：李惊起，召主人诘曰： 君刲一白羊耶？
现代文：李明府被吓醒了，把主人叫来追问说： 你杀了一只白羊吗？
English: Li Mingfu was startled awake and called his master to ask: Did you kill a white sheep?

古文：有双羔否？ 
现代文：有没有两个羊羔。 
English: Are there two lambs?

古文：曰： 是。 具话夜来之梦，更叹异。
现代文：主人说： 是杀了一只白羊，从肚里取出了两个羊焦。 
English: The owner said, "I killed a white sheep and took out two scorch marks from its belly.

古文：及寻拱枓内，果得二物。
现代文：这时李明府就把晚上做梦的事全都告诉了主人。
English: At this time, Li Mingfu told his master everything about his dream that night.

古文：乃取羊埋之，为作功德追荐焉。
现代文：大家都非常感叹并惊异。等到拱枓里一找，果然在那里找到了金钗和盒子，于是就把羊给埋掉了，并作道场来追荐。
English: Everyone was very impressed and surprised. When they looked in the vault, they found the gold ingot and box, so they buried the sheep and recommended it as a dojo.

古文：刘钥匙
现代文：刘钥匙
English: Liu Key

古文：陇右水门村有店人曰刘钥匙者，不记其名。
现代文：陇右水门村，有个开店的人叫刘钥匙，不记得他的名字了。
English: In Shuimen Village on the right bank of the Yangtze River, there is a man who opened a store called Liu Key, but I can't remember his name.

古文：以举债为家，业累千金，能于规求，善聚难得之货，取民间资财，如秉钥匙，开人箱箧帑藏，盗其珠珍不异也，故有 钥匙 之号。
现代文：他以放高利贷为业。家里积累千金。很能钻营，关于聚集一些难得的货物，搜取民间的资财，就好象拿着钥匙打开人家的箱子和钱匣，来盗取珠宝珍品一样方便，所以就有了钥匙的称号。
English: He is in the business of loan sharking. He accumulates a lot of money at home. He is very good at burglary. In terms of gathering rare goods and searching for private wealth, it is as convenient as taking a key to open someone's box and money box to steal precious jewels, so he has the title of key.

古文：邻家有殷富者，为钥匙所饵，放债与之，积年不问。
现代文：他的邻居有个很有钱的人，被刘钥匙所迷惑，就借了他的钱，多少年来他也不提起这件事。
English: His neighbour, a very rich man, was bewitched by Liu Kechuang and borrowed money from him. For many years, he did not mention the incident.

古文：忽一日，执券而算之，即倍数极广。
现代文：忽然有一天，钥匙拿着借债的凭据向此人讨债，结果比原来借的钱数增加了好几倍。
English: All of a sudden, one day, I went to collect the debt from this person with the key and the proof of the loan, and the result was that the amount of money I had borrowed had increased several times over.

古文：既偿之未毕，即以年系利，略无期限，遂至资财物产，俱归 钥匙 ，负债者怨之不已。
现代文：一时还不完就以年计算利息，无限期地继续盘剥，终于把所有的资财和物产都归给了刘钥匙。借债的人怨恨得不得了。
English: He calculated the interest in terms of years without stopping for a moment, continued to rob the bank indefinitely, and finally returned all the assets and property to Liu Keji. The borrower was extremely resentful.

古文：后 钥匙 死，彼家生一犊，有钥匙姓名，在膁肋之间，如毫墨书出。
现代文：后来刘钥匙死了，借债那家养的母牛生下了一个牛犊，在膁骨和肋骨之间有刘钥匙的姓名，就象用笔墨写上的一样，被债家用鞭打使役的没有完整的皮肤。
English: Later, Liu Key died, and the debt-borrowed family cow gave birth to a calf, with Liu Key's name between the shinbone and ribs, as if written with pen and ink. The debtors whipped the servant without a complete skin.

古文：乃为债家鞭棰使役，无完肤， 钥匙 妻男广，以重货购赎之，置于堂室之内，事之如生。及毙，则棺敛葬之于野，葢与刘自然之事仿佛矣。此则报应之道，其不诬矣。
现代文：钥匙的妻子和儿子刘广，拿很多的钱把它买了回来，放在屋里，象刘钥匙活着那样精心地喂养着。等到死了，就装了棺材埋葬在荒野之中。这个故事和刘自然的故事差不多，也是因果报应的道理，决不是瞎说。
English: Key's wife and son, Liu Guang, took a lot of money to buy it back, put it in the house, and fed it as carefully as Liu Key did when he was alive. When he died, he was buried in a coffin in the wilderness. This story is similar to Liu's natural story, and it is also the principle of karma. It is by no means nonsense.

古文：上公
现代文：上公
English: Shangguo

古文：宜春郡东安仁镇有齐觉寺，寺有一老僧，年九十余，门人弟子有一二世者，彼俗皆只乎为 上公 ，不记其法名也。
现代文：宜春郡东安仁镇有座齐觉寺，寺内有个老和尚已经九十多岁了。他的门人弟子有一两代，因此不管是僧家还是俗家，都称呼他是 上公 ，不记得他的法名了。
English: There is a Jijie Temple in Donganren Town, Yichun County. There is an old monk in the temple who is more than 90 years old. There are one or two generations of his disciples, so both monks and laymen call him Shangguo, but they can't remember his Dharma name.

古文：其寺常住庄田，孳畜甚多。
现代文：寺院在常住有庄田，繁殖了不少牲畜。
English: The temple has a permanent residence in Shoda, and has bred a lot of livestock.

古文：上公偶一夜，梦见一老姥，衣青布之衣，拜辞而去，云： 只欠寺内钱八百。 
现代文：上公有一天晚上梦见了一个老太婆，穿着青布的衣服，向他拜了一拜，就告辞而去了。临走还说： 只欠寺院八百钱。 
English: One night, his father-in-law dreamed of an old woman, dressed in blue cloth, who bowed to him for a while and then left, saying, "I only owe the temple eight hundred coins."

古文：上公觉而异之，遂自取笔写于寝壁，同住僧徒亦无有知之者。
现代文：上公醒来，认为此事很奇怪，就拿起笔把这件事写在卧室的墙壁上。和他住在一起的徒弟们，也都不知道这件事。
English: When the father-in-law woke up, he thought it was very strange, so he took a pen and wrote about it on the wall of his bedroom. The apprentices who lived with him did not know about it either.

古文：不三五日后，常住有老牸牛一头，无故而死，主事僧于街市鬻之，只酬钱八百。
现代文：没过三五天，常住庄田有一头老母牛不知什么原因死了，管事的和尚就到街上把它卖了。
English: Not more than three or five days later, there was an old cow in the village of Shoda that had died for unknown reasons, and the monk in charge went to the street to sell it.

古文：如是数处，不移前价。
现代文：买主只给八百钱，因此去了好多地方，都给这个价钱。
English: The buyer only gave 800 yuan, so I went to many places and they all gave this price.

古文：主事僧具白上公云： 常住牛死，欲货之，屠都数辈，皆酬价八百。
现代文：管事的和尚就将这种情况全都回报了上公说： 常住的牛死了，想把它卖掉，屠户很多，全都给八百钱。 
English: The monk who was in charge of the situation reported the whole situation back to the shogun, saying: The resident cow died and they want to sell it. There are many butchers, and they all want to pay 800 yuan.

古文：上公叹曰： 偿债足矣。 
现代文：上公叹息说： 偿还了欠债就足够了。 
English: Shangguan sighed and said: It is enough to have paid off the debt.

古文：遂令主事僧入寝所，读壁上所题处，无不嗟叹。
现代文：于是就叫管事的和尚进到他的卧室，读了他在墙壁上所写的字，读后都感叹万分。
English: So he asked the monk in charge to go into his bedroom and read the words he had written on the walls.

古文：施汴
现代文：施汴
English: Shi Yan

古文：庐州营田吏施汴，尝恃势夺民田数十顷，其主退为其耕夫，不能自理。
现代文：卢州营田吏施汴，曾经依仗势力夺取老百姓的田地好几十顷，田主生活没有着落，只好给他当长工。
English: Luzhou Ying Tian Li Shih, once relied on military forces to seize dozens of hectares of farmland from the common people. The farmer's life was not settled, so he had to give him a job as a longshoreman.

古文：数年，汴卒。
现代文：过了几年施汴死了。
English: A few years later, Shi Xuan died.

古文：其田主家生一牛，腹下有白毛，方数寸，既长，稍斑驳，不逾年，成 施汴 字，点画无缺。
现代文：那田主的家里的母牛生下了一头小牛，肚子底下长着白毛，有几寸见方。等长大以后就出现了杂色的毛，不到一年的时间，竟变成了 施汴 两个字，一笔一划都不缺。
English: The cow in the home of the owner of the field gave birth to a calf, with white hair growing under the belly, a few inches square. When it grew up, it appeared mixed-colored hair, and in less than a year, it turned into two words, not missing a stroke.

古文：道士邵修默，亲见之。
现代文：有个叫邵修默的道士亲眼看见过。
English: A Taoist named Shao Shumo saw it with his own eyes.

古文：公乘通
现代文：公乘通
English: Public transport

古文：渚宫有民公乘通者，平生隐匿，人或难知。
现代文：渚宫有个居民叫公乘通的，一生隐藏奸邪，所以人们很难知道。
English: There is a resident of Nagisa Palace called Gongsheng Tong, who hides his treachery all his life, so it is difficult for people to know about it.

古文：死后，湖南民家生一黑驴驹，白毛作 荆南公乘通 字。
现代文：他死了以后，湖南有个老百姓的家里就生了一头黑色的驴驹，它身上长了些白毛显示 荆南公乘通 几个字。
English: After he died, a black donkey calf was born in the home of a commoner in Hunan Province. It had some white hair on its body, displaying the words "Jingnan Gongzhengtong."

古文：其子孙闻之怀耻，竟不能寻赎，江陵人知之。
现代文：公乘通的子孙们听说了这件事，感到非常的耻辱。可是竟然没能寻找到那头驴驹把它买回来。江陵的人们都知道这件事。
English: The descendants of the public transport pass heard about this and felt very ashamed. However, they couldn't find the donkey and bought it back. People in Gangneung all know about this.

古文：僧审言
现代文：僧审言
English: Monk-councillor

古文：云顶山慈云寺，四方归辏，供食者甚厚。
现代文：云顶山有个慈云寺，四面八方的人都到这里进香，供奉寺院东西的人特别多。
English: There is a Jiyun Temple on Mount Genting. People from all over the world come here to burn incense, and there are especially many people who offer things to the temple.

古文：寺主僧审言，性贪鄙，欺隐本寺施财，饮酒食肉，畜养妻子，无所不为。
现代文：寺院里的主持叫审言，他生性贪婪卑鄙，欺骗隐藏人们施舍给寺院的财物，每日喝酒吃肉，还娶老婆、生儿子，真是无所不为。
English: The head of the temple is called the judge. He is greedy and mean by nature. He cheats and hides the money that people give to the temple. He drinks alcohol and eats meat every day. He also married a wife and had a son. He really can do anything.

古文：僧众稍孤洁者，必遭凌辱。
现代文：和尚当中如果有稍稍的孤傲和洁身自好的人，一定要遭到他的欺凌和侮辱。
English: If there is the slightest bit of arrogance and self-righteousness among the monks, they are sure to be bullied and insulted by him.

古文：一旦疾笃，自言见空中绳悬一石臼，有鼠啮之，绳断，正中其心，大叫气绝。
现代文：有一天的早晨，他突然得了重病，自己说看见空中有一条绳子上吊着一个石臼，有个老鼠咬那根绳子，绳子断了，石臼落下正好打在他的心口上，他大叫了一声就断了气。
English: One morning, he suddenly fell seriously ill. He said that he saw a millstone hanging from a rope in the sky. A mouse bit the rope. The rope broke. The falling millstone hit him right in the heart. He cried out and died.

古文：久而复苏，如此数十度，方卒。
现代文：很长时间又苏醒过来。象这样的有几十回，最后才死了。
English: It took a long time for him to wake up again. He did this dozens of times before finally dying.

古文：逾年，寺下村中牛生一犊，腹下分明有 审言 二字。
现代文：过了一年，寺院下边的村子里有一头牛，生了一个小牛犊，肚子下面清清楚楚的有 审言 两个字。
English: A year later, a cow in the village below the temple gave birth to a calf with the word "Shugen" clearly written on its belly.

