古文：铫期字次况，颍川郏人也。
现代文：铫期字次况，颍川郡郏县人。
English: 期字次况, 川郡县人.

古文：长八尺二寸，容貌绝异，矜严有威。
现代文：身长八尺二寸，容貌非常奇异，庄重严肃有威风。
English: He is eight feet two inches tall, his appearance is very strange, solemn and dignified.

古文：父猛，为桂阳太守，卒，期服丧三年，乡里称之。
现代文：父铫猛，是桂阳太守，死后，铫期为其服丧三年，乡里都称赞他。
English: My fierce father was the governor of Guiyang. After his death, he was mourned for three years, and the villagers all praised him.

古文：光武略地颍川，闻期志义，召署贼曹掾，从徇蓟。
现代文：光武掠地颍川，听说铫期颇有志义，召来任署贼曹掾，跟从攻蓟。
English: Guangwu swept across the Li River, and was said to have been quite ambitious during the siege, summoning the appointed thief Cao Pi to follow him.

古文：时，王郎檄书到蓟，蓟中起兵应郎。
现代文：当时王郎檄书到蓟，蓟中起兵响应王郎。
English: At that time, Wang Lang's imperial edict arrived at the capital, and the soldiers in the capital responded to Wang Lang.

古文：光武趋驾出，百姓聚观，喧呼满道，遮路不得行，期骑马奋戟，瞋目大呼左右曰 跸 ，众皆披靡。
现代文：光武车驾趋出，百姓聚集围观，喧呼挤满了道途，车驾不能通行，铫期骑马奋举手中戟，怒目大叫左右 警卫 ，观众纷纷退避。
English: Light armored cars were coming out, people gathered around to watch, the road was crowded with noise, cars could not pass, people on horseback raised their fists during the rush hour, guards shouted angrily, and spectators retreated one after another.

古文：及至城门，门已闭，攻之得出。
现代文：到城门时，门已关闭，攻破城门而出。
English: When they arrived at the gate, it was already closed. They broke through the gate and left.

古文：行至信都，以期为裨将，与傅宽、吕晏俱属邓禹。
现代文：行到信都，以铫期为裨将，与傅宽、吕晏都属邓禹。
English: If you go to the capital of Xinyi, you will benefit from the rainy season, and Fu Kuan and Lv Ying are all from Deng Yu.

古文：徇傍县，又发房子兵。禹以期为能，独拜偏将军，授兵二千人，宽、晏各数百人。
现代文：攻旁县，又发房子兵，邓禹以铫期有能力，独拜偏将军，授给兵卒二千人，傅宽、吕晏各数百人。
English: In the attack on Binxian County, soldiers were also sent to the house. Deng Yu, who had the ability to be a general, awarded two thousand soldiers, hundreds of Fu Kuan and Lv Ying.

古文：还言其状，光武甚善之。
现代文：回后向光武报告情况，光武很称赞。
English: After returning, he reported the situation to Guangwu, who was very complimentary.

古文：使期别徇真定宋子，攻拔乐阳、槁、肥累。
现代文：使铫期另攻真定宋子，攻下了乐阳、高禾、肥各县地。
English: He made another attack on Zhending Songzi during the Warring States period, and conquered the counties of Leyang, Gaohe, and Fei.

古文：从击王郎将皃宏、刘奉于巨鹿下，期先登陷陈，手杀五十余人，被创中额，摄帻复战，遂大破之。
现代文：跟从邓禹击王郎将儿宏、刘奉于钜鹿下，铫期先登攻陷敌阵，手杀五十多人，额部被创，用头巾裹伤再战，于是大破敌军。
English: Following Deng Yu's attack on Wang Lang, General Erhong and Liu Bongyu marched to the foot of the elk. They were the first to attack and capture the enemy's camp, killed more than fifty people by hand, were wounded in the forehead, and were wrapped in headscarves to fight again, thus defeating the enemy army.

古文：王郎灭，拜期虎牙大将军。
现代文：王郎灭后，拜铫期为虎牙大将军。
English: After Wang Lang's death, he became the General of the Tiger's Teeth during the intercession period.

古文：乃因间说光武曰： 河北之地，界接边塞，人习兵战，号为精勇。
现代文：于是乘机对光武说： 河北之地，与边塞接界，人们习兵战，号称精锐勇敢。
English: So he took the opportunity to say to Guangwu: In the land of Hebei, bordering the frontier fortress, people are accustomed to war and are known as the elite and brave.

古文：今更始失政，大统危殆，海内无所归往。
现代文：现在更始失败，汉的大统处于危急之中，海内无所归往。
English: Now it has failed again, the Han dynasty is in a critical situation, and there is nowhere to go.

古文：明公据河山之固，拥精锐之众，以顺万人思汉之心，则天下谁敢不从？ 光武笑曰： 卿欲遂前跸邪？ 时，铜马数十万众入清阳、博平，期与诸将迎击之，连战不利，期乃更背水而战，所杀伤甚多。
现代文：明公据河北山河之固，拥精锐之众，以顺万人思汉之心，那么天下谁敢不从？ 光武笑着说 ：你想像以前一样大呼警吗？ 当时铜马数十万众进入清阳、博平，铫期与诸将迎击，连战不利，铫期就更加背水而战，杀伤敌甚多。
English: According to Ming Gong, the mountains and rivers of Hebei are firmly entrenched, with the elite of the people, with the hearts of all people thinking of Han, so who in the world would dare not to follow? Guangwu smiled and said: Do you want to call out the alarm as before? At that time, hundreds of thousands of bronze horses entered Qingyang and Boping, and met with the generals during the flood season. The battle was unfavorable, and the flood season was more difficult to fight, and there were many enemy casualties.

古文：会光武救至，遂大破之，追至馆陶，皆降之。
现代文：恰逢光武救兵到，于是大破敌军，追到馆陶，铜马都投降了。
English: When Guangwu's rescuers arrived, they defeated the enemy army and chased it to Guentao. The bronze horses all surrendered.

古文：从击青犊、赤眉于射犬，贼袭期辎重，期还击之，手杀伤数十人，身被三创，而战方力，遂破走之。
现代文：跟从击青犊、赤眉于射犬，贼兵袭击铫期辎重，铫期还击，亲手杀伤数十人，身上有三处受了伤，而他继续苦战，于是破敌并将其驱走。
English: He followed the blue-bearded, red-browed and dog-shooting, and the robber soldiers attacked him heavily during the battle, and he fought back during the battle, killing and wounding dozens of people with his own hands, and he was wounded in three places, and he continued to fight hard, so he defeated the enemy and drove it away.

古文：光武即位，封安成侯，食邑五千户。
现代文：光武即位，封为安成侯，食邑五千户。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, he was given the title of Ancheng Hou, with 5,000 households in the county.

古文：时，檀乡、五楼贼入繁阳、内黄，又魏郡大姓数反复，而更始将卓京谋欲相率反邺城。帝以期为魏郡太守，行大将军事。
现代文：当时檀乡、五楼贼进入繁阳、内黄、又魏都大姓几次反覆，而更始将卓京，正策划相率反于邺城，帝以铫期为魏郡太守，行使大将军事务。
English: At that time, Dangxiang, the Fifth Floor Thief entered the prosperous sun, the Inner Yellow, and the Wei all repeated the surname several times, and the beginning will be Zhuojing, is planning the phase ratio against the Lucheng, the emperor will be the governor of Wei County in the Lucheng period, and will exercise the general affairs.

古文：期发郡兵击卓京，破之，斩首六百余级。
现代文：铫期发郡兵攻击卓京，攻破，斩首六百余级。
English: During the Warring States period, the county soldiers attacked Zhuojing, broke through, and beheaded more than 600 people.

古文：京亡入山，追斩其将校数十人，获京妻子。
现代文：卓京奔到山中，铫期追斩其将校数十人，俘获了卓京妻子儿女。
English: Zhuo Jing ran to the mountains, chased and killed dozens of his officers, and captured Zhuo Jing's wife and children.

古文：进击繁阳、内黄，复斩数百级，群界清平。
现代文：又进击繁阳、内黄，又斩首数百级，郡界清平。
English: They also attacked Shanyang and Neihuang, and beheaded hundreds of people. The county was completely leveled.

古文：督盗贼李熊，邺中之豪，而熊弟陆谋欲反城迎檀乡。
现代文：督盗贼李熊，是邺中豪强，李熊弟李陆想策划城中谋反以迎檀乡。
English: The thief-in-chief, Li Xiong, is the most powerful man in the country. Li Xiong's younger brother, Li Lu, wants to plot against the city and welcome the country.

古文：或以告期，期不应，告者三四，期乃召问熊。
现代文：有的人报告铫期，铫期不应，告三四次，铫期就召问李熊。
English: Some people reported that it was too late, that it should not be too late, three or four times, and then summoned Li Xiong.

古文：熊叩头首服，愿与老母俱就死。
现代文：李熊叩头自首服罪，愿与老母就死。
English: Li Xiong kowtowed and turned himself in to serve his sentence. He was willing to die with his mother.

古文：期曰： 为吏傥不若为贼乐者，可归与老母往就陆也。 使吏送出城。
现代文：铫期说： 做官吏如果比不上做贼快乐，你可以与老母回到李陆那里去。 派官吏送他出城。
English: "If being a government official is not as happy as being a thief, you and your mother can go back to Li Lu and have the officials escort him out of the city," he said.

古文：熊行求得陆，将诣邺城西门。
现代文：李熊出走求见李陆，将到达邺城西门。
English: Li Xiong left to meet Li Lu and will arrive at the West Gate of Handan City.

古文：陆不胜愧感，自杀以谢期。
现代文：李陆不胜惭愧感激，就自杀以谢铫期。
English: Li Lu was so ashamed and grateful that he committed suicide to show his gratitude.

古文：期嗟叹，以礼葬之，而还熊故职。
现代文：铫期嗟叹，以礼安葬，而恢复李熊原来职务。
English: He was buried with full military honors, and Li Xiong was restored to his former position.

古文：于是郡中服其威信。
现代文：于是魏郡中都心服其威信。
English: As a result, the people of Wei County all obeyed his authority.

古文：建武五年，行幸魏郡，以期为太中大夫。
现代文：建武五年，光武行幸魏郡，以铫期为太中大夫。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, Guangwu went to Xingwei County, and was promoted to Taizhong Doctor.

古文：从还洛阳，又拜卫尉。
现代文：跟从光武回洛阳，又拜卫尉。
English: He followed Guangwu back to Luoyang and became a lieutenant.

古文：期重于信义，自为将，有所降下，未尝虏掠。
现代文：铫期重于信义，自从为将，常有降兵下城，但未尝虏掠百姓。
English: The siege period was more important than loyalty. Since then, there have been frequent troop withdrawals from the city, but they have not tried to plunder the people.

古文：及在朝廷，忧国爱主，其有不得于心，必犯颜谏诤。
现代文：在朝廷供职，忧国爱主，有不得不谏的事，必是犯颜诤谏。
English: Serving in the imperial court, worrying about the country and loving the Lord, there are things that have to be done, and they must be done.

古文：帝尝轻与期门近出，期顿首车前曰： 臣闻古今之戒，变生不意，诚不愿陛下微行数出。 帝为之回舆而还。
现代文：帝曾经轻身与期门进出，铫期在车驾前叩头说： 臣听说古今的警戒，事变往往生于不意之中，实在不愿陛下微行数出。 帝为之回车而还。
English: The emperor once entered and exited the gate with a light step, and bowed before the driver of the car, saying: "Minister, I have heard of the vigilance of ancient and modern times, events are often born unexpectedly, I really don't want to count out your majesty. The emperor returned to the car.

古文：十年卒，帝亲临襚敛，赠以卫尉、安成侯印绶，谥曰忠侯。
现代文：建武十年去世，帝亲临赠送死者衣物，赠以卫尉、安成侯印绶，谥封为忠侯。
English: When Emperor Jianwu died ten years later, the emperor himself came to present the clothes of the deceased, and presented him with the title of guardsman, the seal of Ancheng marquis, and the seal of loyal marquis.

古文：子丹嗣。
现代文：子铫丹嗣位。
English: He is succeeded by his son, Li Dan.

古文：复封丹弟统为建平侯。
现代文：又封铫丹弟铫统为建平侯。
English: In addition, all of them were awarded the title of Jianping.

古文：后徒封丹葛陵侯。
现代文：后来徙封铫丹为葛陵侯。
English: Later, he was given the title of Ge Ling Hou.

古文：丹卒，子舒嗣。
现代文：铫丹去世，子铫舒嗣。
English: Shidan died, and his son Shuji succeeded him.

古文：舒卒，子羽嗣。
现代文：铫舒去世，子铫羽嗣。
English: Zou Shu passed away, and his son, Zou Han Zi, took over.

古文：羽卒，子蔡嗣。
现代文：铫羽去世，子姚蔡嗣。
English: Hao Yu passed away, and his son Yao Cai Ci took over.

古文：王霸字元伯，颍川颍阳人也。
现代文：王霸字元伯，颍川颍阳人。
English: Wangba is the character of Yuan Bo, and Lu Chuan is the character of Shenyang.

古文：世好文法，父为郡决曹掾，霸亦少为狱吏。
现代文：世代爱好法制，父亲为郡决曹掾，霸自己年轻时也为狱吏。
English: His generation loves the legal system. His father was the county judge Cao Wei, and when he was young, he was also a prison guard.

古文：常慷慨不乐吏职，其父奇之，遣西学长安。
现代文：时常感慨不乐于吏职，其父感到奇怪，派遣他西到长安学习。
English: His father was surprised and sent him west to study in Chang'an.

古文：汉兵起，光武过颍阳，霸率宾客上谒，曰： 将军兴义兵，窃不自知量，贪慕威德，愿充行伍。 光武曰： 梦想贤士，共成功业，岂有二哉！ 遂从击破王寻、王邑于昆阳，还休乡里。
现代文：汉兵兴起，光武过颍阳，王霸率领宾客去谒见，说： 将军兴义兵，我不知自量，贪慕将军威德，愿参加行伍。 光武说： 我梦想贤士，以共成功业，岂有两样！ 于是从光武击破王寻、王邑于昆阳，后在乡里休息。
English: The Han soldiers were on the rise, and Guangwu passed Poyang. Wang Bao led the guests to see him and said: General Xing Youyi, I don't know how to measure myself, I admire General Weide, I am willing to participate in the march. Guangwu said: I dream of sages, to achieve a successful career, can there be two! So from Guangwu, he defeated Wang Huan and Wang Yu in Kunyang, and then rested in the countryside.

古文：及光武为司隶校尉，道过颍阳，霸请其父，愿从。
现代文：等到光武为司隶校尉，道过颍阳，王霸请示其父，希望跟从光武。
English: When Guangwu was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, Wang Ba asked his father to follow Guangwu.

古文：父曰： 吾老矣，不任军旅，汝往，勉之！ 霸从至洛阳。
现代文：其父说： 我老了，不能胜任军旅，你去，好好干吧！ 王霸跟光武到洛阳。
English: His father said, "I am too old to be in charge of the military expedition, you go, do a good job! Wang Ba and Guangwu went to Luoyang.

古文：及光武为大司马，以霸为功曹令史，从度河北。
现代文：等到光武为大司马，就以王霸为功曹令史，从渡河北。
English: When Guangwu became the grand steed, he took Wangba as a meritorious deed and crossed over to Hebei Province.

古文：宾客从霸者数十人，稍稍引去。
现代文：宾客跟从王霸的数十人，逐渐离去。
English: The guests gradually leave, followed by dozens of Wang Ba's followers.

古文：光武谓霸曰： 颍川从我者皆逝，而子独留。
现代文：光武对王霸说： 颍川跟从我的人都已离去，而你独留。
English: Guangwu said to Wangba, "All my followers in Luochuan have left, and you are the only one left.

古文：努力！
现代文：努力！
English: Work hard!

古文：疾风知劲草。 
现代文：疾风知劲草哩。 
English: The wind whistles through the grass.

古文：及王郎起，光武在蓟，郎移檄购光武。
现代文：王郎起兵时，光武在蓟，王郎移檄书悬赏捉拿光武。
English: When Wang Lang raised an army, Guangwu was at the castle, and Wang Lang sent a letter offering a reward to capture Guangwu.

古文：光武令霸至市中募人，将以击郎。
现代文：光武令王霸到市中招募人员，准备攻击王郎。
English: Guangwu ordered Wangba to go to the city to recruit people to attack Wangro.

古文：市人皆大笑，举手邪揄之，霸惭懅而还。
现代文：市人都大笑，举手揶揄嘲弄，王霸惭愧怯懦而回。
English: The townspeople laughed loudly, raised their handkerchiefs in mockery, and Wang Ba returned with shame and cowardice.

古文：光武即南驰至下曲阳。
现代文：光武立即南驰到下曲阳。
English: Guangwu immediately drove south to the lower Quyang.

古文：传闻王郎兵在后，从者皆恐。
现代文：传闻王郎兵在后，跟从的人都害怕。
English: Rumor has it that Wang Langbing is behind this, and his followers are afraid.

古文：及至虖沱河，候吏还白河水流澌，无船，不可济。
现代文：等到了滹沱河，侦察的官吏回来报告河水流动着冰块，无船只，不能渡过。
English: When they reached the Li River, the reconnaissance officers came back to report that the river was flowing with ice, there were no boats, and it was impossible to cross.

古文：官属大惧。
现代文：官属听到大惧。
English: The officials were greatly alarmed.

古文：光武令霸往视之。
现代文：光武令王霸去看看。
English: Guangwu ordered Wang Ba to go and have a look.

古文：霸恐惊众，欲且前，阻水，还即跪曰： 冰坚可度。 官属皆喜。
现代文：王霸恐怕惊吓了众人，想渡河，被阻于水，回来即诈称说： 冰坚可渡。 官属都欢喜。
English: I'm afraid that Wang Ba scared everyone. He wanted to cross the river, but was blocked by the water. When he came back, he pretended to say, "Ice is hard to cross." The officials were delighted.

古文：光武笑曰： 候吏果妄语也。 遂前。
现代文：光武笑着说 ：侦察的官吏果然是瞎说呢。 
English: Guangwu said with a smile, "The official of the reconnaissance is really talking nonsense."

古文：比至河，河冰亦合，乃令霸护度，未毕数骑而冰解。
现代文：于是往前。等到了河边，河冰也合拢了，就令王霸保护渡河，还剩数骑没过完河而河冰解冻了。
English: So we went ahead. When we reached the river, the river ice had also closed, so we asked Wangba to protect the crossing. There were still a few riders left to cross the river, but the river ice had thawed.

古文：光武谓霸曰： 安吾众得济免者，卿之力也。 霸谢曰： 此明公至德，神灵之祐，虽武王白鱼之应，无以加此。 光武谓官属曰： 王霸权以济事，殆天瑞也。 以为军正，爵关内侯。
现代文：光武对王霸说 ：安定部众使大军得以安全渡河的，是你的功劳啊。 王霸答谢说： 这是明公的至德，神灵的庇，虽是武王白鱼的感应，也比不上呢。 光武对官属们说 ：王霸因权诈以济事，真是天降之瑞啊。 以王霸为军正，爵关内侯。
English: Guangwu said to Wang Ba, "It is to your credit that the people of the Ministry of Stability enabled the large army to cross the river safely." Wang Ba replied, "This is the supreme virtue of Ming Gong, the protection of the gods, although it is the inspiration of King Wuchang, it is not comparable." Guangwu said to the officials and subordinates, "It is truly a heaven-sent blessing for Wang Ba to defraud the government and take advantage of the situation. To have Wang Ba as the commander-in-chief, the lord of Guanzhong."

古文：既至信都，发兵攻拔邯郸。
现代文：既到信都，发兵攻拔邯郸。
English: As soon as he arrived at the capital, he sent troops to attack and plunder it.

古文：霸追斩王郎，得其玺绶。封王乡侯。
现代文：王霸追斩王郎，得王郎印绶，封为王乡侯。
English: Wang Ha chased and beheaded Wang Rong, obtained Wang Rong's seal, and was given the title of Wang Xiang Hou.

古文：从平河北，常与臧宫、傅俊共营，霸独善抚士卒，死者脱衣以敛之，伤者躬亲以养之。
现代文：跟从平定河北，常与臧宫、傅俊共营，王霸独善于抚慰士卒，士卒死了脱自己的衣以安殓，伤了亲自为他们疗伤。
English: He followed the pacification of Hebei Province, and often fought alongside Gong Gong and Fu Jun. Wang Hao was very good at soothing soldiers. When soldiers died, he would take off his clothes to comfort them, and if they were injured, he would personally treat their injuries.

古文：光武即位，以霸晓兵爱士，可独任，拜为偏将军，并将臧宫、傅俊兵，而以宫、俊为骑都尉。
现代文：光武即位，以王霸懂军事爱护士兵，可独任，就拜他为偏将军，并率领臧宫、陈俊的兵马，而以臧宫、陈俊为骑都尉。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, Wang Ba, who understood military affairs and cared for soldiers, was given the sole responsibility. He was worshipped as a general, and led the soldiers and horses of Gongu and Chen Jun, with Gongu and Chen Jun as cavalry captains.

古文：建武二年，更封富波侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封王霸为富波侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Wangba was given the title of Fubao Hou.

古文：四年秋，帝幸谯，使霸与捕虏将军马武东讨周建于垂惠。
现代文：建武四年秋，光武驾幸谯，使王霸与捕虏将军马武东讨周建于垂惠。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Jianwu's reign, Guangwu went on a pleasure cruise, causing Wang He and the captive general Ma Wudong to discuss the construction of Tuli Hui.

古文：苏茂将五校兵四千余人救建，而先遣精骑遮击马武军粮，武往救之。
现代文：苏茂率领五校兵四千余人救援周建，而先派遣精锐骑兵遮击马武军粮，马武前往救护。
English: Su Mao led five school soldiers and more than 4,000 people to rescue Zhou Jian, and first dispatched elite cavalry to block Ma Wu's army rations, and Ma Wu went to the rescue.

古文：建从城中出兵夹击武，武恃霸之援，战不甚力，为茂、建所败。
现代文：周建从城中出兵夹击马武，马武依仗王霸的援助，作战不甚出力，被苏茂、周建所击败。
English: Zhou Jian dispatched troops from the city to attack Mawu. Mawu relied on the assistance of Wangba and did not make much effort in the battle. He was defeated by Sumo and Zhou Jian.

古文：武军奔过霸营，大呼求救。
现代文：马武军奔过王霸营地，大呼求救。
English: The Mabu troops ran past Wangba's camp, shouting for help.

古文：霸曰： 贼兵盛，出必两败，努力而已。 乃闭营坚壁。
现代文：王霸说： 贼兵强盛，出战必将两败，努力而已。 于是关闭营门坚壁而守。
English: Wang Ba said, "The robber soldiers are strong, and if they go to war, they are sure to lose twice, it's just a matter of effort." So he closed the gate of the camp and guarded it with a solid wall.

古文：军吏皆争之。
现代文：军吏都争着出战。
English: The military officials are all vying to go to war.

古文：霸曰： 茂兵精锐，其众又多，吾吏士心恐，而捕虏与吾相恃，两军不一，此败道也。
现代文：王霸说 ：苏茂兵很精锐，其部众又多，我们的官吏士卒心中恐惧，而捕虏将军与我军互相依仗，两军不一致，这是失败的道路。
English: Wang Ba said: "The Sumo soldiers are very elite, and their troops are numerous. Our officials and cadres have fear in their hearts, and the captured general and our army rely on each other. The two armies are not consistent. This is the road to failure."

古文：今闭营固守，示不相援，贼必乘胜轻进；捕虏无救，其战自倍。
现代文：现在闭营固守，表示出不相救援的姿态，贼兵必然乘胜轻进，捕虏将军眼见没有救援，必将加倍苦战。
English: Now they are holding fast to the closed camp, showing a posture of not wanting to be rescued. The thief soldiers will inevitably take advantage of the victory and advance lightly. If there is no rescue in the eyes of the captor general, the hard battle will be doubled.

古文：如此，茂众疲劳，吾承其弊，乃可克也。 茂、建果悉出攻武。合战良久，霸军中壮士路润等数十人断发请战。
现代文：这样，苏茂军众疲劳，我们攻其疲惫，就可战胜了。 苏茂、周建果然集中兵力攻马武，交战很久，王霸军中壮士路润等数十人截断头发请战。
English: In this way, we can defeat the fatigue of the Sumo army. Su Mao and Zhou Jian successfully concentrated their forces to attack Mabu, and the battle lasted for a long time. Dozens of strong men in Wangba's army, such as Lu Run, cut off their hair to fight.

古文：霸知士心锐，乃开营后，出精骑袭其背。
现代文：王霸知士卒心锐，就开营后门，出精骑袭击其背后。
English: Wang Bajishi, with a keen mind, opened the back gate of the camp and rode behind it.

古文：茂、建前后受敌，惊乱败走，霸、武各归营。
现代文：苏茂、周建前后受敌，惊乱败走，王霸、马武各归营。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian were defeated by the enemy and fled in panic. Wang Ba and Ma Wu returned to their respective camps.

古文：贼复聚众挑战，霸坚卧不出，方飨士作倡乐。
现代文：贼兵再聚众挑战，王霸坚壁不出，正饱飨士卒作歌舞乐会。
English: The robber soldiers gathered again to challenge the crowd, and Wang Ba did not come out of the wall. He was busy making a song and dance party.

古文：茂雨射营中，中霸前酒樽，霸安坐不动。
现代文：苏茂发箭如雨点一般射向营中，射中王霸面前的酒樽，王霸安坐不动。
English: Su Mao shot his arrows into the camp like raindrops, hitting the wine bottle in front of Wang Ba, who remained motionless.

古文：军吏皆曰： 茂前日已破，今易击也。 霸曰： 不然。
现代文：军吏们都说 ：苏茂前日吃了败仗，现在容易击破哩。 
English: The military officials all said, "Sumo was defeated the day before yesterday, so it's easy to defeat him now."

古文：苏茂客兵远来，粮食不足，故数挑战，以侥一切之胜。
现代文：王霸说 ：不然，苏茂兵远来，粮食不足，所以几次挑战，以求侥幸一时之胜。
English: Wang Ba said: Otherwise, the Sumo soldiers came from far away and there was not enough food, so they challenged several times in order to get a fluke victory.

古文：今闭营休士，所谓不战而屈人之兵，善之善者也。 茂、建既不得战，乃引还营。
现代文：我今闭营休士，正所谓是不战而屈人之兵，这是最好的战术哩。 苏茂、周建求战不得，就引军回营。
English: I am now retired from the army, and I am what is known as a soldier who fights without fighting, which is the best tactic. Su Mao and Zhou Jian had no choice but to fight, so they led their troops back to the camp.

古文：其夜，建兄子诵反，闭城拒之，茂、建遁去，诵以城降。
现代文：其夜，周建的侄子周诵造，闭住城门抵抗，苏茂、周建逃去，周诵举城投降王霸。
English: That night, Zhou Jian's nephew, Zhou Chiaozong, closed the city gate and resisted. Sumo and Zhou Jian fled, and Zhou Chiaozong surrendered the city to Wangba.

古文：五年春，帝使太中大夫持节拜霸为讨虏将军。
现代文：建武五年春，帝使太中大夫持符节拜王霸为讨虏将军。
English: In the spring of the 5th year of the Jianwu era, the emperor sent Tai Zhong Dafu to hold a festival to worship Wangba as the general who fought against the invaders.

古文：六年，屯田新安。
现代文：建武六年，屯田新安。
English: Jianwu six years, Tonden Xinan.

古文：八年，屯田函谷关。击荥阳、中牟盗贼，皆平之。
现代文：建武八年，屯田函谷关，击荥阳、中牟的盗贼，都平定了。
English: In the eighth year of the Jianwu era, the robbers of Tonden, Hantangguan, Zhiyang and Zhongmou were all defeated.

古文：九年，霸与吴汉及横野大将军王常、建义大将军朱祐、破奸将军侯进等五万余人，击卢芳将贾览、闵堪于高柳。
现代文：建武九年，王霸与吴汉及横野大将军王常、建义大将军朱祐、破奸将军侯进等五万多人，攻击卢芳将领贾览、闵堪于高柳。
English: In the ninth year of Jianwu, more than 50,000 people, including Wang Ba, Wu Han, Yokono Grand General Wang Chang, Jianyi Grand General Zhu Yu, and traitor-busting General Hou Jin, attacked Lu Fang's generals Jia Xiang and Xian Kan in Gaoliu.

古文：匈奴遣骑助芳，汉军遇雨，战不利。
现代文：匈奴派遣骑兵助卢芳，汉军遇到下雨，作战不利。
English: The Xiongnu dispatched cavalry to help Lu Fang, and the Han army encountered rain, which was unfavorable for the battle.

古文：吴汉还洛阳，令朱祐屯常山，王常屯涿郡，侯进屯渔阳。
现代文：吴汉回到洛阳，令朱祐屯兵常山，王常屯涿郡，侯进屯渔阳。
English: When Wu Han returned to Luoyang, he ordered Zhu Yu to garrison Changshan, Wang Chang to garrison Yunnan, and Hou Jin to garrison Yuyang.

古文：玺书拜霸上谷太守，领屯兵如故，捕击胡虏，无拘郡界。
现代文：玺书拜王霸为上谷太守，领屯兵一如过去，捕击胡虏，无拘于郡界。
English: Wanshu worshipped Wangba as the Kamitani Taishu, led the troops as in the past, and captured Huru, regardless of the county boundary.

古文：明年，霸复与吴汉等四将军六万人出高柳击贾览，诏霸与渔阳太守陈将兵为诸军锋。
现代文：第二年，王霸再与吴汉等四位将军以六万人出高柳击贾览，诏令王霸与渔阳太守陈讠斤率军为诸军前锋。
English: The following year, Wang Baza and four other generals, including Wu Han, sent 60,000 men to Gaoliu to attack Jiaxiang, and ordered Wang Baza and Yuyang Governor Chen Bingjin to lead the army as the vanguard of the army.

古文：匈奴左南将军将数千骑救览，霸等连战于平城下，破之，追出塞，斩首数百级。
现代文：匈奴左南将军率数千骑救贾览，王霸等与其连战于平城下，破敌兵，追击出塞，斩首数百级。
English: The Xiongnu Zuo Nan general led thousands of horsemen to rescue Jia Qian, Wang Ba and others fought with him at the foot of Pingcheng, defeated the enemy soldiers, chased them out, and beheaded hundreds of levels.

古文：霸及诸将还入雁门，与骠骑大将军杜茂会攻卢芳将尹由于崞、繁畤，不克。
现代文：王霸及诸将回入雁门，与骠骑大将军杜茂会攻卢芳将尹由于崞县、繁县，没有取得胜利。
English: Wang Ba and the generals returned to the Wild Goose Gate, and together with the cavalry general Du Mao, they attacked Lu Fang and the general Yin, but they did not achieve victory because they advanced to Min County and Shige County.

古文：十三年，增邑户，更封向侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加邑户，更封王霸为向侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, the number of villages was increased, and Wangba was given the title of Xianguo.

古文：是时，卢芳与匈奴、乌恒连兵，寇盗尤数，缘边愁苦。
现代文：这时，卢芳与匈奴、乌桓连兵，侵掠抢劫更频繁，边疆愁苦。
English: At this time, Lu Fang and the Xiongnu and Wu Huan Company soldiers invaded, plundered and robbed more frequently, and the frontier was troubled.

古文：诏霸将弛刑徒六千余人，与杜茂治飞狐道，堆石布土，筑起亭障，自代至平城三百余里。
现代文：诏令王霸率解除枷锁的刑徒六千余人，与杜茂治理飞孤道，堆石头布土方，筑起亭障，自代到平城三百多里。
English: Zhao ordered Wang Ba to lead more than six thousand prisoners who had been released from the shackles, and together with Du Mao, they ruled over isolated roads, piled up stones and earth, built pavilions, and traveled more than three hundred miles to Pingcheng.

古文：凡与匈奴、乌桓大小数十百战，颇识边事，数上书言宜与匈奴结和亲，又陈委输可从温水漕，以省陆转输之劳，事皆施行。
现代文：王霸共与匈奴、乌桓大大小小数十百战，颇识边防事务，几次上书说宜与匈奴和亲，又呈说运输可从温水漕运，以节省陆运转输之劳苦，这些都被采纳了。
English: Wang Baocong fought hundreds of battles with the Xiongnu and Wu Huan, large and small, and was quite knowledgeable about border defense affairs. He wrote several times that it was appropriate to make peace with the Xiongnu, and also suggested that transportation could be carried out from warm water tanks to save the labor of land operation. These were all adopted.

古文：后南单于、乌桓降服，北边无事。
现代文：后来南单于、乌桓归降了。北边安静无事。
English: Later, Nan Shan Yu and Wu Huan surrendered. The north side was quiet.

古文：霸在上谷二十余岁。
现代文：王霸在上谷二十多年。
English: Wang Ba has lived in Shanggu for more than 20 years.

古文：三十年，定封淮陵侯。
现代文：建武三十年，定封淮陵侯。
English: Jianwu was thirty years old, and was given the title of Huairing.

古文：永平二年，以病免，后数月卒。
现代文：永平二年。以病免职，后数月去世。
English: In the second year of Yongping, he was relieved of his duties due to illness, and died a few months later.

古文：子符嗣，徙封轪侯。
现代文：子王符嗣位，徙封为轶侯。
English: He was given the title of prince and heir to the imperial insignia, and his posthumous name was Shoko.

古文：符卒，子度嗣。
现代文：王符卒，子王度嗣位。
English: The king is the bearer of the imperial seal, and his son the heir to the throne.

古文：度尚显宗女浚仪长公主，为黄门郎。
现代文：王度娶显宗女浚仪长公主，为黄门郎。
English: Wang Du married the eldest daughter of Emperor Xian, Princess Jianyi, and became Huangmen Lang.

古文：度卒，子歆嗣。
现代文：王度卒，子王歆嗣位。
English: The king dies, the son becomes king.

古文：祭遵字弟孙，颍川颍阳人也。
现代文：祭遵字弟孙，是颍川颍阳人。
English: He is a descendant of the late Junji Matsuri and a descendant of the late Shinyo Hijikawa.

古文：少好经书。
现代文：年轻时喜爱经书。
English: When he was young, he loved scriptures.

古文：家富给，而遵恭俭，恶衣服。
现代文：家里富裕，而祭遵恭谨俭朴，不爱穿华丽衣服。
English: The family was wealthy, but Zai Zunong was prudent and frugal, and did not like to wear fancy clothes.

古文：丧母，负土起坟。
现代文：母死后，背土起坟。
English: After my mother's death, my mother's grave was dug up.

古文：尝为部吏所侵，结客杀之。
现代文：曾被衙吏欺凌，祭遵结交宾客杀了衙吏。
English: He had been bullied by the eunuchs, so he killed the eunuchs.

古文：初，县中以其柔也，既而皆惮焉。
现代文：起初，县中以为他柔弱，以后都害怕他了。
English: At first, the people in the county thought he was a weakling, and they have been afraid of him ever since.

古文：及光武破王寻等，还过颍阳，遵以县吏数进见，光武爱其容仪，署为门下史。
现代文：光武破了王寻等，回往颍阳，祭遵以县吏身份几次进见，光武喜爱他的容貌仪表，令他暂为门下吏。
English: After defeating Wang Huan and others, Guangwu went back to Fenyang, and met with Matsu Zun several times as a county official. Guangwu liked his appearance and appearance, so he temporarily became a subordinate official.

古文：从征河北，为军市令。
现代文：从征河北，为军市令。
English: He was conscripted to Hebei Province and became a military magistrate.

古文：舍中儿犯法，遵格杀之。
现代文：舍中儿犯了法，祭遵把他杀了。
English: The boy in the orphanage broke the law, and the priest killed him.

古文：光武怒，命收遵。
现代文：光武发怒，令将祭遵拘捕。
English: Enraged, Guangwu ordered the commander of the festival to be arrested.

古文：时，主簿陈副谏曰： 明公常欲众军整齐，今遵奉法不避，是教令所行也。 光武乃贳之，以为刺奸将军。
现代文：这时主簿陈副劝谏说： 明公常想要众军整齐，现在祭遵奉行法令不避权势，正是教化法令所需要的哩。 光武就赦免了他，令他为刺奸将军。
English: At this time, Chen Zifu, the chief accountant, advised him, "Ming Gong always wanted to keep the army in order. Now, it is necessary to follow the law, execute the law, and not avoid the power. This is exactly what the edification law requires." Guangwu pardoned him and made him the assassin general.

古文：谓诸将曰： 当备祭遵！
现代文：对诸将说 ：对祭遵要多加小心！
English: To the generals, he said, "Be more careful when performing the ritual!"

古文：吾舍中儿犯法尚杀之，必不私诸卿也。 寻拜为偏将军，从平河北，以功封列侯。
现代文：我舍中儿犯法他照样杀了，对你们是绝不会徇私的。 不久又拜偏将军，跟从平定河北，以功封为列侯。
English: He still killed my son-in-law who violated the law, and he will never be selfish with you. Soon after, he bowed to the general, followed the pacification of Hebei, and took Gongfu as a vassal.

古文：建武二年春，拜征虏将军，定封颍阳侯。
现代文：建武二年春，拜为征虏将军，定封颍阳侯。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianwu's reign, he was appointed as the general of the conquest, and was given the title of the Marquis of Shenyang.

古文：与骠骑大将军景丹、建义大将军朱祐、汉忠将军王常、骑都尉王梁、臧宫等入箕关，南击弘农、厌新、柏华蛮中贼。
现代文：与骠骑大将军景丹、建义大将军朱祐、汉忠将军王常、骑都尉王梁、臧宫等入箕关，南击弘农、厌新、柏华蛮中贼。
English: With the cavalry general Jing Dan, the general Zhu Yu of Jianyi, the general Wang Chang of Han Zhong, the cavalry captain Wang Liang, the imperial palace and so on entering Shaoguan, the south attacked the peasants, the new-born, and the barbarian thieves of Baihua.

古文：弩中遵口，洞出流血，众见遵伤，稍引退，遵呼叱止之，士卒战皆自倍，遂大破之。
现代文：祭遵中了弩箭，伤口流血，众人看到祭遵受伤，逐渐引退，祭遵呼叫斥骂不止，士卒都加倍苦战，于是大破贼兵。
English: Zai Zun was hit by a crossbow, his wound was bleeding, everyone saw that Zai Zun was injured and gradually retired, Zai Zun shouted and cursed more and more, and the soldiers doubled their hard work, so they broke the thief soldiers.

古文：时，新城蛮中山贼张满，屯结险隘为人害，诏遵攻之。遵绝其粮道，满数挑战，遵坚壁不出。
现代文：当时新城蛮中山贼张满，屯结兵士于险要之处为害人民，诏令祭遵去攻击，祭遵断绝了张满的粮道，张满几次挑战，祭遵坚守壁垒不出。
English: At that time, the mountain bandits in Xincheng were in full swing, the soldiers were encamped in critical places to harm the people, the Emperor ordered the festival to attack, the festival cut off Zhangman's food supply, Zhangman challenged several times, and the festival could not keep the barrier.

古文：而厌新、柏华余贼复与满合，遂攻得霍阳聚，遵乃分兵击破降之。
现代文：而厌新、柏华的残余重新与张满会合，于是攻下了霍阳聚，祭遵于是分兵予以击破迫其投降。
English: However, the remnants of the Xinxing and Baohua reunited with Zhang Man, and then captured Huoyangju, and then defeated the detachment of soldiers and forced it to surrender.

古文：明年春，张满饥困，城拔，生获之。
现代文：建武三年春，张满饥饿困倦，祭遵攻破其城，活捉张满。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianwu, Zhang Man was hungry and sleepy. So Zun attacked his city and captured Zhang Man alive.

古文：初，满蔡祀天地，自云当王，既执，叹曰： 谶文误我！ 乃斩之，夷其妻子。
现代文：起初，张满祭祀天地，自己说当为王，既被捉，叹道 ：谶文误了我！ 于是把他及其妻子儿女都斩了。
English: At first, Zhang Man offered sacrifices to heaven and earth, and said that he should be king. Once he was caught, he lamented, "Xi Wen has deceived me!" So he and his wife and children were all beheaded.

古文：遵引兵南击邓奉弟终于杜衍，破之。
现代文：祭遵引兵南击邓奉弟邓终于杜衍，攻破了。
English: Deng Bong's younger brother, Deng Duyan, finally broke through.

古文：时，涿郡太守张丰执使者举兵反，自称无上大将军，与彭宠连兵。
现代文：这时涿郡太守张丰捉住使者举兵造反，自称无上大将军，与彭宠连兵。
English: At this time, Zhang Feng, the governor of Qian County, captured the envoy and raised an army to rebel. He claimed to be the supreme general and joined forces with Peng Cai.

古文：四年，遵与朱祐及建威大将军耿弇、骁骑将军刘喜俱击之。
现代文：建武四年，祭遵与朱祐及建威大将军耿弇、骁骑将军刘喜共同攻击张丰。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, Saizong attacked Zhang Feng together with Zhu Yu and Jianwei generals Geng Yao and Liu Xi.

古文：遵兵先至，急攻丰，丰功曹孟厷执丰降。
现代文：祭遵兵先到，急攻张丰，张丰的功曹孟捉住张丰投降。
English: Zai Zun soldiers arrived first and attacked Zhang Feng in a hurry. Zhang Feng's hero Cao Meng captured Zhang Feng and surrendered.

古文：初，丰好方术，有道士言丰当为天子，以五彩囊裹石系丰肘，云石中有玉玺。
现代文：起初，张丰喜好方术，有道士说张丰当做天子，以五彩囊裹着石头系在张丰的肘子上，说石中有玉玺。
English: At first, Zhang Feng was fond of magic. Some Taoists said that Zhang Feng should be regarded as the son of heaven. They wrapped a multicolored bag with a stone and tied it to Zhang Feng's elbow, saying that there was a jade bracelet in the stone.

古文：丰信之，遂反。
现代文：张丰相信了，就造反。
English: Zhang Feng believed it and rebelled.

古文：既执当斩，犹曰： 肘石有玉玺。 遵为椎破之，丰乃知被诈，仰天叹曰： 当死无所恨！ 诸将皆引还，遵受诏留屯良乡拒彭宠。
现代文：既被捉当斩，他还说： 肘有玉玺。 祭遵将其石椎破，张丰才知被道士骗了，仰天叹道： 当死无所恨！ 诸将都引回，祭遵受诏命留屯良乡抵拒彭宠。
English: As soon as he was caught and beheaded, he also said, "My elbow has a jade bracelet." So Zun broke his stone vertebrae. Zhang Feng only knew that he had been deceived by the Taoist, and he sighed to the heavens, "There is nothing to hate in death!" All generals were brought back, and So Zun was ordered by the emperor to stay in Tuen Liang Township to resist Peng Ji.

古文：因遣护军傅玄袭击宠将李豪于潞，大破之，斩首千余级。
现代文：因而派遣护军傅玄袭击彭宠部将李豪于潞，大破其军，斩首千余级。
English: As a result, Fu Xuan, the protector, was dispatched to attack Peng's favorite general, Li Hao Yuxuan, defeating his army and beheading more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：相拒岁余，数挫其锋，党与多降者。
现代文：相拒一年多，几次挫败其锋，彭宠党徒许多都投降。
English: After more than a year of resistance and several defeats, many of Peng Ji's followers surrendered.

古文：及宠死，遵进定其地。
现代文：等到彭宠死，祭遵进军以平定其地。
English: After Peng Jia's death, Saizong marched in to pacify the area.

古文：六年春，诏遵与建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延、汉忠将军王常、捕虏将军马武、骁骑将军刘歆、武威将军刘尚等从天水伐公孙述。
现代文：建武六年春，诏令祭遵与建威大将军耿弇、虎牙大将军盖延、汉忠将军王常、捕虏将军马武、骁骑将军刘歆、武威将军刘尚等从天水伐公孙述。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, the Emperor's edict festival was held, and the great generals of Jianwei, Geng Xi, Huya, Gai Yan, Han Zhong, Ma Wu, Huanqi, Liu Yu, and Wuwei, such as the grandson of Tianshui, were described.

古文：师次长安，时车驾亦至，而隗嚣不欲汉兵上陇，辞说解故。
现代文：军队停留长安，光武车驾也到了，而隗嚣不想让汉兵上陇，借故推脱以为辞说。
English: The army stopped in Chang'an, and Guangwu's chariot arrived, but Yan Yan didn't want to let the Han soldiers board the chariot, so he pretended to resign.

古文：帝召诸将议，皆曰： 可且延嚣日月之期，益封其将帅，以消散之。 遵曰： 嚣挟奸久矣。
现代文：光武召集诸将商议。都说 ：可以暂时拖延隗嚣日月之期，加封他手下的将帅，以促其分散瓦解。 祭遵说： 隗嚣怀挟奸谋已久。
English: Guangwu called the generals together for discussion. They all said, "It is possible to temporarily delay the period of Sun Yat-sen's tyranny, and to seal up the generals under his command in order to encourage them to disperse and disintegrate." Matsu Zun said, "It has been a long time since Sun Yat-sen's tyranny and plotting.

古文：今若按甲引时，则使其诈谋益深，而蜀警增备，固不如遂进。 帝从之，乃遣遵为前行。
现代文：现在如果按兵不动拖延时日，就会促使他诈谋更深，而使公孙述增加警备，所以不如直接进兵。 光武听从了，就派遣祭遵为先锋。
English: Now, if he were to procrastinate, it would only encourage him to be more deceptive, and cause his son-in-law to increase his vigilance, so it would be better to march directly into the army. Guangwu obeyed, and sent Zuo as the vanguard.

古文：隗嚣使其将王元拒陇坻，遵进击，破之，追至新关。
现代文：隗嚣派其将王元拒于陇坻，祭遵进击，破王元军，追到新关。
English: Yan Yan sent his troops to block Wang Yuan's advance, and they defeated Wang Yuan's army and chased them to Xinguan.

古文：及诸将到，与嚣战，并败，引退下陇。
现代文：等到诸将到，与隗嚣战，都失败了，引军退陇。
English: After waiting for the generals to arrive, the war with the rebels failed, and the troops were withdrawn.

古文：乃诏遵军汧、耿弇军漆，征西大将军冯异军栒邑，大司马吴汉等还屯长安。
现代文：光武诏令祭遵屯军于，令耿弇屯军于漆，令征西大将军冯异屯军于邑，令大司马吴汉等回军长安。
English: The Guangwu Emperor ordered the Zuntun Army to hold the festival, the Gengxun Army to hold the festival in Urushi, the Western General Feng Yitun Army to hold the festival in Yue, and the Major General Ma Wuhan to hold the festival in Chang'an.

古文：自是后，遵数挫隗嚣。
现代文：自此以后祭遵几次挫败隗嚣。
English: Since then, the festival has thwarted the riot several times.

古文：事已见《冯异传》。
现代文：事见《冯异传》。
English: For details, see "The Legend of Feng Ying."

古文：八年秋，复从车驾上陇。
现代文：建武八年秋，再从光武上陇。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of Jianwu, he was promoted from Guangwu.

古文：及嚣破，帝东归过汧，幸遵营，劳飨士卒，作黄门武乐，良夜乃罢。
现代文：等到隗嚣破灭，光武东归经过汧，到祭遵军营，慰劳饱飨士卒，作黄门武乐，深夜才停止。
English: Wait until the hullabaloo dies down, the Guangwu Donggui passes through the Yunnan, to the Shajun military camp, the soldiers are full of consolation, and the Yellow Gate martial music is made, and it will not stop until late at night.

古文：时，遵有疾，诏赐重茵，覆以御盖。
现代文：这时祭遵有病，诏赐厚厚的坐褥，上面覆盖着皇帝用的御盖。
English: At this time, the festival was in full swing, and the emperor gave a thick cushion, covered with the emperor's lid.

古文：复令进屯陇下。
现代文：再令他进兵陇下。
English: Then he was drafted into the army.

古文：及公孙述遣兵救嚣，吴汉、耿弇等悉奔还，遵独留不却。
现代文：等到公孙述派兵援救隗嚣，吴汉、耿弇等全都逃奔而回，只有祭遵独留不退却。
English: By the time Gongsun Sui sent troops to rescue the tumult, Wu Han, Geng Yao and others had all fled and returned, leaving only Zai Zunlu to hold out.

古文：九年春，卒于军。
现代文：建武九年春，在军中去世。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Kenmu, he died in the army.

古文：遵为人廉约小心，克己奉公，赏赐辄尽与士卒，家无私财，身衣韦裤，布被，夫人裳不加缘，帝以是重焉。
现代文：祭遵为人廉洁约束小心，克己奉公，所得赏赐常常尽数给予士卒，家里没有私人财产，身穿韦带布衤夸，盖布被，夫人的衣服不加彩，帝因此看重他。
English: The emperor valued him because he was a man of probity, restraint, self-restraint, and service to the state. The rewards he received were often given to his subordinates. The family had no private property. He wore a loincloth, a cloth cap, and a quilt. His wife's clothes were plain.

古文：及卒，愍悼之尤甚。
现代文：他死后，怜悯悼念尤甚。
English: When he died, the outpouring of sympathy and condolences was particularly strong.

古文：遵丧至河南县，诏遣百官先会丧所，车驾素服临之，望哭哀恸。
现代文：祭遵灵柩到河南县，帝诏遣百官先到治丧场所会齐，光武身着白色丧服驾临，望着哭泣哀恸。
English: When the funeral procession arrived in Henan County, the emperor sent hundreds of officials to the funeral site. Guangwu arrived wearing a white mourning dress, weeping and wailing.

古文：还幸城门，过其车骑，涕泣不能已。
现代文：回经城门，阅过丧车，涕泣不能自已。
English: I went back through the city gate, read the funeral car, and couldn't stop crying.

古文：丧礼成，复亲祠以太牢，如宣帝临霍光故事。
现代文：丧礼成，又亲自以太牢之礼祭祀，如宣帝办霍光丧事一样。
English: Funeral rites were made, and he personally performed the ethereal ritual, just as Emperor Xuan conducted the funeral of Emperor Huoguang.

古文：诏大长秋、谒者、河南尹护丧事，大司农给费。
现代文：诏大长秋、谒者、河南尹护丧事，大司农负责费用。
English: Zhao Dajia, Changqiu, Zou Zhe and Henan Yin Guo attended the funeral, and the farmer was responsible for the expenses.

古文：博士范升上疏，追称遵曰： 臣闻先王崇政，尊美屏恶。
现代文：博士范升上疏，追称祭遵说： 臣闻先王崇高的德政，尊崇美好，扌屏弃丑恶。
English: Ph.D. Fan Sheng Shang Shou, posthumous festival Zun Yu said: Subordinates listen to the noble virtue of the previous king, respect the beautiful, and reject the ugly.

古文：昔高祖大圣，深见远虑，班爵割地，与下分功，著录勋臣，颂其德美。
现代文：以前高祖大圣，深见远虑，分爵割地，与部下分功，把功臣的事迹记载在簿籍上，歌颂他们的美德。
English: In the past, Gao Zu Dasheng was far-sighted, he divided the land into peerages, shared the credit with his subordinates, recorded the deeds of the heroes in the books, and extolled their virtues.

古文：生则庞以殊礼，奏事不名，入门不趋。
现代文：在生时以特殊礼节以示宠爱，奏事免于报名，入门不必急走。
English: When you are a child, you can show your affection with special etiquette. You are not required to sign up for formal events, and there is no need to rush to get started.

古文：死则畴其爵邑，世无绝嗣，丹书铁券，传于无穷。
现代文：死了以后封以爵邑，令其无绝嗣位，又颁赐使其世世代代享受特权的契券，使其恩宠传于无穷。
English: After his death, he was granted a title of nobility, making him heirless, and he was also granted a deed of privilege for generations to come, so that his grace would be passed on to infinity.

古文：斯诚大汉厚下安人长久之德，所以累世十八，历载数百，废而复兴，绝而复续者也。
现代文：这是我大汉对功臣后代赐给的长久恩德，所以累及十多世，历数两百余年，废而复兴，绝了又为之续嗣。
English: This is the long-term grace bestowed by my great-grandfather on the descendants of heroes, so it has affected more than ten generations, with a history of more than two hundred years.

古文：陛下以至德受命，先明汉道，褒序辅佐，封赏功臣，同符祖宗。
现代文：陛下以至德而受命，光大先祖之道，依次表彰辅佐，封赏有功之臣，与祖宗的法度相符合。
English: His Majesty received the order with the highest virtue, followed the path of his ancestors, and commended the assistants in turn, and rewarded the meritorious vassals, which is in line with the laws of his ancestors.

古文：征虏将军颍阳侯遵，不幸早薨。
现代文：征虏将军颍阳侯祭遵，不幸早逝。
English: The conscript general, Shenyang Hou Saizong, unfortunately died early.

古文：陛下仁恩，为之感伤，远迎河南，恻怛之恸，形于圣躬，丧事用度，仰给县官，重赐妻子，不可胜数。
现代文：陛下仁恩，为之感伤，远迎河南。忧伤哀恸，表现于圣躬，治丧用度，由国家献给，重赐妻子儿女，不可胜数。
English: His Majesty's benevolence, sentimental about it, is far away from Henan. Sorrow and grief, manifested in prostration, funeral rites, dedicated by the state, and re-gifted to his wife and children, are countless.

古文：送死有以加生，厚亡有以过存，矫俗厉化，卓如日月。
现代文：送给死者有加于生者，厚赙亡者以慰抚亲属，矫正世俗振励教化，高如日月。
English: For the dead, there are gifts for the living, and for the dead, there are consolation for relatives, correction of the world, encouragement and enlightenment, which are as high as the sun and moon.

古文：古者臣疾君视，臣卒君吊，德之厚者也。
现代文：古时臣病了君来看望，臣死了君来吊丧，这是深厚的君德。
English: In ancient times, when a vassal fell ill, the vassal came to visit, and when a vassal died, the vassal came to mourn. This is a profound virtue.

古文：陵迟以来久矣。
现代文：但这种君德遭到破坏已很久了。
English: But that civility has long since been destroyed.

古文：及至陛下，复兴斯礼，群下感动，莫不自励。
现代文：陛下重新恢复这种仪礼，臣下都为之感动，莫不自相激励。
English: His Majesty's reinstatement of this ritual has moved all of his subjects, and they cannot help but encourage each other.

古文：臣窃见遵修行积善，竭忠于国，北平渔阳，西拒陇、蜀，先登坻上，深取略阳。
现代文：臣私下看到祭遵修行积善，竭忠于国，北上平定渔阳，西上抗拒陇、蜀，先登陇坻，深取略阳。
English: Privately, his vassals saw that he was good at performing the rituals and was loyal to the country. He went to the north to pacify Yuyang, to the west to resist Zhao and Shu, and to the south to conquer Xiaoyang.

古文：众兵既退，独守冲难。
现代文：各路兵马都退了，而他独留不退。
English: All the soldiers and horses retreated, but he did not retreat.

古文：制御士心，不越法度。
现代文：他能制约驾御士兵，使他们不逾越法度。
English: He is able to restrain his soldiers and prevent them from breaking the law.

古文：所在吏人，不知有军。
现代文：他军队所在地的官吏民众，不知军队的存在。
English: Officials and people in the area where his army is located are unaware of the army's existence.

古文：清名闻于海内，廉白著于当世。
现代文：清名传播于海内，廉洁清白著名于当世。
English: A clean name is spread at sea, and a clean conscience is famous in this world.

古文：所得赏赐，辄尽与吏士，身无奇衣，家无私财。
现代文：他所获得的赏赐，常常尽数分给吏士，身上没穿过稀贵的衣服，家里没有私人财产。
English: The rewards he received were often divided among the officials, he did not wear expensive clothes, and there was no private property in his family.

古文：同产兄午以遵无子，娶妾送之，遵乃使人逆而不受，自以身任于国，不敢图生虑继嗣之计。
现代文：同母弟祭午以他无子，为他娶妾送给他，祭遵使人拒不接受，自以为身任国事，不敢贪图生活考虑继嗣的私事。
English: His maternal half-brother made fun of him for not having a son and gave him a concubine for him to marry, but he refused to accept it. He thought he was in charge of state affairs and did not dare to covet life and think about the private affairs of the heir.

古文：临死遗诫牛车载丧，薄葬洛阳。
现代文：临死前还遗嘱叮诫用牛车载灵柩，薄葬洛阳。
English: Before his death, he also instructed his followers to use ox carts to carry the coffin and bury it in Luoyang.

古文：问以家事，终无所言。
现代文：问他的家事，始终无所言。
English: When I asked him about his family, he remained silent.

古文：任重道远，死而后已。
现代文：任重道远，死而后已。
English: It's a long way to go, but I've come a long way since his death.

古文：遵为将军，取士皆用儒术，对酒设乐，必雅歌投壶。
现代文：祭遵为将军，选拔人才都用儒术，对酒设乐，必唱雅诗投壶。
English: The festival is a general, the selection of talents all use Confucianism, set music for the wine, and must sing Yashi and throw pots.

古文：又建为孔子立后，奏置《五经》大夫。
现代文：又为孔子建庙立后，奏置《五经》大夫。
English: In addition, after the temple was built for Confucius, the doctor of the "Five Classics" was appointed.

古文：虽在军旅，不忘俎豆，可谓好礼悦乐，守死善道者也。
现代文：虽身在军旅，不忘祭祀，可说是遵礼仪悦礼乐，死守善道的人了。
English: Although he is on a military trip, he does not forget the sacrifice, which can be said to be a person who follows the etiquette, pleases the etiquette, and defends the virtuous path.

古文：礼，生有爵，死有谥，爵以殊尊卑，谥以明善恶。
现代文：礼，生时有爵位，死了就应谥封，爵位是用来区分尊卑，谥封是用来明白善恶。
English: According to etiquette, when you are born, you should have a title, and when you die, you should be given a seal. A title is used to distinguish between superiority and inferiority, and a seal is used to understand good and evil.

古文：臣愚以为宜因遵薨，论叙众功，详案《谥法》，以礼成之。
现代文：臣以为应在祭遵死后，论叙众多功劳，详细按照谥法，以古礼成全之。
English: The vassal thought that after the death of Jun, the many merits should be described in detail, and it should be completed with ancient rites in accordance with the law.

古文：显章国家笃古之制，为后嗣法。 帝乃下升章以示公卿。
现代文：以显示国家遵守古代章法制度，为后世立定嗣法。 帝于是把范升的奏章下示给公卿。
English: In order to show the country's adherence to the ancient legal system and to establish a successor law for future generations, the emperor then presented Fan Sheng's music chapter to the nobles.

古文：至葬，车驾复临，赠以将军、侯印绶，朱轮容车，介士军陈送葬，谥曰成侯。
现代文：等到安葬，帝车驾再亲临，赠以将军、侯的印绶，用漆红了轮子的车子装着，让武士们排成军阵送葬，谥封为成侯。
English: Wait until the burial, the imperial chariot driver will come in person again, give the general and the prince's seal, and put it on a car with a red wheel, so that the samurai will line up to send the funeral, and seal it as a prince.

古文：既葬，车驾复临其坟，存见夫人室家。
现代文：安葬完毕，光武再亲临其坟，妥为安置其夫人家室。
English: After the burial, Guangwu went to the grave again to properly arrange his wife's family.

古文：其后会朝，帝每叹曰： 安得忧国奉公之臣如祭征虏者乎！ 遵之见思若此。
现代文：其后会朝，帝常叹道： 怎能得到忧国奉公的像祭遵那样的大臣呢？ 祭遵之见思于光武其深如此。
English: After that meeting, the emperor often lamented: "How can I get a minister who is concerned about the country and serves the public like Saizun? This is how deeply Saizun thought of Guangwu."

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：无子，封国废除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：兄午，官至酒泉太守。
现代文：兄祭午，官至酒泉太守。
English: His elder brother, Saigo, rose to the position of Sake Izumi Taishu.

