古文：萧旷史遂田布进士崔生张偃裴氏子韦驺
现代文：萧旷史遂田布进士崔生张偃裴氏子韦驺
English: Xiao Kuang Shi Sui Tian Bu Jin Shi Cui Sheng Zhang Qi Pei's son Wei Wei

古文：萧旷
现代文：萧旷
English: Xiao Kuang

古文：太和处士萧旷，自洛东游。
现代文：太和年间，有位情操高洁的士人叫萧旷，沿着洛水东游，到了孝义后住下来。
English: During the Taiwa era, a scholar named Xiao Kuang, who had high moral standards, traveled east along the Luoshui River and settled down in Xiaoyi.

古文：至孝义馆，夜息于双美亭，时月朗风清。
现代文：有天晚上他到双美亭上游玩小歇，当时月朗风清。
English: One evening he went upstream to Shuangmei Pavilion for a short break, when the moon was bright and the wind was light.

古文：旷善琴，遂取琴弹之。
现代文：萧旷善于弹琴，就在月下弹琴。
English: Xiao Yu is good at playing the piano, he plays the piano under the moon.

古文：夜半，调甚苦。
现代文：深夜时，琴声很凄伤。
English: In the middle of the night, the harp sounds mournful.

古文：俄闻洛水之上，有长叹者。渐相逼，乃一美人。
现代文：忽然听见洛水上有人发出长叹声，越来越近，竟是一个美貌女子。
English: Suddenly I heard someone on the Luo River utter a long sigh, getting closer and closer, and it turned out to be a beautiful woman.

古文：旷因舍琴而揖之曰，彼何人斯？
现代文：萧旷忙放下琴起来行礼并问，您是什么人？女子说，我就是洛神。
English: Xiao Bai hurriedly put down the piano, stood up, bowed and asked, "Who are you?" The woman said, "I am Luo Shen."

古文：昔陈思王有赋，子不忆耶？
现代文：从前陈思王曾作了《洛神赋》，你不记得了吗？
English: Once upon a time, Chen Si Wang made Luo Shenfu, don't you remember?

古文：旷曰：然。
现代文：萧旷说，记得。
English: Xiao Meng said, remember.

古文：旷又问曰：或闻洛神即甄皇后，谢世，陈思王遇其魄于洛滨，遂为《感甄赋》。后觉事之不正，改为《洛神赋》，托意于宓妃。
现代文：我听说洛神就是甄皇后，死后陈思王在洛水边遇到了她的魂灵，有感而发写了《甄赋》，后来觉得不正确，才改名为《洛神赋》，并诧意于宓妃，是不是这样泥？
English: I heard that Luo Shen is the Queen of Zhen. After her death, Chen Si Wang met her spirit on the edge of Luo Shui, and wrote "Zhen Fu" with feeling. Later, I felt that it was not correct, so I changed it to "Luo Shen Fu" and was surprised by Gongfei. Is this mud?

古文：有之乎？
现代文：女子说，我就是甄后。
English: Is there any truth to this?

古文：女曰：妾即甄后也。为慕陈思王之才调，文帝怒而幽死。
现代文：当初因为我倾慕陈思王的才华，魏文帝大怒，把我幽禁而死。
English: At first, because I admired Chen Si Wang's talent, Emperor Wei Wen was furious and had me imprisoned until I died.

古文：后精魄遇王洛水之上，叙其冤抑，因感而赋之。
现代文：后来我的魂灵在洛水边遇见了陈思王，我向他倾诉了我的哀怨，他才写了《感甄赋》。
English: Later, my spirit met Chen Si Wang on the banks of the Luo River. I told him of my grievances, and he wrote "Feelings."

古文：觉事不典，易其题，乃不缪矣。
现代文：后来觉得这事不太雅，就改名叫《洛神赋》了。
English: Later, he thought it was not very elegant, so he changed the name to "Luo Shenfu."

古文：俄有双鬟，持茵席，具酒肴而至。谓旷曰：妾为袁家新妇时，性好鼓琴。
现代文：这才是事情的真相。不一会，有一个梳着双髻的少女拿着坐垫和酒菜走来，对萧旷说，我刚嫁到袁家时，很喜欢弹琴。
English: This is the truth of the matter. Soon, a girl with a double-bobbed haircut came with a cushion and wine and vegetables, and said to Xiao Yuan, "When I first married into the Yuan family, I liked to play the piano very much.

古文：每弹至《悲风》及《三峡流泉》，未尝不尽夕而止。适闻君琴韵清雅，愿一听之。
现代文：每当弹起《悲风》和《三峡流泉》这些曲子时，常常会弹上一夜，刚才我听到您的琴声清新典雅，能不能再弹给我听听呢？
English: Whenever I play pieces such as "Pathetic Wind" and "Three Gorges Spring," I often play them all night. Just now, I heard your piano sound fresh and elegant. Could you play them for me again?

古文：旷乃弹《别鹤操》及《悲风》。
现代文：萧旷就弹了《别鹤操》和《悲风》。
English: Xiao Kuang played "Farewell to Cranes" and "The Tragic Wind."

古文：神女长叹曰：真蔡中郎之俦也。
现代文：神女听罢感叹地说，您的琴艺真能和蔡邕相媲美啊。
English: Hearing this, the goddess sighed and said, "Your skill on the piano is truly comparable to Cai Xuan's."

古文：问旷曰：陈思王《洛神赋》如何？
现代文：又问萧旷，您觉得陈思王的《洛神赋》写得怎么样？
English: I also asked Xiao Kuang, how do you think Chen Si Wang's "Luo Shenfu" is written?

古文：旷曰：真体物浏，为梁昭明之精选耳。
现代文：萧旷说，不论文体和文采都十分完美，堪称是选出的精品了。
English: Xiao Yuan said that both the style and the writing were perfect, and it could be called a fine selection.

古文：女微笑曰：状妾之举止云 翩若惊鸿，宛若游龙，得无疏矣。
现代文：洛神微笑着说，赋中写我的举止，说我 翩若惊鸿，婉若游龙， 也不是很恰当的啊。
English: Luo Shen said with a smile, "It's not very appropriate to describe my demeanor in Fu, to say that I'm graceful and stunning, or that I'm a gentle swimmer.

古文：旷曰：陈思王之精魄今何在？
现代文：萧旷问，陈思王的灵魂现在哪里？
English: Xiao Kui asked, where is Chen Si Wang's soul now?

古文：女曰：见为遮须国王。
现代文：洛神说，他现在是遮须国的国王。
English: Luo Shen said that he was now the king of the country of whiskers.

古文：旷曰：何为遮须国？
现代文：萧旷说，什么叫遮须国？
English: Xiao Yu said, "What is called the country of whiskers?"

古文：女曰：刘聪子死而复生，语其父曰： 有人告某云，遮须国久无主，待汝父来作主。
现代文：洛神说，刘聪的儿子死而复生以后对他父亲说， 有人对我说，遮须国一直没有国王，等你父亲来当国王。
English: Luo Shen said that after Liu Cong's son was resurrected from the dead, he said to his father, "Someone told me that there has never been a king in the State of Qashu until your father came to be king."

古文：即此国是也。
现代文：说的就是这个遮须国。
English: This is the country of the mustache.

古文：俄有一青衣，引一女曰：织绡娘子至矣。
现代文：不一会，又有一个使女引导着一个女子走来说，织绡娘子到了。
English: After a little while, another servant girl, leading a woman, came and said, "Here is the weaver.

古文：神女曰：洛浦龙王之处女，善织绡于水府。
现代文：洛神说，这是洛水龙王的女儿，他织绡织得很好，一直在龙宫织绡，是我刚刚把他请来的。
English: Luo Shen said, "This is Luo Shui, the daughter of the Dragon King. He is a very good weaver. He has been weaving at the Dragon Palace. I just invited him."

古文：适令召之尔。旷因语织绡曰：近日人世或传柳毅灵姻之事，有之乎？
现代文：萧旷就问织绡娘子说，近来人世间都传说柳毅传书与龙女联姻的事，是真有此事吗？
English: Xiao Yan asked the weaver's daughter: "Recently, people all over the world have been talking about the marriage between Liu Yi Chuanshu and the dragon maiden. Is this true?

古文：女曰：十得其四五尔，余皆饰词，不可惑也。
现代文：织绡娘子说，十成只有四五成是对的，其它都是编造的了，不要信它。
English: The weaver's daughter said that of the ten percent, only four or five percent are true, the rest are fabricated, don't believe it.

古文：旷曰：或谓龙畏铁，有之乎？
现代文：萧旷问，我听说龙最怕铁器，是真的吗？
English: Xiao Meng asked, I heard that dragons are most afraid of iron, is it true?

古文：女曰：龙之神化，虽铁石金玉，尽可透达，何独畏铁乎？
现代文：织绡女说，龙有神力，不论金玉铁石都不能阻挡，怎么会只怕铁呢。
English: The weaver girl said that dragons have divine power, and no matter whether they are made of gold or iron, they cannot be stopped. How could they be afraid of iron?

古文：畏者蛟螭辈也。
现代文：真正怕铁是蛟、螭之类。
English: People who are really afraid of iron are earthworms, centipedes and the like.

古文：旷又曰：雷氏子佩丰城剑，至延平津，跃入水，化为龙。
现代文：萧旷又问。传说雷氏子佩着丰城宝剑，到了延平河边，剑窜到水里变成了龙，对吗？
English: Xiao Kui asked again. Legend has it that Lei Jizi, wearing the Fengcheng Sword, arrived at the Yanping River, and the hilt of the sword turned into a dragon in the water, right?

古文：有之乎？
现代文：织绡女说，错了。
English: Is there any truth to this?

古文：女曰：妄也。龙，木类，剑乃金。
现代文：龙属木，剑属金，金与木相克而不相生，剑怎么能变成龙呢。
English: Dragon belongs to wood, sword belongs to gold, gold and wood are incompatible, how can a sword become a dragon?

古文：金既克木，而不相生，焉能变化，岂同雀入水为蛤，野鸡入水为蜃哉！但宝剑灵物，金水相生，而入水雷生，自不能沉于泉。
现代文：倒是鸟雀入水能变成蛙，野鸡入水能变成蚌。宝剑是有灵的东西，入水以后，金水相生的，就会生出雷来，所以不会在水中沉没。
English: On the other hand, a sparrow can turn into a frog when it enters the water, and a pheasant can turn into a cormorant when it enters the water. A sword is a living thing, and after entering the water, if it is born of gold and water, it will produce thunder, so it will not sink in the water.

古文：信其下搜剑不获，乃妄言为龙。
现代文：当初雷焕把丰城剑掉进水里后，在水里怎么捞也捞不到，别人就胡说宝剑已变成龙了。
English: At first, after Lei Huan dropped the Fengcheng Sword into the water, it could not be retrieved in the water, and others said that the sword had become a dragon.

古文：且雷焕只言化去，张司空但言终合，俱不说为龙。
现代文：其实雷焕只不过说 宝剑化去 ，张司空则说宝剑与水 终合 ，都没说变龙的事。
English: In fact, Lei Huan only said that the sword would turn into a dragon, while Zhang Siku said that the sword would merge with the water. Neither of them said anything about turning into a dragon.

古文：任剑之灵异，且人之鼓铸锻炼，非自然之物。是知终不为龙，明矣。
现代文：宝剑虽然有灵性，但毕竟是由人类锻烧锤炼而成的，并不是自然中的东西，所以不可能变成龙，你明白了吗？
English: Although the sword is spiritual, it is forged and tempered by human beings. It is not a natural thing, so it cannot turn into a dragon, do you understand?

古文：旷又曰：梭化为龙如何？
现代文：萧旷又问，织布的梭子能变成龙吗？
English: Xiao Yuan also asked, can the shuttle of weaving cloth turn into a dragon?

古文：女曰：梭木也，龙本属木，变化归木，又何怪也？
现代文：织绡女说，梭子是木头做的，龙本来就属木，梭变龙后仍归为木，这有什么奇怪的呢。
English: The weaver girl said that the shuttle was made of wood, the dragon was originally a tree, and after the shuttle became a dragon, it was still classified as a tree. What is strange about this?

古文：旷又曰：龙之变化如神，又何病而求马师皇疗之？
现代文：萧旷又说，龙变化后有神力，为什么龙病了还要请马医师皇来治呢？
English: Xiao Yuan also said that dragons have divine power after transformation. Why would a dragon be ill and need to be treated by Dr. Ma?

古文：女曰：师皇是上界高真，哀马之负重引远，故为马医，愈其疾者万有匹。
现代文：织绡女说，师皇是天界里的真人，他同情马一生受尽了负重奔波之苦，所以才当了马医。经他治好了的马成千上万。
English: The weaver's daughter said that the king's teacher was a real person in the heavenly world. He sympathized with the horse's suffering from the burden of running all his life, so he became a horse doctor. Thousands of horses have been cured by him.

古文：上天降鉴，化其疾于龙唇吻间，欲验师皇之能。龙后负而登天，天假之。非龙真有病也？
现代文：天帝知道后，想试试他的医术究竟如何，就把一条龙变成马，并让它生了病。师皇治好了病马，那马立刻变成了龙，师皇就骑这条龙上了天。所以说，并不是龙真的有了病，而是上天故意安排的。
English: After the Heavenly Emperor learned of this, he wanted to test his medical skills, so he turned a dragon into a horse and made it sick. The King's teacher cured the sick horse, and the horse immediately turned into a dragon, and the King's teacher rode this dragon to heaven. Therefore, the dragon did not really have a disease, but it was deliberately arranged by heaven.

古文：旷又曰：龙之嗜燕血，有之乎？
现代文：萧旷又问，说龙爱喝燕子的血，有这事吗？
English: Xiao Yuan asked again, "Is it true that dragons like to drink the blood of swallows?"

古文：女曰：龙之清虚，食饮沆瀣。若食燕血，岂能行藏。
现代文：绢绡女说，龙在清虚的云间，吃的是露水云雾，如果真吃燕血，还能在云间藏身游弋吗？
English: The maiden said that the dragon eats dew and mist in the clouds. If it really eats swallow's blood, can it still hide in the clouds and swim?

古文：盖嗜者乃蛟蜃辈。
现代文：喜欢喝燕血的是蛟、蜃之类。
English: People who like to drink swallow's blood are cormorants, pelicans and the like.

古文：无信造作，皆梁朝四公诞妄之词尔。
现代文：你别信那些胡编的话，那都是梁朝四公们胡说八道。
English: Don't believe those made-up stories. They are all the nonsense of the four princes of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：旷又曰：龙何好？
现代文：萧旷又说，龙有什么特别的爱好？
English: Xiao Yuan also said, what special hobbies do dragons have?

古文：曰：好睡，大即千年，小不下数百岁。
现代文：织绡女说，龙很爱睡觉。大睡能睡千年，小睡也能睡几百年。
English: The weaver said that dragons love to sleep. A dragon can sleep for thousands of years if it sleeps for a long time, and it can sleep for hundreds of years if it sleeps for a short time.

古文：偃仰于洞穴，鳞甲间聚其沙尘。
现代文：它在洞穴里伏着，鳞甲间聚集了很多泥土灰尘。
English: It was lying down in the cave, with a lot of dirt and dust collected between its scales.

古文：或有鸟衔木实，遗弃其上。乃甲拆生树，至于合抱，龙方觉悟。遂振迅修行，脱其体而入虚无，澄其神而归寂灭。
现代文：有时有鸟衔着树木的种子丢落在龙身上，就会长出树来，甚至能长得又高又大一个人合抱那么粗，龙才知道，于是才挣脱了身上的大树，腾云驾雾，进入虚空，和天地的锺灵之气合在一起，最后完全消失。
English: Sometimes a bird with a seed of a tree falls on the dragon, and a tree will grow, and it can even grow tall and large. A person hugging so thick, the dragon only knows, so he broke free from the big tree on his body, soared through the clouds, entered the void, and merged with the spirit of heaven and earth, and finally disappeared completely.

古文：当此之时，虽百骸五体，尽可入于芥子之内。随举止，无所不之。自得还元返本之术，与造化争功矣。
现代文：龙身上的树种如果没有发芽生长，也能因为得了龙的灵性，成为一种十分精奇的似物似神的东西，可以无处不有，也能够自由地到处游动，达到无处不可存在的境界，这就是返元还本之术，也就是人们通常说的造化之功了。
English: If the tree seeds on the dragon's body do not germinate and grow, they can also, because they have the dragon's spirituality, become a very exquisite, god-like thing that can exist nowhere, and can also move freely everywhere, reaching a state where it can exist nowhere. This is the art of returning to the original, which is what people usually call the work of creation.

古文：旷又曰：龙之修行，向何门而得？
现代文：萧旷又问，龙的修行造化，是向哪里求得的呢？
English: Xiao Yu also asked, where did the dragon's training and creation come from?

古文：女曰：高真所修之术何异？
现代文：织绡女说，龙的修行和方士真人的修行，在方法上是一样的。
English: The weaver said that the practice of dragons and the practice of the magicians are the same in terms of methods.

古文：上士修之，形神具达；中士修之，神超形沉；下士修之，形神俱堕。
现代文：上等人修行，形和神都能达到仙人的境界。中等人修行，精神能成仙肉体却失去了。下等人修行，则不论神和形都不行。
English: In the practice of the upper class, both the form and the god can reach the realm of immortals. In the practice of the middle class, the spirit can become immortal but the body is lost. In the practice of the lower class, both the god and the form are not possible.

古文：且当修之时，气爽而神凝，有物出焉。即老子云恍恍惚惚，其中有物也。
现代文：修行的时候，心气清爽而全神贯注，这时就会感到自身的超脱，正象老子说的 恍恍惚惚，其中有物出也 。
English: When practising, one's mind is fresh and one is fully concentrated. At this time, one will feel detached from oneself, just like what Lao Tzu said about "trance," in which things also emerge.

古文：其于幽微，不敢泄露，恐为上天谴谪尔。
现代文：至于修行中更奥妙的方法。我不敢泄露，不然会受到上天的谴责和惩罚的。
English: As for the more esoteric methods in the practice, I dare not divulge them, or I will be condemned and punished by Heaven.

古文：神女遂命左右，传觞叙语。
现代文：这时洛神就让使女倒酒，和萧旷一起边喝边谈，谈得很投机，态度也很亲切。
English: At this time, Luo Shen let the maid pour the wine, and drank and talked with Xiao Qian. The conversation was very opportunistic, and the attitude was very cordial.

古文：情况眤洽，兰艳动人，若左琼枝而右玉树，缱绻永夕，感畅冥怀。
现代文：萧旷看身边的神女，左边的洛神象是琼枝，右边的织绡娘子象是玉枝，都是那么光艳照人。
English: Xiao Yu looked at the goddesses around her. Luo Shen on the left looked like Qiong Zhi, and the weaver girl on the right looked like Yuda Zhi. They were both so radiant.

古文：旷曰：遇二仙娥于此，真所谓双美亭也。
现代文：萧旷和两位神女在一起尽情饮酒欢谈，十分缠绵，心情也非常旷达。萧旷说，今天在这里有幸遇见二位仙女，怪不得这个亭子叫做 双美亭 啊！
English: Xiao Yuan and the two goddesses are drinking and chatting together, very intimate, the mood is also very open. Xiao Yuan said that today he was lucky to meet two fairies here, no wonder this pavilion is called Shuangmei Pavilion!

古文：忽闻鸡鸣，神女乃留诗曰：玉筋凝腮忆魏宫，朱丝一弄洗清风。
现代文：忽然听见雄鸡啼明，洛神就写了首诗留赠：玉筋凝腮忆魏宫，朱丝一弄洗清风。
English: When he suddenly heard the rooster crowing, Luo Shen wrote a poem as a gift: "Jade sinew congeals, reminiscent of the Wei Palace, while jade washes away the wind."

古文：明晨追赏应愁寂，沙渚烟销翠羽空。
现代文：明晨追赏应愁寂，沙渚烟销翠羽空。
English: In the morning, the pursuit of reward should be sad, and the sand beach should be smoke-free.

古文：织绡诗曰：织绡泉底少欢娱，更劝萧郎尽酒壶。
现代文：织绡娘子也赠了一首诗说，织绡泉底少欢娱，更劝萧郎尽酒壶。
English: The weaver's daughter also presented a poem, saying that the bottom of the weaver's spring was less fun, and advised Xiao Lang to finish the wine jug.

古文：愁见玉琴弹别鹤，又将清泪滴珍珠。
现代文：愁见玉琴弹别鹤，又将清泪滴珍珠。
English: Sad to see the jade harp played by another crane, and tears drop pearls.

古文：旷答二女诗曰：红兰吐艳间夭桃，自喜寻芳数已遭。
现代文：萧旷也写了一首诗酬谢说，红兰吐艳间夭桃，自喜寻芳数已遭。
English: Xiao Kuang also wrote a poem to express his gratitude, saying that the Red Orchid had spit out a young peach, and the number of self-congratulatory searches had fallen.

古文：珠珮鹊桥从此断，遥天空恨碧云高。
现代文：珠佩鹊桥从此断，遥天空恨碧云高。
English: Zhu Puiqian Bridge has been broken since then, and the distant sky is as high as the clouds.

古文：神女遂出明珠、翠羽二物赠旷曰：此乃陈思王赋云 或采明珠，或拾翠羽 ，故有斯赠，以成洛神赋之咏也。
现代文：洛神拿出了明珠和翠羽赠给萧旷说，陈思王的赋里不是说 或采明珠，或拾翠羽 吗，我就把这两件东西送给你，这样就符合《洛神赋》里所描写的了。
English: Luo Sheng took out a pearl and a cedar feather to give to Xiao Yuan and said, "Didn't Chen Si Wang's Fu Li say either pick a pearl or pick a cedar feather, and I will give you these two things, which is in line with what is described in Luo Sheng Fu?"

古文：龙女出轻绡一疋赠旷曰：若有胡人购之，非万金不可。
现代文：龙女则把一疋轻绡送给萧旷说，如果有胡地的人买它，必须一万金才能卖。
English: Long Niang then gave Xiao Meng a feather duster, saying that if someone with a beard bought it, it would cost ten thousand gold to sell it.

古文：神女曰：君有亲骨异相，当出世。但淡味薄俗，清襟养真，妾当为阴助。
现代文：洛神又说，您的骨相和面相都不同凡人，应该修道，远离凡俗的尘世修真养性，我会暗暗帮助你的。
English: Luo Shen also said, your bone and facial features are different from ordinary people, you should cultivate, stay away from ordinary earthly cultivation, I will secretly help you.

古文：言讫，超然蹑虚而去，无所睹矣。
现代文：说罢，轻轻地腾空而去，什么也看不见了。
English: Say it, and gently float away, nothing to be seen.

古文：后旷保其珠绡，多游嵩岳。友人尝遇之，备写其事。
现代文：后来萧旷保存着明珠和轻绡开始修行，常常游嵩山，有朋友曾遇到他，详细地写出了这些事。
English: Later, Xiao Yuan preserved the pearl and the featherweight and began to practice. He often visited Songshan Mountain. A friend once met him and wrote about these things in detail.

古文：今遁世不复见焉。
现代文：现在萧旷已经从世间消失，再也没见过他。
English: Now Xiao Yuan has disappeared from the world, never to be seen again.

古文：史遂
现代文：史遂
English: Historically,

古文：会昌中，小黄门史遂，因疾退于家。
现代文：会昌年间，有个在小黄门当官的史遂，因病在家休养。
English: During the years of Huichang, there was a person who was an official in Xiaohuamen, but he had to rest and recuperate at home due to illness.

古文：一日，忽召所亲，自言初得疾时，见一黄衣人，执文牒曰：阴司录君二魂对事。量留一魂主身。
现代文：一天，他忽然把家里人都找来，说他刚得病时，见一个黄衣人手拿公文对他说，阴司召你的二魂去有公事，给你留下一魂管你的身子。
English: One day, he suddenly called his family together and said that when he had just fallen ill, he had seen a man in yellow holding a document and saying to him, "Your wife has called your two souls to work, leaving you one soul to take care of your body."

古文：不觉随去。
现代文：史遂不知不觉地就跟着走。
English: Shi then unknowingly followed suit.

古文：出通化门，东南入荒径，渡灞浐。陟兰田山。
现代文：出了通化门向东南走上一条很荒僻的路，又渡过浐河上了兰田山。
English: Out of the Tonghua Gate, I walked southeast on a very desolate road, and then crossed the Wei River and climbed Mount Lantian.

古文：山上约行数十里，忽见一骑执黑幡，云：太一登殿已久，罪人毕录。
现代文：在山上走了有几十里，忽然看见一个骑马的人执着一个黑幡说，太一神已经登殿好半天了，要审的罪人都点过了名，你怎么这晚才来？
English: After walking for dozens of miles in the mountains, he suddenly saw a man on horseback holding a black flag and said, "It's been half a day since the great god has ascended to the temple, and the sinners to be judged have all been named. Why did you come so late?"

古文：尔何迟也。
现代文：督促他们快走。
English: Tell them to leave.

古文：督之而去。至一城，甲士翼门。直北至一宫，宫门守卫甚严。
现代文：来到一座城，见城门两边排列着很多兵士，进城一直向北进了一个宫殿，宫门守卫也很森严。
English: When I came to a city, I saw many soldiers lined up on both sides of the city gate. When I entered the city, I went all the way north to a palace, and the palace gate was heavily guarded.

古文：有赤衣吏，引使者同入。
现代文：有个穿红衣的官引着他们走进去。
English: A red-clad official ushered them inside.

古文：萧屏间，有一吏自内出曰：受教受教。
现代文：在影壁墙间有一个官员迎上来说，你们快听旨意。
English: Between the walls of shadows, an official came up and said, "Listen to the will."

古文：使者鞠躬受命。
现代文：领史遂来的人礼施恭听。
English: Those who came to listen to the history were polite and courteous.

古文：宣曰：史遂前世括苍山主录大夫侍者，始者恭恪，中间废堕，谪官黄门，冀其醒悟。
现代文：那官员宣读公文说，史遂前世曾任括苍山主录大夫的侍者，起初还恪尽职责，后来就有些懈怠了，所以才贬到黄门当小官，为了使他能够反省自已的错误。
English: The official read out the official document and said that in his previous life, Shi Sui had served as a waiter for the chief record doctor of Cangshan. At first, he also fulfilled his duties, but later he slacked off, so he was demoted to Huangmen as a minor official, in order to enable him to reflect on his mistakes.

古文：今大夫复位，侍者宜迁，付所司准法。
现代文：现在括苍山主录大夫官复原位，史遂这个侍者也应该升迁了。现已被主管部司批准。
English: Now, including Cangshan, the chief record officer has been restored to his original position, and the waiter should also be promoted. It has now been approved by the competent department.

古文：遂领就一院，见一人，白须鬓，紫衣，左右十数列侍。
现代文：宣毕就把史遂带到另一院子，见一个人白发苍苍身穿紫袍，左右有十几个侍从。
English: After the announcement, Shi Sui was taken to another courtyard, where he saw a man with white hair, wearing a purple robe, and surrounded by a dozen attendants.

古文：拜讫仰视，乃少傅白居易也。
现代文：史遂忙叩跪，拜完抬头一看，竟是少傅白居易。
English: Shi then quickly knelt down and bowed. When he looked up, he saw that it was actually Shao Fu Bai Ju Yi.

古文：遂元和初为翰林小吏，因问曰：少傅何为至此？
现代文：史遂元和初年在翰林院当小官，认识白居易，就问，白少傅到这儿来作什么呢？
English: Shi Sui Yuan and his first year at Hanlin Academy as a minor official, knowing Bai Juyi, asked, what did Bai Shao Fu come here to do?

古文：白怡然曰：侍者忆前事耶？
现代文：白居易很淡然一笑说，你不记得以前的事了吗？
English: Bai Juyi smiled coldly and said, "Don't you remember what happened before?

古文：俄如睡觉，神气顿如旧。
现代文：这时史遂突然醒了过来，神色和没生病时完全一样了。
English: At this time, Shi suddenly woke up and looked exactly the same as when he was not sick.

古文：诸黄门闻其疾愈，竟访之。是夕，居易薨于洛中。
现代文：黄门里听说史遂病好了，都来看望他，这时他才听说，就在那天晚上白居易病死在洛中。
English: When Huangmenli heard that Shi had recovered from his illness, they all came to visit him. It was only then that he heard that Bai Juyi died of illness in Luochu that very night.

古文：临终，谓所亲曰：昔自蓬莱，与帝有闫浮之因。
现代文：临终时对家人说，昔日在蓬莱仙宫时，我曾和武宗皇帝有闫浮那样前因。
English: On his deathbed, he said to his family members, "In the past, when I was at the Penglai Palace of Immortals, I had a quarrel with Emperor Wuzong.

古文：帝于闫浮为麟德之别。
现代文：皇帝在闫浮做麟德之别。
English: The emperor made a farewell visit to Lin De in Muxifu.

古文：言毕而逝。人莫晓也。
现代文：说完就死了，人们不懂他说的是什么意思。
English: And then he died, and people didn't know what he meant.

古文：较其日月，当捐馆之时，乃上宴麟德殿也。
现代文：后来一推算日子，才知道他死的那天，正是皇上在麟德殿赐的日子。
English: Later, when he calculated the date, he learned that the day he died was the day given by the emperor at the Lin De Palace.

古文：田布
现代文：田布
English: Tabu

古文：唐相崔铉镇淮南。卢耽罢浙西，张择罢常州，俱经维扬，谒铉。
现代文：唐代，相国崔铉镇守淮南时，在常州罢官的张泽，在浙西罢官的卢耽，都在经过扬州时来拜望他。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Ze, who was dismissed from his post in Changzhou, and Lu Tan, who was dismissed from his post in western Zhejiang, both came to visit him when they were passing through Yangzhou.

古文：铉因暇日，与二客方奕，吏报女巫与故魏博节度史田布偕至，泊逆旅某亭者。
现代文：当时崔铉正是公余间暇，与两们客人正在下棋时，有人来报告说，已经去世的前魏博节度使田布与一个女巫一块来了，正寄宿在某个亭子间。
English: At that time, Cui Yao was free in his spare time. While he was playing chess with two guests, someone came to report that the deceased former Wei Bo Jie Du had made Tian Bu come with a witch and was boarding in a pavilion.

古文：铉甚异之，复曰：显验，与他巫异，请改舍于都候之解。
现代文：崔铉很奇怪，又说：看来这是神灵显验，和平日的女巫不一样，还是请他们到都衙官舍来住吧。
English: Cui Yao was very puzzled and said, "It seems that this is a manifestation of gods, which is different from the witches of ordinary days. Let's invite them to live in the Tudor official residence."

古文：铉趣召巫者至，乃与神迭拜，曰：谢相公。
现代文：于是又让人把巫祝召来。巫祝和神一块拜谒崔铉说：谢高等崔相国。
English: So they summoned the sorcerer again. The sorcerer and the god worshipped the god together and said, "Thank you, high-ranking Choi Sanguk."

古文：铉曰：何谢？
现代文：崔铉说，为什么要谢我呢？
English: "Why are you thanking me?

古文：神答曰：布有不肖子，黩货无厌，郡事不治。
现代文：田布的魂回答说，我那不肖的儿子，做官时贪污受贿，不理政事，理当被处以死刑。
English: Tabu's soul replied, "My ugly son, who was corrupt and took bribes when he was an official, and did not care about politics, should have been sentenced to death."

古文：当犯大辟，赖公阴德免焉。使布之家庙血食不绝者，公之恩也。
现代文：全仗着您的佑助才使他免了一死，使我田布家祖庙香火不至断绝，是您的大恩大德啊！
English: It was only thanks to your help that he was spared from death, so that the incense of the Tabu family ancestral temple would not be cut off. It was your great kindness!

古文：铉矍然曰：异哉。
现代文：崔铉惊奇的说，这事可太怪了！
English: Surprised, Cui Yao said, "This is so strange!

古文：铉为相日，夏州节度奏银州刺史田釸犯赃罪，私造铠甲，以易市边马布帛。
现代文：我当相国时，夏州节度史曾奏报说银州刺史田釸犯了贪赃罪，用私自打造的铠甲在边境上换马匹和布疋。
English: When I was in power, the Xiazhou Jiedu History Newspaper once reported that Yinzhou Jishi Tianyao had committed the crime of corruption, using self-made armor to exchange horses and cloths at the border.

古文：帝赫怒曰： 赃自别议。且委以边州，所宜防盗。以甲资敌，非反而何？
现代文：皇上一听大怒，说： 派在边境州府的官员本身的职责就是防盗寇的，现在田铉竟拿军用品资助敌人，这和造反有什么不同？
English: The emperor was outraged and said, "Officials assigned to the border state capitals are responsible for preventing thieves and robbers. Now Tian Xuan is actually using military supplies to finance the enemy. How is this different from rebellion?"

古文：命中书以法论，将赤其族。
现代文：立刻交付中书有，按法严办诛灭九族！ 
English: Immediately deliver the documents, and strictly carry out the extermination of the nine ethnic groups according to the law!

古文：翌日，铉从容言于上曰：釸赃罪自有宪章。
现代文：第二天，我从容地对皇上说， 田釸的罪的确应该依法严办。
English: The next day, I calmly told the emperor that Tian Yao's crime should indeed be strictly dealt with according to the law.

古文：然是弘正之孙，田布之子。
现代文：然而，他是田弘正的孙子，是田布的儿子。
English: However, he is the grandson of Tian Hiromasa and the son of Tian Bu.

古文：弘正首以河朔入觐，奉吏员。
现代文：田弘正在河朔首立战功被召进皇宫晋见嘉奖，后来升了官职。
English: Tian Hong was summoned to the Imperial Palace to receive a commendation for his distinguished war service in the first battle of Heshaku, and was later promoted to a higher post.

古文：布亦成父之命，继以忠教，伏剑而死。
现代文：田布秉他父亲的美德。尽忠尽孝，最后也战死在战场。
English: Tianbu upholds the virtues of his father. He is loyal and filial, and finally dies on the battlefield.

古文：今若行法以固边圉，未若因事弘贷，激劝忠烈。
现代文：现在皇上想严办田釸以巩固边防，杀了他还不如宽恕了他，以他父亲爷爷的忠义事绩激励他，让他认识自己的罪恶，戴罪立功。
English: Now that the emperor wanted to strengthen the border defense by strictly enforcing the rice fields, it was better to kill him than to forgive him, to inspire him with the loyalty and achievements of his father and grandfather, to let him know his sins, and to make him pay for his crimes.

古文：上意乃解。止黜授远郡司马。
现代文：皇上听了我的话，免了他的罪，只降调到边远的州郡当司马。
English: The emperor listened to my words and absolved him of his crime, only demoting him to a remote prefectural post.

古文：而铉未尝一出口于亲戚私昵，已将忘之。今神之言，正是其事。
现代文：然而，这件事我从来没跟任何人说过，连自己现在都忘了，今天这巫祝说得却一点也不差。
English: However, I've never told anyone about this, I've even forgotten myself now, but today's wish is not bad at all.

古文：乃命廊下素服而见焉。谓之曰：君以义烈而死，奈何区区为愚妇人所使乎？
现代文：于是崔铉就命手下的官员穿上素服祭拜了田布的阴魂，并对田布说，你一生忠义，死得也轰轰烈烈，怎么能被一个愚昧无知的妇人所驱使呢？
English: So Cui Lan ordered his officials to put on plain clothes and worship the ghost of Tian Bu. He said to Tian Bu, "You have been loyal all your life and died a brilliant death. How can you be driven by a foolish and ignorant woman?"

古文：神曰：布尝负此妪八十万钱，今方忍耻偿之。
现代文：田布的魂灵说，我曾欠这个巫婆八十万钱，到现在我还在忍辱还她呢。
English: Tabu's spirit said, "I once owed this witch eight hundred thousand dollars, and I'm still paying her back.

古文：铉与二客及监军使幕下，共偿其钱。
现代文：崔铉和两位客人以及监军使一起凑齐了钱，还给了巫婆，田布的魂才离去。
English: Cui Wei, the two guests, and the overseer gathered the money together and returned it to the witch. Only then did Tabu's spirit leave.

古文：神乃辞去，因言事不验。
现代文：从此巫婆凡说出的事宜都不应验。
English: Since then, none of the witch's predictions have come true.

古文：进士崔生
现代文：进士崔生
English: Entered the priesthood, Choe Son

古文：进士崔生，自关东赴举，早行潼关外十余里。
现代文：进士崔生，曾从关东进京赶考。丰夜起来赶路，走出潼关外十几里时，才打过五更鼓。
English: Cui Sheng, a trainee, once went to Beijing from Guandong to catch up with the examination. He got up at night to catch up with the road, and when he walked out of Shaoguan, he had only played five more drums.

古文：夜方五鼓，路无人行，唯一仆一担一驴而已。
现代文：路上没有行人，仅崔生骑着驴，仆人挑着担跟着。
English: There were no pedestrians on the road, only Cui Sheng riding a donkey, followed by servants carrying loads.

古文：忽遇列炬呵殿，旗帜戈甲，二百许人，若方镇者。
现代文：忽然遇见前面排列着火把并有人喝道，二百多人举着旗帜和兵器，好象是那一方的镇守使。
English: Suddenly I met in front of me a row of torches and people drinking, more than two hundred people holding flags and weapons, as if they were town guards from the other side.

古文：生映树自匿。
现代文：崔生躲在一棵树后，等队列过后才走。
English: Cui Sheng hid behind a tree and waited for the queue to pass before leaving.

古文：既过，行不三二里，前之导从复回，乃徐行随之。
现代文：刚走了二三里，那支队伍又转回来了。崔生就跟在队伍后头慢慢走。
English: After just walking a few miles, the group turned around and came back. Cui Sheng slowly walked behind the group.

古文：有健步押茶器，行甚迟，生因问为谁。
现代文：有一个士兵押运着茶器，走得很慢，崔生就问他这是谁。
English: There was a soldier escorting a teapot, walking very slowly, and Cui Sheng asked him who it was.

古文：曰：岳神迎天官崔侍御也。
现代文：那士兵说，这是岳神去迎接天官崔侍御回来了。
English: The soldier said that it was Yue Shen who went to meet the heavenly officer Cui Shangguo when he returned.

古文：秀才方应举，何不一谒，以卜身事。
现代文：您这位秀才要去赶考，何不去见一见，问问你自己的事呢？
English: You, the genius, are going to take an exam. Why don't you go and see him and ask him about yourself?

古文：生谢以无由自达，健步许侦之。
现代文：崔生说没法能去面见，士兵说我看情况帮帮你。
English: Cui Sheng said there was no way he could meet him face-to-face, and the soldier said, "I'll help you depending on the situation."

古文：既及庙门，天犹未曙，健步约生伺之于门侧。
现代文：队伍到了庙门，天还没亮。士兵让崔生躲在庙门后，自己先进去了。
English: When the team arrived at the temple gate, it was still dark. The soldiers let Cui Sheng hide behind the temple gate and went ahead of them.

古文：入良久出曰：白侍御矣。遽引相见，甚喜。
现代文：过了很久士兵才出来说他已经跟崔侍御说了，立刻引崔生见了崔侍御，崔生很高兴。
English: It took a long time for the soldier to come out and say that he had already spoken to Choi Samgyong. He immediately took Choi Son to see Choi Samgyong. Choi Son was very happy.

古文：逡巡岳神至，立语，便邀崔侍御入庙中。
现代文：不一会岳神来了，崔侍御就请岳神进了庙里。
English: Not long after, Yue Shen arrived, and Cui Shangguo invited Yue Shen into the temple.

古文：陈设帐幄，筵席鼓乐极盛。
现代文：庙里陈设了帐幕，摆下了酒宴。
English: A tent was set up in the temple and a banquet was prepared.

古文：顷之，张乐饮酒。崔临赴宴，约敕侍者，只待于生，供以汤茶所须，情旨敦厚。
现代文：不一会儿，奏起了鼓乐，岳神被崔侍御请入座位，临开宴时，崔侍御特别关照手下人，让他们拿来饭菜好好招待崔生，显得很热情。
English: Soon after, the drum music began to play, and Yue Shen was invited to take a seat by Choi's attendant. At the opening of the banquet, Choi's attendant paid special attention to his subordinates, letting them bring food to properly invite Choi Sheng, and appeared very enthusiastic.

古文：饮且移时，生倦，徐行周览，不觉出门。
现代文：崔生喝了一会儿酒，觉得有些疲倦，就慢慢地溜达着玩，不觉走到庙门外。
English: After drinking wine for a while, Cui Sheng felt a little tired, so he slowly walked around to play and unknowingly walked outside the temple gate.

古文：忽见其表丈人，握手话旧。
现代文：忽然发现他的表丈人在门外，忙上前握手叙话。
English: Suddenly, he found his cousin-in-law outside the door, and he hurried forward to shake hands and talk.

古文：颜色憔悴，衣服褴缕。生曰：丈人久辞人间，何得至此？
现代文：崔生看表丈人面容又黄又瘦，破衣烂衫的，就问，表丈人已经去世很久了，怎么到了这里？
English: Cui Sheng saw that his father-in-law's face was yellow and thin, and his clothes were tattered, and asked, "My father-in-law has been dead for a long time, how did he get here?"

古文：答曰：仆离人世，十五年矣，未有所诣。
现代文：回答说，我离开人世已经十五年了，一直没见着你。
English: He replied, "It's been fifteen years since I died, and I haven't seen you.

古文：近做敷水桥神，倦于送迎，而窘于衣食。穷困之状，迨不可济。
现代文：近来派我当敷水桥神，每天送往迎来，十分疲劳，又非常穷困，连衣食都不足，一点帮助也得不到。
English: Recently, I was sent as a water-laying bridge god, sent to usher in every day, very tired, very poor, even food and clothing are insufficient, and I can't get any help.

古文：知侄与天官侍御相善，又宗姓之分，必可相荐，故来投诚。
现代文：我知道侄儿你和天官崔侍御是朋友，你们又都姓崔，一定能替我推荐一下，所以来找你。
English: I know that my nephew and you are friends with the celestial officer Choi Samgyong, and you are both surnamed Choi. I'm sure you can recommend someone for me, so I came to you.

古文：若得南山觜神祈，即粗免饥穷。
现代文：如果我能被任命为南山觜神，我就能免于冻饿之苦了。
English: If I can be appointed as the god of Nanshan, I can be free from the suffering of cold and hunger.

古文：此后迁转，得居天秩矣。
现代文：以后还有希望调到天界去作官。
English: In the future, there is hope that he will be transferred to the heavenly world to become an official.

古文：生辞以乍相识，不知果可相荐否。
现代文：崔生说，我和崔侍御不过是刚刚认识，不知道他能不能接受我的推荐。
English: Cui Sheng said that he and Cui Shangguo had just met, and he didn't know if he could accept my recommendation.

古文：然试为道之。
现代文：我可以试着跟他说一说。
English: I can try to talk to him.

古文：侍御寻亦罢宴而归，谓曰：后年方及第，今年不就试亦可。
现代文：过了一阵，崔侍御吃完了饭要回去，对崔生说，你后年才能考中，今年不去参加会试也没关系。
English: After a while, Cui Shangguo finished her meal and wanted to go back. She said to Cui Sheng, you can only take the middle school entrance examination next year, and it doesn't matter if you don't take the entrance examination this year.

古文：余少顷公事亦毕，即当归去，程期甚迫，不可久留。
现代文：我等一会公事也办完，也要赶回去，日程很紧，不能在这里久留了。
English: I have to rush back after I finish my business for a while. My schedule is very tight and I can't stay here for long.

古文：生因以表丈人所求告之。
现代文：崔生就把表丈人的请求对他说了。
English: Cui Sheng told him the request of his father-in-law.

古文：侍御曰：觜神似人间选补，极是清资，敷水桥神卑杂，岂可便得。
现代文：崔侍御说，南山觜神好象人间的选补官，要求有较高的资历。敷水桥神官积卑微，怕不容易办得到。
English: Cui Shangguo said that Nanshan Shanshin is like a human elective officer, requiring higher qualifications. Shisuibashi priests are humble, and it may not be easy to get them.

古文：然试为言之，岳神必不相阻。
现代文：不过我可以试着说一说，我想岳神是不会拒绝我的。
English: But I can try to say that I think my father-in-law will not refuse me.

古文：即复诣岳神迎奉。
现代文：说罢就又把岳神请来，两个人在一起商量。
English: As soon as he said that, he invited his father-in-law, and the two of them discussed it together.

古文：生潜还伺之，历闻所托，岳神果许之。
现代文：崔生偷偷到近前等着，听清崔侍御在和岳神讲情，岳神也就答应了。
English: Cui Sheng secretly waited nearby and heard that Cui Shangguo was making love to Yue Sheng, and Yue Sheng agreed.

古文：即命出牒补署。
现代文：当时就命令办理好公文让崔生的表丈人补上了南山觜神。
English: At that time, it was ordered to handle the official document so that Cui Sheng's father-in-law could add Nanshan Shishin.

古文：俄尔受牒入谢，迎官将吏一二百人，侍从甚整。
现代文：不大一会儿，崔生的表丈就被召进庙里去拜谢上任，迎接他上任的官员仆从有一二百人，很是威风。
English: Not long after, Cui Sheng's cousin was called into the temple to offer thanks for his appointment. There were one or two hundred officials and servants to greet him, which was very dignified.

古文：生因出贺，觜神泣曰：非吾侄之力，不可得此位也。
现代文：崔生就走上前向表丈人祝贺。表丈人哭着说，没有侄儿你出力，我绝不可能得到这个官位的。
English: Cui Sheng stepped forward to congratulate his father-in-law. The father-in-law cried and said, "Without your nephew's efforts, I would never have been able to get this post."

古文：后一转，便入天司矣。
现代文：下一次调动，我就可以进入天司了。
English: The next time I'm transferred, I'll be able to join Tenshi.

古文：今年渭水泛溢，侄庄当飘坏。
现代文：今年渭河会发大水，侄儿的村庄会被洪水侵害，一起受害的有三五百家。
English: This year, the Min River will flood, and my nephew's village will be affected by the flood, with three to five hundred families being affected.

古文：一道所损三五百家，已令为侄护之，五六月必免此祸。
现代文：我已下令保护你的田庄。五六月间就能免这场灾祸。
English: I have ordered the protection of your estate, and in May or June you will be spared this calamity.

古文：更有五百缣相酬。
现代文：然后我还会给你五百疋绸缎来酬谢你。
English: Then I'll give you five hundred silk cocoons to thank you.

古文：须臾，觜神驱殿而去，侍御亦发，岳神出送。
现代文：说完，就带着仆从侍卫奔驰而去。这里崔侍御也要上路，岳神出来送行。
English: After saying this, he drove away with his servants and attendants. Here, Cui attendant also had to go on the road, and his father-in-law came out to see him off.

古文：生独在庙中，歘如梦觉。
现代文：庙里只剩下崔生自己，恍然如一场梦刚醒。
English: Cui Sheng was the only one left in the temple. It was like waking up from a dream.

古文：出访仆使，只在店中，一无所睹。
现代文：他寻找自己的仆人，仆人说他一直在店里，什么也没看见。
English: He looked for his servant, who said he had been in the shop and had seen nothing.

古文：于是不复入关，回止别墅。
现代文：于是崔生就不再进关去赶考了，直接回到家乡。
English: As a result, Cui Sheng no longer went to the detention center to catch up with the exam, and went directly back to his hometown.

古文：其夏，渭水泛溢，漂损甚多，唯崔生庄独免。
现代文：这年夏天，渭水果然泛滥，很多村庄都被淹没，唯独崔生的田庄没有受到水害。
English: This summer, there was a sudden flood of strawberries, many villages were flooded, but Cui Sheng's farm was not affected by the flood.

古文：庄前泊一空船，水涸之后，船有绢五百疋。
现代文：庄子前停着一只空船，水退之后，见船里放着五百尺绸缎。
English: An empty boat was parked in front of Zhuo Zi. After the water receded, I saw a five-hundred-feet-long silk cocoon in the boat.

古文：明年果擢第矣。
现代文：第二年，崔生果然考中了进士。
English: In the second year, Cui Sheng successfully passed the entrance examination.

古文：张偃
现代文：张偃
English: Zhang Ye

古文：进士张偃者赴举，行及金天王庙前，遇大雨，于庙门避雨，至暮不止。
现代文：有位叫张偃的进士，在他去参加举人会考时，走到金天王庙前，遇到了大雨，就在庙门下避雨。
English: A scholar named Zhang Xuan, when he went to participate in the examination, walked to the Golden King Temple, encountered heavy rain, and sheltered from the rain under the temple gate.

古文：不及诣店，遂入庙中门宿。
现代文：雨一直下到晚上也不停，没法投宿客店，只好到庙门里面睡下。
English: It rained all the way into the evening and didn't stop. We couldn't stay in a hotel, so we had to sleep inside the temple gate.

古文：至四更，闻金天视事之声，嗢喝甚厉。
现代文：睡到四更时分，听到金天王问案的声音，吵喊得很严厉。
English: When he fell asleep at 4:00 a.m., he heard the voice of the Golden King asking questions, shouting very harshly.

古文：须臾，闻唤张偃，来日午时，行至某村，为赤狸虎所食。
现代文：不大一会，就听见有人喊说，张偃在明天午时走到某村将被一只赤狸虎吃掉。
English: Not long after, someone shouted that Zhang Ye would be eaten by a red tiger if he went to a certain village at noon the next day.

古文：偃闻之甚惧，侯庭下静，遂于门下匍匐而入。
现代文：张偃听后十分恐惧。等庙堂上静下来，就在庙门下慢慢爬到庙堂前，自报姓名跪拜金天王。
English: Zhang Ye was very afraid after listening. When the temple was quiet, he slowly climbed under the temple gate to the front of the temple and knelt in front of the golden king.

古文：自通名而拜，金天曰：汝生人，何事而来？
现代文：金天王说，你是活人，到这儿来有什么事？
English: The King of Heaven said, "You are a living person. Why have you come here?

古文：遂具前事告金天。
现代文：张偃就把刚才听到的话告诉了金天王。
English: Zhang Ye told Jin Tianwang what he had just heard.

古文：金天曰：召虎来。
现代文：金天王说，把那只虎给我召来！
English: King Jin Tianwang said, "Bring me that tiger!"

古文：须臾虎至。
现代文：片刻虎就来了。
English: The tiger will be here in a minute.

古文：金天曰：与二大兽食而代偃。
现代文：金天王对说，给你两只大兽吃，把张偃换下来，行不行？
English: King Jin Tianwang said, "Can I give you two big beasts to eat, and exchange Zhang Ye for them?"

古文：虎曰：冤家合食，他物代之不可。
现代文：虎说，我和他是冤家就该吃张偃，什么东西都不能替换。
English: The tiger said that he and I were enemies, so we should eat Zhang Ye. Nothing can be replaced.

古文：金天曰：检虎何日死。
现代文：金天王说，给我查一查，这只虎什么时候死？
English: King Jin Tianwang said, "Let me check. When will this tiger die?"

古文：有一吏来曰：未时为某村王存射杀死。
现代文：有一个官儿查完来报告说，老虎在未时为某村的王存射死。
English: After an investigation, an official reported that the tiger had been shot dead for Wang Cun of a certain village.

古文：金天曰：命张偃过所食时即行。
现代文：金天王说，叫张偃过了老虎吃他的时间再走。
English: Jin Tianwang said that he told Zhang Ye to wait for the tiger to eat him before leaving.

古文：及行至前路，果见人喧闹，问之，乃曰：某村王存，射赤狸虎。果金天所言。
现代文：张偃按时走了，果然看见前面路上人声喧闹，一打听，人们告诉他，某村的王存射死了一只赤狸虎，真的应验了金天王所说的话。
English: Zhang Qian walked on time, and indeed saw the noisy voices on the road ahead. When he inquired, people told him that Wang Cun of a certain village had shot and killed a red tiger, which really fulfilled the words of the Golden King.

古文：偃遂自市酒，求鹿脯，亲往庙谢之。
现代文：张偃就自己买了酒和鹿脯，亲自到庙里去祭谢。
English: Zhang Ye bought the wine and deer antler by himself and went to the temple to offer thanks.

古文：裴氏子
现代文：裴氏子
English: Bae's son

古文：天水彭郡裴氏子，咸通中，于东阆学孤林法。
现代文：天水彭郡有个姓裴的人，在东寺学孤林法术。
English: There is a man in Peng County, Tianshui with the surname of Pei, who is studying solitary forest magic at the East Temple.

古文：淫其亲表妇女，事发系狱。
现代文：此人竟奸淫了亲戚中的妇女，事情被揭发后下了大狱。
English: The man had actually raped a female relative, and went to prison after the affair was exposed.

古文：每日供其饮食，悉是孤林法神为致之。狱吏怪而谓其神曰：神既灵异，何不为免此刑？
现代文：然而每天孤林法神都给裴某送饭吃。管监狱的官感到奇怪，就问孤林法神说，您这么灵通，何不干脆想法让他免去刑罚呢？
English: The officer in charge of the prison was surprised and asked the Solitary Forest Deity, "You are so clever, why don't you just think of a way to let him avoid punishment?"

古文：神曰：受吾法者，只可全身远害，方便济人。
现代文：神说，学我的法术的人，只能用法术来防身避害，救助他人。
English: God said, "Those who learn my spells can only use them to protect themselves from harm and to save others.

古文：既违戒誓，岂但王法，神亦不容也。
现代文：现在裴某既然犯了禁忌别，别说是人间王法不容，神也不能容他。
English: Now that Pei has broken the taboo, let alone the king of the world, the law is unacceptable, and God cannot tolerate him.

古文：今之殷勤，以酬香火之功。
现代文：给他送饭，仅仅是回报他给神烧香上供的功而已。
English: Giving him food was just a reward for the work he had done in offering incense to the gods.

古文：竟笞杀之。
现代文：后来裴某竟被鞭子抽死了。
English: Later, Bae was beaten to death with a whip.

古文：韦驺
现代文：韦驺
English: Wei Xuan

古文：韦驺者，明五音，善长啸，自称逸群公子。
现代文：有个叫韦驺的人，懂音律，善于长啸，自称是逸群公子。
English: There was a man named Wei Wei, who knew music and was good at whistling. He claimed to be a member of the Yixun noble family.

古文：举进士，一不第便已。
现代文：去参加进士会考，一次没考中，就再也不考了。
English: I went to take the entrance examination, and once I failed the exam, I would never take it again.

古文：曰：男子四方之志，岂屈节于风尘哉。
现代文：常说，男子汉志在四方，岂能为风俗所折节呢。
English: It is often said that a man's character can be formed in all four directions, but can it be broken by custom?

古文：游岳阳，岳阳太守以亲知见辟，数月谢病去。
现代文：后来韦驺游荡到岳阳，被岳阳太守所征用，几月后称病离去。
English: Later, Wei Wei wandered to Yueyang and was requisitioned by the governor of Yueyang. A few months later, he claimed to be ill and left.

古文：驺亲弟騋，舟行，溺于洞庭湖。
现代文：韦驺的弟弟叫韦騋，坐船时淹死在洞庭湖中。
English: Wei Wei's younger brother, Wei Wei, drowned while boating in Dongting Lake.

古文：驺乃水滨恸哭。
现代文：韦驺就在湖滨痛哭，并把船停泊在湖神庙下，想把庙烧掉。
English: Wei Wei cried bitterly on the lake shore and moored his boat under the Lake God Temple, wanting to burn the temple down.

古文：移舟湖神庙下，欲焚湖神庙，曰：千里估胡，安稳获济。
现代文：他大喊道，化了那么多钱修了这湖神庙，为了能使老百姓得到佑护平安度日。
English: He shouted that he had spent so much money to build this lake temple so that the people could be protected and live in peace.

古文：吾弟穷悴，乃罹此殃。焉用尔庙为？
现代文：我弟弟穷困憔悴，却遭此大难，要你这湖神庙有什么用！
English: What use is this lake temple to you, when my brother is poor and destitute, but has suffered such great hardships!

古文：忽于舟中假寐，梦神人盛服来谒，谓驺曰：幽冥之途，无枉杀者。
现代文：他在船上小睡时，梦见一个神人穿着官服来拜见他，并对他说，阴间从来没有冤枉过一个人。
English: While he was taking a nap on the boat, he dreamed that a god-man in a government uniform came to pay him a visit and told him that the underworld had never wronged anyone.

古文：明公先君，昔为城守，方闻谠正，鬼神避之。
现代文：你的先父过去作过这里的地方官，他为人刚正不阿，鬼神都怕他的正气。
English: Your forefather used to be a local official here. He was an upright man, and ghosts and gods were afraid of his uprightness.

古文：撤淫祠甚多，不当废者有二。
现代文：他上任后，下令撤掉了很多不该建立的祠庙，但其中有两座庙是不该撤的。
English: After he took office, he ordered the removal of many temples that should not have been built, but two of them should not have been removed.

古文：二神上诉，帝初不许，因请十余年，乃许与后嗣一人，谢二废庙之主。
现代文：这两座庙里的神就向上告状。天帝最初不管，二神一直告了十多年。后来天帝允许让你们韦家的后代中死一个人，来向二位庙神谢罪。
English: The gods in these two temples complained to the emperor. At first, the emperor did not care, and the two gods kept complaining for more than ten years. Later, the emperor allowed one of the descendants of the Wei family to die to thank the two temple gods.

古文：然亦须退不能知其道，进无以补于时者，故贤弟当之耳。倘求丧不获，即我之过，当令水工送尸湖上。
现代文：要死，就得在你们后代中找一个最没有出息的人去死，你弟弟正好是这样的人，因而就让他死了。如果你找不到你弟弟的尸体，那就是我的失职，我立刻让水工把你弟弟的尸体给你送来。
English: If you want to die, you have to find the most worthless person among your descendants to die. Your brother is just such a person, so let him die. If you can't find your brother's body, it's my fault. I immediately asked the waterman to bring your brother's body to you.

古文：驺惊悟，其事遂止。遂命渔舟施钩缗，果获弟之尸于岸。
现代文：韦驺惊醒后，不再想烧湖神庙，使渔船放下绳和钩，果然在湖边岸上找到了弟弟的尸体。
English: After Wei Wei woke up, he no longer wanted to burn the lake temple, so he made the fishing boat put down the rope and hook, and found his brother's body on the shore of the lake.

古文：是夕，又梦神谢曰：鬼神不畏愤怒，而畏果敢，以其诚也。
现代文：当天夜晚，韦驺又梦见湖神来向他道谢说，鬼神不怕人发怒，但怕那些勇敢的人，因为他们心地至诚。
English: That night, Wei Wei also dreamed that the lake god came to thank him, saying that ghosts and gods are not afraid of people's anger, but are afraid of those who are brave, because they are sincere.

古文：君今为人果敢。
现代文：你就是一个果敢诚恳的人。
English: You are a brave and sincere person.

古文：昔洞庭张乐，是吾所司。
现代文：过去洞庭湖里只要奏乐，就都是我来演奏。
English: In the past, whenever there was music in Dongting Lake, I would come and play.

古文：愿以至音酬君厚惠，所冀观咸池之节奏，释浮世之忧烦也。
现代文：我现在要为你奏上一曲，以感谢你对我的赠馈，也可以听一听神界的音律，来减轻你人世的烦恼。
English: I will now play a piece for you to thank you for your gift to me, and you can also listen to the melody of the spirit world to alleviate your troubles in the world.

古文：忽睹金石羽籥，铿锵振作。
现代文：这时，韦驺突然看见空中出现了不少乐器，奏起了动听的乐曲。
English: At this time, Wei Wei suddenly saw a lot of musical instruments appear in the air and played beautiful music.

古文：驺甚叹异，以为非据，曲终乃寤。
现代文：韦驺十分惊叹，因为音乐奏的都是没有谱子作依据的。音乐奏完了，韦驺就醒了。
English: Wei Wei was very surprised, because the music was not based on a score. When the music was over, Wei Wei woke up.

