古文：贞观元年，太宗曰： 朕看古来帝王以仁义为治者，国祚延长，任法御人者，虽救弊于一时，败亡亦促。
现代文：贞观元年，太宗说： 我看古代的帝王，凡以仁义治理国家的，都国运久远。用严刑酷法统领人民的，虽然能挽救一时的弊端，但国家很快就会灭亡。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said: I look at the emperors of ancient times. Those who govern the country with benevolence and righteousness will have a long-term success. Leading the people with severe punishment and harsh laws, although it can save the temporary drawbacks, the country will soon perish.

古文：既见前王成事，足是元龟。
现代文：既然我们看到了前代帝王成事的方法，就可以把它们用作统治国家的典范。
English: Now that we have seen how the previous emperors accomplished things, we can use them as a model for ruling the country.

古文：今欲专以仁义诚信为治。望革近代之浇薄也。 
现代文：现在，我们要以诚信、仁义作为治理国家的方针，希望这有助于铲除近代的虚伪之风。 
English: Now, we should take honesty, benevolence and righteousness as the principle of governing the country. I hope this will help eradicate the modern hypocrisy.

古文：黄门侍郎王珪对曰： 天下凋丧日久，陛下承其余弊，弘道移风，万代之福。
现代文：黄门侍郎王珪回答说： 天下荒废凋疲的时间已经很长了，陛下在天下积弊之时统领国家，弘扬古代圣贤的遗风，实乃万民之福。
English: The Yellow Gate's steward, Wang Qi, replied, "The world has been in a state of desolation for a long time. Your Majesty is leading the country at a time when the world is in a bad state. Carrying forward the legacy of the ancient sages is truly a blessing for all people.

古文：但非贤不理，惟在得人。 
现代文：但没有贤才是治理不好国家的，关键在于用人得当。 
English: However, a country that is not well governed is a country that does not have talented people. The key is to employ people properly.

古文：太宗曰： 朕思贤之情，岂舍梦寐！ 
现代文：太宗说： 我求贤若渴，即使夜晚做梦都梦到贤才。 
English: Taizong said, "I thirst for talent, even when I dream at night I dream of talent."

古文：给事中杜正伦进曰： 世必有才，随时听用，岂待梦傅说，逢吕尚，然后为治乎？ 
现代文：给事中杜正伦说： 哪个时代都有人才，随时等候陛下的发掘任用，哪里用得着去梦傅说，遇吕尚，然后才治理天下呢？ 
English: During the presentation, Du Zhenglun said: "In which era are there talented people, always waiting for the discovery and appointment of His Majesty, where is the need to go to Mengfu and say, meet Lushan, and then govern the world?

古文：太宗深纳其言。
现代文：太宗十分赞赏他的话。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated his words.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕谓乱离之后，风俗难移，比观百姓渐知廉耻，官民奉法，盗贼日稀，故知人无常俗，但政有治乱耳。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 我原来认为在离乱之后，民间的风俗习惯会很难改变，近来我发现百姓逐渐懂得了廉洁和羞耻，官员庶民都能遵守法纪，盗贼一天比一天少，我才知道民间没有一成不变的风俗习惯，关键要看施政是治还是乱。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: I originally thought that after the chaos, the folk customs and habits would be difficult to change. Recently, I found that the people gradually understood the integrity and shame, officials and ordinary people could abide by the law, and thieves were decreasing day by day. Only then did I know that the folk did not have immutable customs and habits. The key is to see whether the government is ruled or disordered.

古文：是以为国之道，必须抚之以仁义，示之以威信，因人之心，去其苛刻，不作异端，自然安静，公等宜共行斯事也。 
现代文：所以，治理国家，必须用仁义来抚慰百姓，同时还要显示出朝廷的威信，顺应民心，废除苛刻的法令，不做背离道义的事情，这样社会自然会平定安静。你们应该共同来做好这件事。 
English: Therefore, to govern the country, it is necessary to soothe the people with benevolence and righteousness, and at the same time show the prestige of the court, comply with the people's hearts, abolish harsh laws and regulations, and do not do things that deviate from morality. In this way, society will naturally be calm and quiet. You should do this together.

古文：贞观四年，房玄龄奏言： 今阅武库甲仗，胜隋日远矣。 
现代文：贞观四年，房玄龄上奏说： 最近，我检查武器库里的铠甲兵器，发现已远远超过隋朝了。 
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Fang Xuanling said: Recently, I checked the armored weapons in the arsenal and found that they have far exceeded the Sui Dynasty.

古文：太宗曰： 饬兵备寇虽是要事，然朕唯欲卿等存心理道，务尽忠贞，使百姓安乐，便是朕之甲仗。
现代文：唐太宗说： 整修兵器防御寇乱，虽然是紧要的事情，但我要求你们把心思用于治国之道，各自务必竭尽忠贞，使老百姓安居乐业，这才是我真正要的铠甲兵器。
English: Tang Taizong said: Although it is an urgent matter to renovate weapons to defend against invasion and turmoil, I ask you to devote your minds to the way of governing the country. Each of you must be loyal to the best of your ability, so that the people can live and work in peace. This is the armor weapon I really want.

古文：隋炀帝岂为甲仗不足，以至灭亡？
现代文：隋炀帝难道是因为铠甲兵器不足，才遭到灭亡的吗？
English: Did the Sui and Qian Dynasties perish because of insufficient armored weapons?

古文：正由仁义不修，而群下怨叛故也。
现代文：正是由于他不修仁义，群臣才会怨恨叛离他。
English: It was precisely because he did not practice benevolence and righteousness that the courtiers would resent and betray him.

古文：宜识此心。 
现代文：你们应该理解我的想法啊！ 
English: You should understand my thoughts!

古文：贞观十三年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 林深则鸟栖，水广则鱼游，仁义积则物自归之。
现代文：贞观十三年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 树林广袤就有飞鸟栖息，水域深广就有鱼儿游弋，多施仁义百姓自然会归顺。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant ministers: If the woods are vast, there will be flying birds, and if the waters are deep and wide, there will be fish swimming. If the people are more benevolent, they will naturally submit.

古文：人皆知畏避灾害，不知行仁义则灾害不生。
现代文：人们都知道恐惧而躲避灾害，却不知施行仁义，灾害就不会产生。
English: People know fear and avoid disasters, but they do not know how to practice benevolence and righteousness, and disasters will not occur.

古文：夫仁义之道，当思之在心，常令相继，若斯须懈怠，去之已远。
现代文：仁义之道，一刻也不能忘记，我们要不断地将仁义推行下去，如有片刻懈怠，就会远离仁义之道。
English: We must not forget the path of benevolence and righteousness for a moment. We must continue to promote benevolence and righteousness. If we slack off for a moment, we will be far away from the path of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：犹如饮食资身，恒令腹饱，乃可存其性命。 
现代文：这就好比用饮食来滋养身体，要让肚子经常吃饱，就能够维持生命。 
English: This is like nourishing the body with food. If you keep your stomach full, you can sustain life.

古文：王珪顿首曰： 陛下能知此言，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：王珪叩头说： 陛下能知道这些道理，真是天下的大幸啊！ 
English: Wang Yao kowtowed and said, "It is truly a great blessing for the world that Your Majesty can know these truths!"

