古文：◎仪卫
现代文：仪卫
English: Guard of honour

古文：《周官》，王之仪卫分掌于天官、春官、夏官之属，而跸事则专属于秋官。
现代文：《周官》中规定，帝王的仪卫分别由天官、春官、夏官之属职掌，而帝王出行清道警卫之事便专门属于秋官。
English: "Zhou Guan" stipulates that the emperor's ceremonial guards are respectively under the jurisdiction of Tian Guan, Chun Guan, and Xia Guan, while the emperor's travel clear road guards are specifically under the jurisdiction of Qiu Guan.

古文：汉朝会，则卫官陈车骑，张旗帜。
现代文：汉代朝会，卫官陈列车骑，张布旗帜。
English: Han dynasty imperial court, guardsmen riding trains, banners.

古文：唐沿隋制，置卫尉卿，掌仪仗帐幕之事。
现代文：唐朝沿袭隋朝制度，设置卫尉卿，掌管仪仗帐幕等事务。
English: The Tang Dynasty followed the system of the Sui Dynasty, setting up guards, controlling the ceremonial curtain and other affairs.

古文：宋卫尉领左右金吾卫司、左右金吾仗司、六军仪仗司，主清道、徼巡、排列、奉引仪仗。
现代文：宋朝卫尉统领左、右金吾卫司，左、右金吾仗司，六军仪仗司，主管清道、徼巡、排列、奉引仪仗。
English: Song Dynasty guards led the left and right of the King's Guards, the left and right of the King's Guards, the guard of honor of the Six Armies, in charge of clearing roads, patrolling, arranging, and leading the ceremonial battle.

古文：元置拱卫司，领控鹤户以供其事。
现代文：元朝设置拱卫司，统领专司宿卫的近卫军控鹤户，以供其职事。
English: The Yuan Dynasty set up the Arch Guards Division, and the Guards Army, which commanded the Special Guards Division, controlled Hezu, in order to serve its duties.

古文：历代制度虽有沿革异同，总以谨出入之防，严尊卑之分。
现代文：历代制度虽然有沿革异同，总之在于谨慎帝王出入的防卫，严格尊卑的名分。
English: Although there are similarities and differences in the systems of past dynasties, in a nutshell, it is based on the prudent protection of the emperor's entry and exit, and a strict hierarchy.

古文：慎重则尊严，尊严则整肃，是故文谓之仪，武谓之卫。
现代文：慎重便显得尊贵庄严，尊贵庄严便显得整肃，因此，文叫做仪，武叫做卫。
English: Prudence shows dignity and solemnity, and dignity and solemnity show rectitude. Therefore, literature is called ceremony, and martial arts is called defense.

古文：天子出，车驾次第谓之卤簿。
现代文：天子出行，车驾仪仗按次第排列，叫做卤簿。
English: When the heavenly son travels, the car driving ceremonies are arranged in order, which is called the halo book.

古文：而唐制四品以上皆给卤簿，则君臣并得通称也。
现代文：而唐朝制度，四品以上官员都供给卤簿，于是君臣仪卫都可以通称卤簿。
English: However, in the Tang Dynasty system, officials with four or more products were all provided with halo books, so the monarch, the ministers and the guards could all be called halo books.

古文：明初诏礼官，卤簿弥文，务从省节，以示尚质去奢之意。
现代文：明朝初年下诏给礼官，卤簿更加注重文的仪仗，务求节省，以表示崇尚质朴而舍弃奢侈的意向。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor issued an edict to the etiquette officials that the halo book should pay more attention to the honor of the text, so as to save money, in order to express the intention of advocating simplicity and abandoning luxury.

古文：凡正、至、圣节、朝会，及册拜、接见蕃臣，仪鸾司陈设仪仗。
现代文：凡是元旦、冬至夏至、皇帝生日、朝会以及册封拜官、接见蕃臣，仪鸾司陈列摆设仪仗。
English: On New Year's Day, the winter solstice, the summer solstice, the emperor's birthday, the imperial court, as well as the proclamation of the emperor's enthronement, the worship of officials, and the reception of courtiers, the master of ceremonies will display and set up ceremonial weapons.

古文：而中宫、东宫、亲王皆有仪仗之制。
现代文：而中宫、束宫、亲王都有仪仗的礼制。
English: On the other hand, the middle palace, the second palace, and the prince all have a ceremonial etiquette.

古文：后或随时增饰，要以洪武创制为准则焉。
现代文：后来或随时期的不同而增加仪仗饰品，总之以洪武年间创立的制度为准则。
English: Later, or according to the different periods, the number of ceremonial ornaments was increased, in accordance with the system created during the Hongwu era.

古文：兹撮《集礼》所载大凡，以备考核。
现代文：现在摘取《集礼》所记载的主要内容，以备考核。
English: Now, let's extract the main contents recorded in "Jirei" to prepare for the examination.

古文：其郡王及皇妃、东宫妃以下仪仗，载在《会典》者，并著于篇云。
现代文：其郡王以及皇妃、束官太子妃以下仪仗，记载于《会典》的，一并著录在这一篇中。
English: The county kings, empresses, crown princes and princesses listed in the "Code of Honor" are all recorded in this article.

古文：皇帝仪仗：吴元年十二月辛酉，中书左相国李善长率礼官以即位礼仪进。
现代文：皇帝的仪仗。昊元年十二月辛酉日，中书左相国李善长率领礼官把即位礼仪进献朝廷。
English: The Emperor's ceremonial battle. In December of the first year of the Heian period, Li Shanzhong led the etiquette officials to present the enthronement ceremony to the imperial court.

古文：是日清晨，拱卫司陈设卤簿，列甲士于午门外之东西，列旗仗于奉天门外之东西。
现代文：这一天清晨，拱卫司陈设仪仗，在午门外的束、西两边排列甲士，在奉天门外的东、西两边排列旗仗。
English: In the early morning of this day, the arch guards set up a ceremonial battle, lined up warriors on both sides of the bund and the west outside the noon gate, and lined up flags on both sides of the east and west outside the Fengtian Gate.

古文：龙旗十二，分左右，用甲士十二人。
现代文：龙旗十二面，分列左右，用甲士十二人。
English: There are twelve dragon flags, arranged in a row, with twelve knights.

古文：北斗旗一、纛一居前，豹尾一居后，俱用甲士三人。
现代文：北斗旗一面、纛旗一面放在前，豹尾旗一面放在后，都用甲士三人。
English: A Big Dipper flag, a skull and crossbones flag, and a leopard's tail flag were placed in the front and the back respectively, all of which were carried by three warriors.

古文：虎豹各二，驯象六，分左右。
现代文：虎豹旗各二面，驯象旗六面，分列左右。
English: There are two tiger and leopard flags on each side, and six tamed elephant flags, arranged side by side.

古文：布旗六十四：门旗、日旗、月旗，青龙、白虎、风、云、雷、雨、江、河、淮、济旗，天马、天禄、白泽、朱雀、玄武等旗，木、火、土、金、水五星旗，五岳旗，熊旗，鸾旗及二十八宿旗，各六行；每旗用甲士五人，一人执旗，四人执弓弩。
现代文：布旗六十四面：门旗、日旗、月旗，青龙旗、白虎旗、风旗、云旗、雷旗、雨旗、江旗、河旗、淮旗、济旗，天马、天禄、白泽、朱雀、玄武等旗，木、火、土、金、水五星旗，五岳旗，熊旗，鸾旗以及二十八宿旗，各六行；每面旗帜用甲士五人，一人执旗，四人执弓弩。
English: Sixty-four cloth flags: gate flag, sun flag, moon flag, blue dragon flag, white tiger flag, wind flag, cloud flag, thunder flag, rain flag, river flag, river flag, hoai flag, economic flag, celestial horse, heavenly rook, white tiger, red phoenix, black dragon and other flags, wood, fire, earth, gold and water five-star flag, five-mountain flag, bear flag, cormorant flag and twenty-eight lodging flags, each with six lines; each flag is used by five knights, one holding the flag, four holding the bow.

古文：设五辂于奉天门外：玉辂居中，左金辂，次革辂，右象辂，次木辂，俱并列。
现代文：在奉天门外设置皇上乘坐的五种车：玉辖居中，左边是金辖，其次革辖，右边是象辖，其次木辖，都并排陈列。
English: Five types of carriages used by emperors are set up outside the Gate of Heaven: the jade carriage is in the middle, the gold carriage is on the left, the leather carriage is on the right, the elephant carriage is on the right, and the wooden carriage is on the left. They are all displayed side by side.

古文：丹墀左右布黄麾仗、黄盖、华盖、曲盖、紫方伞、红方伞、雉扇、朱团扇、羽葆幢、豹尾、龙头竿、信幡、传教幡、告止幡、绛引幡、戟氅、戈氅、仪锽氅等，各三行。
现代文：红色地面左右两边布置黄麾仗、黄盖、华盖、曲盖、紫方伞、红方伞、雉扇、朱团扇、羽葆幢、豹尾、龙头竿、信施、传教施、告止施、绛引施、戟氅、戈氅、仪鍟氅等，各三行。
English: On the left and right sides of the red ground, there are three rows of yellow fan, yellow cover, flower cover, curved cover, purple square umbrella, red square umbrella, fan fan, fan fan fan, feather fan, leopard tail, dragon's head pole, letter, missionary, notice, notice, letter, letter, letter, letter, letter, letter, letter, letter and so on.

古文：丹陛左右陈幢节、响节、金节、烛笼、青龙白虎幢、班剑、吾杖、立瓜、卧瓜、仪刀、镫杖、戟、骨朵、朱雀玄武幢等，各三行。
现代文：宫殿红色台阶左右陈设幢节、响节、金节、烛笼、青龙白虎幢、班剑、吾杖、立瓜、卧瓜、仪、鉴杖、戟、骨朵、朱雀玄武幢等，各三行。
English: On the left and right sides of the red steps of the palace, there are three rows of stalls, a bell stall, a gold stall, a candlestick, a blue dragon and a white tiger stall, a team of swords, a cane, a standing melon, a lying melon, a gong, a cane, a shovel, a bone, and a Suzaku genbu stall.

古文：殿门左右设圆盖一、金交椅、金脚踏、水盆、水罐、团黄扇、红扇。
现代文：殿门左右设置圆盖一个、金交椅、金脚踏、水盆、水罐、团黄扇、红扁。
English: There is a round cover on the left and right of the hall door, a gold chair, a gold footrest, a water basin, a water jar, a yellow fan and a red fan.

古文：皆校尉擎执。
现代文：都是校尉托举着。
English: They were all held up by the captain.

古文：洪武元年十月，定元旦朝贺仪：金吾卫于奉天门外分设旗帜。
现代文：洪武元年十月，确定元旦朝贺礼仪。金吾卫在奉天门外面分别设置旗帜。
English: In October of the first year of Hongwu, the New Year's Day morning greeting ceremony was determined. King Wuwei separately set up a flag outside the Fengtian Gate.

古文：宿卫于午门外分设兵仗。
现代文：宿卫在午门外，分别设立兵仗。
English: Outside the afternoon gate, the guards separately set up barricades.

古文：卫尉寺于奉天殿门及丹陛、丹墀设黄麾仗。
现代文：卫尉寺在奉天殿门以及官殿红色台阶、红色地面设置黄麾仗。
English: At the gate of the Bongten Hall and the red steps and floor of the hall of officials, the Temple of the Guardians has set up a yellow swastika.

古文：内使监擎执于殿上。
现代文：内使监托举仪仗站在殿上。
English: The Minister of the Interior stood in the main hall to preside over the ceremony.

古文：凡遇冬至、圣节、册拜、亲王及蕃使来朝，仪俱同。
现代文：凡是遇上冬至、皇帝生日、册封拜官、亲王以及番使来朝见，仪节都相同。
English: Whenever the winter solstice, the emperor's birthday, the enthronement of officials, princes and envoys come to see the emperor, the ceremonies are the same.

古文：其宣诏赦、降香，则惟设奉天殿门及丹陛仪仗、殿上擎执云。
现代文：宣布诏令，发布赦令、朔望日内监到孔庙焚香叩拜，便只设置奉天殿门以及宫殿红色台阶上的仪仗、以及殿上执举的仪仗。
English: After the proclamation of the imperial edict, the issuance of the pardon order, and the visit of the day watchman to the Confucius Temple to burn incense and worship, only the ceremonial battle on the door of the Fucheng Hall and the red steps of the palace, as well as the ceremonial battle held in the hall, were set up.

古文：其陈布次第，午门外，刀、盾、殳、叉各置于东西，甲士用赤。
现代文：仪卫陈列布置的顺序是，午门外，刀、盾、殳、叉各自安置在东西两边，甲士穿赤色服饰。
English: The order of the display of ceremonial guards is that outside the noon gate, swords, shields, halberds and forks are placed on both sides of the east and west respectively, and warriors wear red clothing.

古文：奉天门外中道，金吾、宿卫二卫设龙旗十二，分左右，用青甲士十二人。
现代文：奉天门外中道，金吾、宿卫二卫设置龙旗十二面，分布在左、右两边，用穿青色服饰的甲士十二人。
English: In the middle of the road outside the Fengtian Gate, Kingu and Suvadivi set up twelve dragon flags, distributed on the left and right sides, with twelve soldiers wearing blue clothing.

古文：北斗旗一、纛一居前，豹尾一居后，俱用黑甲士三人。
现代文：北斗旗一面、纛旗一面放在前边，豹尾旗一面放在后边，都用穿黑色服饰的甲士三人。
English: A Big Dipper flag, a skull and crossbones flag, and a leopard's tail flag were placed in the front and the back respectively, all of which were carried by three armadillos dressed in black.

古文：虎豹各二，驯象六，分左右。
现代文：虎豹旗各二面，驯象旗六面，分列左右。
English: There are two tiger and leopard flags on each side, and six tamed elephant flags, arranged side by side.

古文：左右布旗六十四：左前第一行，门旗二，每旗用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭。
现代文：左右布旗六十四面。左前方第一行，门旗二面，每旗用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭。
English: There are sixty-four cloth banners on the left and right, with the first row in the left foreground and two door banners. Each banner is carried by five men in red attire, one of whom is holding the banner and four of whom are holding bows and arrows.

古文：第二行，月旗一，用白甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩；青龙旗一，用青甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第二行，月旗一面，用穿白色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩；青龙旗一面，用穿青色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: The second row, one side of the moon flag, with five knights in white attire, one of them holding a flag, four of them holding a scepter; one side of the blue dragon flag, with five knights in blue attire, one of them holding a flag, four of them holding a scepter.

古文：第三行，风、云、雷、雨旗各一，每旗用黑甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭；天马、白泽、朱雀旗各一，每旗用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭。
现代文：第三行，风、云、雷、雨旗各一面，每面旗用穿黑色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭；天马、白泽、朱雀旗各一面，每面旗用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭。
English: In the third row, the wind, cloud, thunder and rain flags on each side, each flag with five armourers wearing black clothing, one of whom is holding a flag and four of whom are holding bows and arrows; Tianma, Bai Ze and Suzaku flags on each side, each flag with five armourers wearing red clothing, one of whom is holding a flag and four of whom are holding bows and arrows.

古文：第四行，木、火、土、金、水五星旗各一，随其方色，每旗用甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩，其甲木青、火红、土黄、金白、水黑、熊旗、鸾旗各一，每旗用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第四行，木、火、土、金、水五星旗各一面，随各方所属之色，每面旗用甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩，其甲士，木星旗下穿青色甲，火星旗下穿红色甲，土星旗下穿黄色甲，金星旗下穿白色甲，水星旗下穿黑色甲；熊旗、鸾旗各一面，每面旗用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: The fourth row, wood, fire, earth, gold, water five-star flag on each side, according to the color of the parties, each flag with five knights, one of them holding a flag, four holding a scepter, its knights, Jupiter wearing blue armor, Mars wearing red armor, Saturn wearing yellow armor, Venus wearing white armor, Mercury wearing black armor; bear flag, shield flag on each side, each flag with five knights wearing red clothing, one of them holding a flag, four holding a scepter.

古文：第五行角、亢、氐、房、心、尾、箕旗各一，每旗用青甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭。
现代文：第五行，角亢、氐、房、心、尾、箕旗各一面，每面旗用穿青色服饰的甲士五入，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭。
English: In the fifth row, the corner, hoist, room, heart, tail, and shield flags fly on each side, and each flag is entered by five knights wearing blue clothing, one of whom is holding a flag, and four of whom are holding bows and arrows.

古文：第六行斗、牛、女、虚、危、室、壁旗各一，每旗用青甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第六行，斗、牛、女、虚、危、室、壁旗各一面，每面旗用穿青色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: In the sixth row, the battle, ox, woman, ghost, danger, room, and wall flags are on each side, and each flag is used by five warriors wearing blue clothing, one of whom is holding a flag, and four of whom are holding a scepter.

古文：右前第一行，门旗二，每旗用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭。
现代文：右前方第一行，门旗二面，每面旗用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭。
English: In the first row, right front, there are two door banners. Each banner is carried by five knights in red attire, one of whom is holding a banner, and four of whom are holding bows and arrows.

古文：第二行，日旗一，用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩；白虎旗一，用白甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第二行，日旗一面，用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩；白虎旗一面，用身穿白色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: In the second line, one side of the Japanese flag shows five warriors in red attire, one of whom is holding a flag and four of whom are holding scepters; one side of the white tiger flag shows five warriors in white attire, one of whom is holding a flag and four of whom are holding scepters.

古文：第三行，江、河、淮、济旗各一，随其方色，每旗用甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭，其甲江红、河白、淮青、济黑；天禄、白泽、玄武旗各一，每旗用甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭，天禄、白泽红甲，玄武黑甲。
现代文：第三行，江、河、淮、济旗各一面，随同各方代表的颜色，每面用甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭，其甲士所穿之服饰，江旗下者焉红色，河旗下者为白色，淮旗下者为青色，济旗下者焉黑色；天禄、白泽、玄武旗各一面，每面旗用甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭，天禄、白泽下是穿红服的甲士，玄武下是穿黑服的甲士。
English: In the third line, each side of the Jiang, He, Huai, and Ji flags, along with the colors of the representatives of the parties, each side uses five warriors, one of whom is holding a flag, four of whom are holding bows and arrows. The costumes worn by the warriors are red for those under the Jiang flag, white for those under the He flag, blue for those under the Huai flag, and black for those under the Ji flag; Tianlu, Baizhe, and Xuanwu flags each side, five warriors for each flag, one of whom is holding a flag, and four of whom are holding bows and arrows. Tianlu and Baizhe are wearing red

古文：第四行，东、南、中、西、北五岳旗各一，随其方色，每旗用甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩，其甲东岳青、南岳红、中岳黄、西岳白、北岳黑；熊旗、麟旗各一，每旗用红甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第四行，束、南、中、西、北五岳旗各一面，随同各方代表的颜色，每面旗用甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩，其甲士所穿之服饰，束岳旗下者为青色，南岳旗下者为红色，中岳旗下者为黄色，西岳旗下者焉白色，北岳旗下者为黑色；熊旗、麟旗各一面，每旗用穿红色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: In the fourth row, the flags of Sokue, South, Central, West and North Goguryeo on each side, along with the colors of the representatives of each side, each flag is used by five warriors, one of whom is holding a flag, and four of whom are holding a scepter. The costumes worn by the warriors are blue for those under Sokue, red for those under South Goguryeo, yellow for those under Central Goguryeo, white for those under West Goguryeo, and black for those under North Goguryeo; Bear flag and Unicorn flag on each side, each flag is used by five warriors wearing red clothing, one of whom is holding a flag

古文：第五行，奎、娄、胃、昴、毕、觜、参旗各一，每旗用青甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弓箭。
现代文：第五行，奎、娄、胃、昴、毕、觜、参旗各一面，每旗用穿青色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弓箭。
English: In the fifth row, Kui, Ho, Stomach, Ho, Bi, Ho, and Sang are on each side of the flag. Each flag is carried by five knights dressed in blue, one of whom is holding the flag, and four of whom are holding bows and arrows.

古文：第六行，井、鬼、柳、星、张、翼、轸旗各一，每旗用青甲士五人，内一人执旗，旗下四人执弩。
现代文：第六行，井、鬼、柳、星、张、翼、干旗各一面，每面旗用穿青色服饰的甲士五人，其中一人手持旗，旗下四人手持弩。
English: The sixth row, the well, the ghost, the willow, the star, the curtain, the wing, and the dry flag are on each side, and each flag has five warriors wearing blue clothing, one of whom is holding a flag, and four of whom are holding a scepter.

古文：奉天门外，拱卫司设五辂。
现代文：奉天门外，拱卫司设置皇上乘坐的五种车。
English: Outside the Gate of Heaven, the Arch-Vice-Chancellor set up five kinds of cars for the emperor to ride.

古文：玉辂居中；左金辂，次革辂；右象辂，次木辂。
现代文：玉辖处于中间；左边金辖，其次革辖；右边象辖，其次木辖。
English: Jade jurisdiction is in the middle; on the left is gold jurisdiction, followed by leather jurisdiction; on the right is elephant jurisdiction, followed by wood jurisdiction.

古文：俱并列。
现代文：都并排陈列。
English: They are all displayed side by side.

古文：典牧所设乘马于文武楼之南，各三，东西相向。
现代文：典牧所设置的驾车的马在文武楼的南边，各三匹，东西相向。
English: The driving horses set up by the herdsmen's ranch are on the south side of Wenwu Building, three horses each, facing east and west.

古文：丹墀左右布黄麾仗凡九十，分左右，各三行。
现代文：红色地面左右布列黄麾仗一共九十人，分成左右，各三行。
English: A total of ninety people, divided into left and right, three rows each.

古文：左前第一行，十五：黄盖一，红大伞二，华盖一，曲盖一，紫方伞一，红方伞一，雉扇四，朱团扇四。
现代文：左前第一行，十五人：黄盖一柄，红大伞二柄，华盖一柄，曲柄伞一柄，紫方伞一柄，红方伞一柄，雉扇四柄，朱团扇四柄。
English: First row from the left, 15 people: a yellow umbrella, two red umbrellas, a Chinese umbrella, a crank umbrella, a purple umbrella, a red umbrella, four fans, and four fans.

古文：第二行，十五：羽葆幢二，豹尾二，龙头竿二，信幡二，传教幡二，告止幡二，绛引幡二，黄麾一。
现代文：第二行，十五人：羽葆幢二面，豹尾二面，龙头竿二柄，信旖二面，传教旖二面，告止旖二面，绛引旖二面，黄麾一面。
English: The second line, fifteen people: feather duster two sides, leopard tail duster two sides, dragon head pole two sides, letter duster two sides, missionary duster two sides, stopper duster two sides, hook duster two sides, yellow duster one side.

古文：第三行，十五：戟氅五，戈氅五，仪锽氅五。
现代文：第三行，十五人：戟蹩五面，戈氅五面，仪鍟氅五面。
English: Third row, 15 people: five gongs, five gongs, five gongs.

古文：右前第一行，十五：黄盖一，红大伞二，华盖一，曲盖一，紫方伞一，红方伞一，雉扇四，朱团扇四。
现代文：右前方第一行，十五人：黄盖一柄，红大伞二柄，华盖一柄，曲柄伞一柄，紫方伞一柄，红方伞一柄，雉扇四柄，朱团扇四柄。
English: In the first row on the right, fifteen people: a yellow umbrella, two red umbrellas, a Chinese umbrella, a crank umbrella, a purple umbrella, a red umbrella, four fans, and four fans.

古文：第二行，十五：羽葆幢二，豹尾二，龙头竿二，信幡二，传教幡二，告止幡二，绛引幡二，黄麾一。
现代文：第二行，十五人：羽葆幢二面，豹尾旖二面，龙头竿二柄，信旖二面，传教旖二面，告止旖二面，绛引旖二面，黄麾一面。
English: The second line, fifteen people: feather duster two sides, leopard tail duster two sides, dragon head pole two sides, letter duster two sides, missionary duster two sides, stopper duster two sides, hook duster two sides, yellow duster one side.

古文：第三行，十五：戟氅五，戈氅五，仪锽氅五。
现代文：第三行，十五人：戟氅五面，戈氅五面，仪钟氅五面。
English: Third row, 15 people: five gongs, five gongs, five gongs.

古文：皆校尉擎执。
现代文：都是校尉持举。
English: They were all held up by the captain.

古文：丹陛左右，拱卫司陈幢节等仗九十，分左右，为四行。
现代文：宫殿红色台阶左右，拱卫司陈列幢节等仪仗九十，分列左右，成为四行。
English: Around the red steps of the palace, the arch guards display the Ninety Ceremonies, which are divided into four rows.

古文：左前第一行，响节十二，金节三，烛笼三。
现代文：左前方第一行，响节十二柄，金节三柄，烛笼三个。
English: Front left, first row, twelve rings, three bracelets, three candlesticks.

古文：第二行，青龙幢一，班剑三，吾杖三，立瓜三，卧瓜三，仪刀三，镫杖三，戟三，骨朵三，朱雀幢一。
现代文：第二行，青龙幢一面，班剑三柄，吾杖三柄，立瓜三柄，卧瓜三柄，仪刀三柄，鉴杖三柄，戟三柄，骨朵三柄，朱雀幢一面。
English: The second row, one side of the blue dragon, three sides of the team sword, three sides of the cane, three sides of the standing melon, three sides of the lying melon, three sides of the instrument, three sides of the knife, three sides of the cane, three sides of the shovel, three sides of the bone, one side of the blackbird.

古文：右前第一行，响节十二，金节三，烛笼三。
现代文：右前方第一行，响节十二柄，金节三柄，烛笼三个。
English: Front right, first row, twelve rings, three bracelets, three candlesticks.

古文：第二行，白虎幢一，班剑三，吾杖三，立瓜三，卧瓜三，仪刀三，镫杖三，戟三，骨朵三，玄武幢一。
现代文：第二行，白虎幢一面，班剑三柄，吾杖三柄，立瓜三柄，卧瓜三柄，仪刀三柄，鉴杖三柄，戟三柄，骨朵三柄，玄武幢一面。
English: The second row, white tiger one side, team sword three sides, my cane three sides, standing gourd three sides, lying gourd three sides, instrument and knife three sides, yardstick three sides, shovel three sides, bone three sides, basenji one side.

古文：皆校尉擎执。
现代文：都是校尉持举。
English: They were all held up by the captain.

古文：奉天殿门左右，拱卫司陈设：左行，圆盖一，金脚踏一，金水盆一，团黄扇三，红扇三；右行，圆盖一，金交椅一，金水罐一，团黄扇三，红扇三。
现代文：奉天殿门左右，拱卫司陈设：左行，圆盖一柄，金脚踏一个，金水盆一个，团黄扇三柄，红扇三柄；右行，圆盖一柄，金交椅一张，金水罐一个，团黄扇三柄，红扇三柄。
English: On the left and right sides of the gate of the Bongten Hall, the arch guards display: left row, one round cover, one gold footrest, one gold basin, three yellow fans and three red fans; right row, one round cover, one gold chair, one gold water jar, three yellow fans and three red fans.

古文：皆校尉擎执。
现代文：都是校尉持举。
English: They were all held up by the captain.

古文：殿上左右内使监陈设：左，拂子二，金唾壶一，金香合一；右，拂子二，金唾盂一，金香炉一。
现代文：殿上左右内使监陈设：左面，拂子二个，金唾壶一个，金香盒一个；右面，拂子二个，金唾盂一个，金香炉一个。
English: On the left and right sides of the hall, the overseers display: on the left, two whisks, a gold spittoon, and a gold incense box; on the right, two whisks, a gold spittoon, and a gold incense burner.

古文：皆内使擎执。
现代文：都是内使持举。
English: All of them have been promoted internally.

古文：和声郎陈乐于丹墀文武官拜位之南，其器数详见《乐志》内。
现代文：和声郎陈列乐器在红色地面文武官员拜位的南面，其乐器敷详见《乐志》内的记载。
English: The musicians display their instruments on the red ground to the south of the civil and military official's throne. The details of their instruments can be found in the "Music History."

古文：三年，命制郊丘祭祀拜褥。郊丘用席表蒲里为褥，宗庙、社稷、先农、山川用红文绮表红木棉布里为褥。
现代文：洪武三年，命令制造郊丘祭祀跪拜所用的垫褥，郊丘表面用席，里面用蒲制成垫褥，宗庙、社稷、先农、山川之祭，表面用红色文绮，里面用红木棉布制成垫褥。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he ordered the production of cushions for kneeling in the suburb hill sacrifice, seats for the surface of the suburb hill, cushions made of cattails inside, festivals of ancestral temples, shrines, ancestors, and mountains and rivers, cushions made of red paper on the surface and mahogany cotton on the inside.

古文：十二年，命礼部增设丹墀仪仗，黄伞、华盖、曲盖、紫方伞、红方伞各二，雉扇、红团扇各四，羽葆幢、龙头竿、绛引、传教、告止、信幡各六，戟氅、戈氅、仪锽氅各十。
现代文：洪武十二年，命令礼部增设红色地面仪仗，黄伞、华盖、曲柄伞、紫方伞、红方伞各二柄，雉扇，红团扇各四柄，羽葆幢、龙头竿、绛引、传教、告止、信旖各六面，戟氅、戈氅、仪镂氅各十面。
English: In the 12th year of Hongwu, he ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to add a red ground ceremonial, yellow umbrella, flower cover, crank umbrella, purple umbrella, red square umbrella, each with two handles, fan, red fan, each with four handles, feather duster, dragon head pole, guide, missionary, notice, letter duster, each with six handles, gong, gong and ceremonial gong, each with ten handles.

古文：永乐元年，礼部言卤簿中宜有九龙车一乘，请增置。
现代文：永乐元年，礼部上言，仪仗中应该有九龙车一乘，请术增设。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the etiquette department said that there should be one ride of the Kowloon Wagon in the ceremonial battle, and it was added.

古文：帝曰： 礼贵得中，过为奢，不及为俭，先朝审之精矣。
现代文：皇帝说： 礼贵在得其适中，超过适中标准便是奢侈，不及适中标准便是过俭，前朝考究已很精到。
English: The emperor said, "Courtesy is appropriate, exceeding the appropriate standard is luxury, and failing to meet the appropriate standard is being too frugal. The previous government was very meticulous.

古文：当遵用旧章，岂可辄有增益，以启后世之奢哉？
现代文：应当遵照沿用旧的规制，哪里能够随便增加，以开启后代的奢侈呢？
English: Should the old regulations be followed, and where can they be increased in order to open up luxury for future generations?

古文：九龙车既先朝所无，其仍旧便。 
现代文：九龙车既然前朝没有，还是照旧规适当。 
English: Since there was no Kowloon Wagon in the previous morning, it is still appropriate to follow the old rules.

古文：宣德元年，更造卤簿仪仗，有具服幄殿一座，金交椅一，金脚踏一，金盆一，金罐一，金马杌一，鞍笼一，金香炉一，金香合一，金唾盂一，金唾壶一，御杖二，摆锡明甲一百副，盔一百，弓一百，箭三千，刀一百。
现代文：宣德元年重新造卤簿仪仗，有具服幄殿一座，金交椅一张，金脚踏一个，金盆一个，金罐一个，金马杌一个，鞍笼一个，金香炉一个，金香盒一个，金唾盂一个，金唾壶一个，御杖二柄，摆锡明甲一百副，头盔一百副，弓一百张，箭三千枝，一百把。
English: In the first year of the Xuande Emperor, a new copy of the Book of Rites and Decrees was made. There was a yakitori hall with robes, a gold chair, a gold footrest, a gold basin, a gold jar, a gold stirrup, a saddle cage, a gold incense burner, a gold incense box, a gold spittoon, a gold spittoon, two staffs, a hundred pairs of tin armor, a hundred helmets, a hundred bows, three thousand arrows, and a hundred spears.

古文：其执事校尉，每人鹅帽，只孙衣，铜带靴履鞋一副。
现代文：那些执事校尉，每人戴鹅帽，穿绛色锦衣，铜带靴履鞋一副。
English: Each of the deacon-lieutenants wore a goose hat, a dark-coloured brocade coat, and a pair of copper-laced shoes.

古文：常朝，各色罗掌扇四十，各色罗绢伞十，万寿伞一，黄双龙扇二。
现代文：平常朝拜，各种颜色的罗掌扇四十柄，各种颜色的罗绢伞十柄，万寿伞一柄，黄色双龙扇二柄。
English: Ordinary morning worship, all kinds of colors of Luo palm fan with forty handles, all kinds of colors of Luo umbrella with ten handles, one umbrella for longevity, yellow double dragon fan with two handles.

古文：筵宴，销金罗伞四，销金雨伞四，金龙响节二十四。
现代文：举行宴席，销金罗伞四柄，销金雨伞四柄，金龙响节二十四柄。
English: A banquet was held, four golden parasols were sold, four golden umbrellas were sold, and 24 golden dragon lanterns were sold.

古文：皇后仪仗，洪武元年定：丹陛仪仗三十六人：黄麾二，戟五色绣幡六，戈五色绣幡六，锽五色锦幡六，小雉扇四，红杂花团扇四，锦曲盖二，紫方伞二，红大伞四。
现代文：皇后的仪仗，洪武元年制定。红色台阶仪仗三十六人：黄麾二面，戟五色绣施六面，戈五色绣旋六面，鍟五色锦旖六面，小雉扇四柄，红色杂花团扇四柄，锦曲柄伞二柄，紫方伞二柄，红大伞四柄。
English: The red steps of the thirty-six-person ceremonial war: yellow embroidery on two sides, five-colored embroidery on six sides, five-colored embroidery on six sides, five-colored brocade on six sides, four small fan handles, four red fan handles, two brocade umbrella handles, two purple umbrella handles, four red umbrella handles.

古文：丹墀仪仗五十八人：班剑四，金吾杖四，立瓜四，卧瓜四，仪刀四，镫杖四，骨朵四，斧四，响节十二，锦花盖二，金交椅一，金脚踏一，金水盆一，金水罐一，方扇八。
现代文：丹墀仪仗五十八人：班剑四把，金吾杖四柄，立瓜四柄，卧瓜四柄，仪刀四把，鉴杖四柄，骨朵四柄，斧四柄，响节十二柄，锦花盖二柄，金交椅一张，金脚踏一个，金水盆一个，金水罐一个，方扇八柄。
English: The fifty-eight men of the Danyang ceremony: four swords, four wands, four standing melons, four lying melons, four swords, four knives, four staffs, four bones, four axes, twelve rattles, two brocade lids, one gold chair, one gold footrest, one gold basin, one gold pitcher, eight square fans.

古文：宫中常用仪卫二十人：内使八人，色绣幡二，金斧二，金骨朵二，金交椅一，金脚踏一；宫女十二人，金水盆一，金水罐一，金香炉一，金香合一，金唾壶一，金唾盂一，拂子二，方扇四。
现代文：宫中常用仪卫二十人：内使八人，色绣施二面，金斧二柄，金骨朵二柄，金交椅一张，金脚踏一个；宫女十二人，金水盆一个，金水罐一个，金香炉一个，金香盒一个，金唾壶一个，金唾盂一个，拂子二柄，方扇四柄。
English: There are twenty guards commonly used in the palace: eight servants, two embroidered cranes, two gold axes, two gold bone brooms, one gold chair, one gold footrest; twelve maids of honor, one gold basin, one gold pitcher, one gold incense burner, one gold box, one gold spittoon, one gold spittoon, two whisks, and four square fans.

古文：永乐元年增制红杖一对。
现代文：永乐元年增制红杖一对。
English: In the first year of Yongle, a pair of red canes were added.

古文：太皇太后、皇太后仪仗与皇后同。
现代文：太皇太后、皇太后仪仗与皇后相同。
English: For the grand empress dowager and the empress dowager, the ceremony is the same as for the empress.

古文：皇太子仪仗，洪武元年定：门外中道设龙旗六，其执龙旗者并戎服。
现代文：皇太子仪仗，洪武元年制定。门外道路之中设置龙旗六面，那些手持龙旗的人都穿戎装。
English: Six dragon flags are set up on the road outside the gate, and those holding the dragon flags wear military uniforms.

古文：黄旗一居中，左前青旗一，右前赤旗一，左后黑旗一，右后白旗一，每旗执弓弩军士六人，服各随旗色。
现代文：黄旗一面处在中央，左前方青旗一面，右前方赤旗一面，左后方黑旗一面，右后方白旗一面，每面旗下持弓弩军士六名，服饰各自随同旗帜的颜色。
English: One side of the yellow flag is in the center, one side of the blue flag in the left front, one side of the red flag in the right front, one side of the black flag in the left rear, and one side of the white flag in the right rear. Six sergeants with bows and arrows are under each flag, and their clothing is the same color as the flag.

古文：殿下设三十六人：绛引幡二，戟氅六，戈氅六，仪锽氅六，羽葆幢六，青方伞二，青小方扇四，青杂花团扇四，皆校尉擎执。
现代文：殿下设置三十六人：绛引旖二面，戟氅六面，戈氅六面，仪镂氅六面，羽葆幢六面，青方伞二柄，青小方扇四柄，青杂花团扇四柄，都是校尉持举。
English: His highness set up thirty-six people: two sides of the gong, six sides of the gong, six sides of the gong, six sides of the gong, six sides of the feather, two sides of the blue umbrella, four sides of the blue small square fan, and four sides of the blue miscellaneous flower fan, all of which were held by the lieutenant.

古文：殿前设四十八人：班剑四，吾杖四，立瓜四，卧瓜四，仪刀四，镫杖四，骨朵四，斧四，响节十二，金节四，皆校尉擎执。
现代文：殿前设置四十八人：班剑四把，吾杖四柄，立瓜四柄，卧瓜四柄，仪刀四把，鉴杖四柄，骨朵四柄，斧四柄，响节十二柄，金节四柄，都是校尉持举。
English: Forty-eight people were set up in front of the hall: four swords, four staffs, four standing gourds, four lying gourds, four knives, four staffs, four bones, four axes, twelve rattles, and four gold rings, all held by the captain.

古文：殿门设十二人：金交椅一，金脚踏一，金水罐一，金水盆一，青罗团扇六，红圆盖二，皆校尉擎执。
现代文：殿门设置十二人：金交椅一张，金脚踏一个，金水罐一个，金水盆一个，青罗团扇六柄，红圆盖二柄，都是校尉持举。
English: Twelve people were set up at the palace gate: one gold chair, one gold footrest, one gold water jar, one gold water basin, six Qing Luo fan handles, two red round lid handles, all held by the captain.

古文：殿上设六人：金香炉一，香合一，唾盂一，唾壶一，拂子二，皆内使擎执。
现代文：殿上设置六人：金香炉一个，香盒一个，唾盂一个，唾壶一个，拂子二柄，都是内使持举。
English: There are six people in the hall: one gold incense burner, one incense box, one spittoon, one spittoon, and two whisks, all held by the inner servant.

古文：永乐二年，礼部言，东宫仪仗，有司失纪载，视亲王差少，宜增制金香炉、金香合各一，殳二，叉二，传教、告止、信幡各二，节二，幢二，夹槊二，槊、刀、盾各二十，戟八，红纸油灯笼六，红罗销金边圆伞、红罗绣圆伞各一，红罗曲盖绣伞、红罗素圆伞、红罗素方伞、青罗素方伞各二，红罗绣孔雀方扇、红罗绣四季花团扇各四，拂子二，唾盂、唾壶各一，鞍笼一，诞马八，红令旗二，清道旗四，幰弩一，白泽旗二，弓箭二十副。
现代文：永乐二年，礼部奏言，柬宫的仪仗，主管部门失于记载，比亲王的少，应该增制金香炉、金香盒各一个，殳二杆，叉二杆，传教、告止、信旖各二面，节二柄，幢二面，夹稍二柄，稍、刀、盾各二十柄，戟八柄，红纸油灯笼六个，红罗销金边圆伞、红罗绣圆伞各一柄，红罗曲柄锈伞、红罗素圆伞、红罗素方伞、青罗素方伞各二柄，红罗绣孔雀方扇、红罗绣四季花团扇各四柄，拂子二柄，唾盂、唾壶各一个，鞍笼一个，备用诞马八匹，红令旗二面，清道旗四面，忆弩一张，白泽旗二面，弓箭二十副。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the proclamation of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the ceremonial battle of the Cambodian Palace, the competent department lost in records, less than that of the prince, should add a gold incense burner and a gold incense box, two sticks, two forks, two sides of the missionary, notice and letter, two handles, two sides of the building, two handles of the clip, twenty handles of the knife and shield, eight handles of the shovel, six red paper oil lanterns, one each of the red rosin gold-edged umbrella and the red rosin embroidered umbrella, two each of the red rosin cranked umbrella, red

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：亲王仪仗，洪武六年定：宫门外设方色旗二，青色白泽旗二，执人服随旗色，并戎服。
现代文：亲王仪仗，洪武六年制定。宫门外设置方色旗二面，青色白泽旗二面，持举的人服饰随旗色而定，都穿戎服。
English: Prince's ceremonial battle, formulated in the sixth year of Hongwu. Two square-colored flags and two blue and white flags are set up outside the palace gate. The attire of the person holding the flag depends on the color of the flag, and they all wear military uniforms.

古文：殿下，绛引幡二，戟氅二，戈氅二，仪锽氅二，皆校尉执。
现代文：殿下，绛引旖二面，戟氅二面，戈氅二面，仪鍟氅二面，都是校尉持举。
English: Your Royal Highness, the two sides of the gong, the two sides of the gong, the two sides of the gong, and the two sides of the ceremonial gong are all held by the captain.

古文：殿前，班剑二，吾杖二，立瓜二，卧瓜二，仪刀二，镫杖二，骨朵二，斧二，响节八，皆校尉执。
现代文：殿前，班剑二柄，吾杖二柄，立瓜二柄，卧瓜二柄，仪=柄，鉴杖二柄，骨朵二柄，斧二柄，响节八柄，都是校尉持举。
English: In front of the hall, the squad sword has two handles, my staff has two handles, the standing melon has two handles, the lying melon has two handles, the instrument has a handle, the yardstick has two handles, the bone has two handles, the axe has two handles, and the bell has eight handles, all of which are held by the captain.

古文：殿门，交椅一，脚踏一，水罐一，水盆一，团扇四，盖二，皆校尉执。
现代文：殿门前，交椅一张，脚踏一个，水罐一个，水盆一个，团扇四柄，盖二柄，都是校尉持举。
English: In front of the main gate, a chair, a footstool, a pitcher, a basin, a fan with four handles, and a lid with two handles were all held up by the captain.

古文：殿上，拂子二，香炉一，香合一，唾壶一，唾盂一。
现代文：殿上，拂子二柄，香炉一个，香盒一个，唾壶一个，唾盂一个。
English: In the hall, there are two whisks, an incense burner, an incense box, a spittoon, and a spittoon.

古文：十六年诏，亲王仪仗内交椅、盆、罐用银者，悉改用金。
现代文：洪武十六年下诏，亲王仪仗内交椅、盆、罐用银制的，一律改用金制。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu, it was decreed that the Prince's ceremonial chairs, pots and jars, which were made of silver, would all be changed to gold.

古文：建文四年，礼部言，亲王仪仗合增红油绢销金雨伞一，红纱灯笼、红油纸灯笼各四，敔灯二，大小铜角四。
现代文：建文四年，礼部上言，亲王仪仗应增加红油绢销金雨伞一柄，红纱灯笼、红油纸灯笼各四个，鱿灯二个，大小铜角四个。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwen, the etiquette department recommended that the prince's ceremonial war should increase by one umbrella made of red oil, four lanterns made of red gauze and four lanterns made of red oil paper, two lanterns, and four bronze horns.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永乐三年命工部，亲王仪仗内红销金伞，仍用宝珠龙文。
现代文：永乐三年，命令工部，亲王俄仗内红销金伞，仍用宝珠龙纹。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the Ministry of Industry and Trade ordered that the Prince of Russia's war red-painted golden umbrella still use the treasure bead dragon pattern.

古文：凡世子仪仗同。
现代文：凡世子仪仗相同。
English: Every child of the world sings the same song.

古文：郡王仪仗：令旗二，清道旗二，幰弩一，刀盾十六，弓箭十八副，绛引、传教、告止、信幡各二，吾杖、仪刀、立瓜、卧瓜、骨朵、斧各二，戟十六，槊十六，麾一，幢一，节一，响节六，红销金圆伞一，红圆伞一，红曲柄伞二，红方伞二，青圆扇四，红圆扇四，诞马四，鞍笼一，马杌一，拂子二，交椅一，脚踏一，水盆一，水罐一，香炉一，红纱灯笼二，敔灯二，帐房一座。
现代文：郡王仪仗。令旗二面，清道旗二面，忆弩一张，盾十六把，弓箭十八副，绛引、传教、告止、信旖各二面，吾杖、仪、立瓜、卧瓜、骨朵、斧各二柄，戟十六柄，稍十六柄，麾一面，幢一面，节一柄，响节六柄，红销金圆伞一柄，红圆伞一柄，红曲柄伞二柄，红方伞二柄，青圆扇四柄，红圆扇四柄，备用诞马四匹，鞍笼一副，马杌一个，拂子二柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，水盆一个，水罐一个，香炉一个，红纱灯笼二个，鱿灯二个，账房一座。
English: The county king's ceremonial war. Two banners, two banners of the Qing Dynasty, one banner of remembrance, sixteen shields, eighteen bows and arrows, two banners each for leading, preaching, denouncing, and believing, two staffs each for the staff, staff, standing melon, lying melon, bone, and axe, sixteen staffs each for the pestle, sixteen staffs each for the mortar, one staff for the pestle, one staff for the block, one staff for the knot, six staffs for the bell, one umbrella for the red pin, one umbrella for the red circle, two umbrellas for the red crank, two um

古文：皇妃仪仗：红杖二，清道旗二，绛引幡二，戈氅、戟氅、仪锽氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、镫杖、骨朵、金钺各二，响节四，青方伞四，红绣圆伞一，绣方扇四，红花圆扇四，青绣圆扇四，交椅一，脚踏一，拂子二，水盆一，水罐一，香炉一，香合一，唾盂一，唾壶一，红纱灯笼四。
现代文：皇妃仪仗。红杖二柄，清道旗二面，绛引施二面，戈氅、戟氅、仪鍟氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、鉴杖、骨朵、金镀各二件，响节四柄，青方伞四柄，红绣圆伞一柄，绣方扇四柄，红花圆扇四柄，青锈圆扇四柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，拂子二个，水盆一个，水罐一个，香炉一个，香盒一个，唾盂一个，唾壶一个，红纱灯笼四个。
English: Two red canes, two Qingdao flags, two embroidered cymbals, two embroidered cymbals, two cymbals, two cymbals, two cymbals, two cymbals, two cymbals, two swords, two swords, a standing melon, a lying melon, two cymbals, a bone, two gold-plated cymbals, four rattles, four blue square umbrellas, one red embroidered round umbrella, four embroidered square fans, four red flower round fans, four blue rust round fans, one chair, one foot pedal, two whistles

古文：东宫妃仪仗：红杖二，清道旗二，绛引幡二，仪锽氅、戈氅、戟氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、镫杖、骨朵、金钺各二，响节四，青方伞二，红素圆伞二，红绣圆伞一，红绣方扇四，红绣花圆扇四，青绣圆扇四，交椅一，脚踏一，拂子二，水盆一，水罐一，香炉一，香合一，红纱灯笼四。
现代文：东宫妃仪仗。红杖二柄，清道旗二面，绛引旖二面，仪锂氅、戈氅、戟氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、鉴杖、骨朵、金钱各二件，响节四柄，青方伞二柄，红素圆伞二柄，红绣圆伞一柄，红绣方扇四柄，红绣花圆扇四柄，青锈圆扇四柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，拂子二柄，水盆一个，水罐一个，香炉一个，香盒一个，红纱灯笼四个。
English: Two red canes, two Qingdao flags, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two joss sticks, two j

古文：永乐二年，礼部言，东宫妃仪仗如亲王妃，惟香炉、香合如中宫，但亦不用金，其水盆、水罐皆用银，从之。
现代文：永乐二年，礼部奏言，柬宫妃的仪仗如同亲王妃，只有香炉、香盒如同中宫，但也不用金制，其水盆、水罐都用银制，皇帝听从。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the etiquette department made a speech, saying that the Cambodian princess was like a princess, only the incense burner and incense box were like the middle palace, but they were not made of gold. The water basin and water jar were made of silver, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：亲王妃仪仗：红杖二，清道旗二，绛引幡二，戟氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、骨朵、镫杖各二，响节四，青方伞二，红彩画云凤伞一，青孔雀圆扇四，红花扇四，交椅一，脚踏一，水盆一，水罐一，红纱灯笼四，拂子二。
现代文：亲王妃的仪仗。红杖二柄，清道旗二面，绛引施二面，戟氅、吾杖、仪刀、班剑、立瓜、卧瓜、骨朵、鉴杖各二件，响节四柄，青方伞二柄，红彩画云凤伞一柄，青孔雀圆扇四柄，红花扇四柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，水盆一个，水罐一个，红纱灯笼四个，拂子二柄。
English: Two red canes, two flags of Qingdao, two bowls of incense, two candlesticks, two canes, two swords, two knives, two javelins, a standing melon, a lying melon, a bone flute, and a cane, four rattles, two azure umbrellas, one red-painted cloud and phoenix umbrella, four blue peacock fans, four scarlet fans, one chair, one footrest, one basin, one pitcher, four red lanterns, and two whistles.

古文：公主、世子妃仪仗俱同。
现代文：公主、世子妃的仪仗都相同。
English: The ceremonial dances of princesses and heiresses are the same.

古文：郡王妃仪仗：红杖二，清道旗二，绛引幡二，戟氅、吾杖、班剑、立瓜、骨朵各二，响节二，青方伞二，红圆伞一，青圆扇二，红圆扇二，交椅一，脚踏一，拂子二，红纱灯笼二，水盆一，水罐一。
现代文：郡王妃仪仗。红杖二柄，清道旗二面，绛引施二面，戟氅、吾杖、班剑、立瓜、骨朵各二件，响节二柄，青方伞二柄，红圆伞一柄，青圆扇二柄，红圆扇二柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，拂子二柄，红纱灯笼二个，水盆一个，水罐一个。
English: Two red canes, two Qingdao flags, two embroidered brooches, two cymbals, two staffs, two swords, two standing melons, two bone flowers, two rattles, two rectangular umbrellas, two red umbrellas, two rectangular fans, two rectangular fans, one chair, one foot pedal, two whistles, two red lanterns, one basin, one pitcher.

古文：郡主仪仗：红杖二，清道旗二，班剑、吾杖、立瓜、骨朵各二，响节二，青方伞一，红圆伞一，青圆扇二，红圆扇二，交椅一，脚踏一，水盆一，水罐一，红纱灯笼二，拂子二。
现代文：郡主仪仗。红杖二柄，清道旗二面，班剑、吾杖、立瓜、骨朵各二件，响节二柄，青方伞一柄，红圆伞一柄，青圆扇二柄，红圆扇二柄，交椅一张，脚踏一个，水盆一个，水罐一个，红纱灯笼二个，拂子二柄。
English: Two red canes, two Qingdao flags, two swords, my cane, a standing melon and a bone flower, two rattles, one blue umbrella, one red umbrella, two blue fans, two red fans, one chair, one footrest, one basin, one pitcher, two red lanterns, two whisks.

古文：旧例，郡王仪仗有交椅、马杌，皆木质银裹；水盆、水罐及香炉、香合，皆银质抹金；量折银三百二十两。
现代文：旧有规程，郡王仪仗有交椅、马杌，都是木质，外用银裹；水盆、水罐以及香炉、香盒，都是银质，外部镀金；按量折合银三百二十两。
English: According to the old regulations, the county king's ceremonial battle has wooden chairs and stirrups, all of which are wrapped in silver for external use; water basins, water jars, as well as incense burners and incense boxes, are all made of silver, gold-plated on the outside; equivalent to 322 silver by weight.

古文：郡王妃仪仗，有交椅等大器，量折银一百六十两。
现代文：郡王妃的仪仗，有交椅等大的器物，按量折合银一百六十两。
English: The ceremonial battle of the county princess, with large objects such as chairs, is equivalent to one hundred and sixty-two silver coins.

古文：馀皆自备充用。
现代文：其余都自备以供使用。
English: The rest are kept for their own use.

古文：嘉靖四十四年定，除亲王及亲王妃初封仪仗照例颁给外，其初封郡王及郡王妃折银等项，并停止。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年，除了亲王以及亲王妃初封的仪仗照规定颁赐供给之外，其初封郡王以及郡王妃折合银雨等项，全部停止供给。
English: In the 44th year of Jiajing, in addition to the provision of the award of the honorary military license for the prince and the princess, the supply of the prince and the princess was completely stopped.

古文：万历十年定，郡王初封系帝孙者，仪仗照例全给，系王孙者免。
现代文：万历十年规定，郡王初封属于皇帝之孙者，仪仗照规定全部供给，属于王孙者，不供给。
English: According to the Ten-Year Rule of the Wanli Era, those who were the emperor's grandchildren at the time of the county king's first investiture were all provided with certificates of honor, while those who were the king's grandchildren were not.

古文：盖宗室分封渐多，势难遍给也。
现代文：原因是宗室分封渐多，形势难以普遍供给。
English: The reason is that there are more and more branch families, and the situation is difficult to supply universally.

