古文：尔朱荣尔朱荣，字天宝，北秀容人也。
现代文：尔朱荣，字天宝，北秀容人氏。
English: Le Zhu Rong, Zi Tian Bao, and Mr. Beixiu Rongren.

古文：其先居于尔朱川，因为氏焉。
现代文：他的祖先居住在尔朱川，便以州名为姓氏。
English: His ancestors lived in the Erzhu River, so his surname is derived from the name of the province.

古文：常领部落，世为酋帅。
现代文：经常统领部落百姓，世世代代为酋长。
English: They often lead the tribal people and have been chiefs for generations.

古文：高祖羽健，登国初为领民酋长，率契胡武士千七百人从驾平晋阳，定中山。
现代文：高祖父羽健，登国初年任领民酋长，率领契胡武士一千七百人跟随圣驾平定晋阳，他率部平定中山。
English: Gao's great-grandfather, Yu Jian, was appointed as the leader of the people in the first year of his ascension to the throne. He led 1,700 Qihu warriors to follow the holy driver to subdue Jinyang, and he led the department to subdue Zhongshan.

古文：论功拜散骑常侍。
现代文：论其功劳朝廷拜授他为散骑常侍。
English: For his services, the Imperial Court awarded him the title of strolling equerry.

古文：以居秀容川，诏割方三百里封之，长为世业。
现代文：家定居在秀容川，皇帝下诏划出一块方圆三百里的地盘分封给他，让他长为世业。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict allocating the surrounding three hundred miles of land to him as a permanent family estate.

古文：太祖初以南秀容川原沃衍，欲令居之。羽健曰： 臣家世奉国，给侍左右。
现代文：太祖一开始想南秀容川原野肥沃，打算让他在那安居乐业，羽健说： 臣家世世代代奉随国命，侍从圣驾左右。
English: At the beginning, the great-grandfather wanted to make the fields of the South Xiuyong River fertile, intending to let him live and work there in peace and contentment. Hagian said: The vassal family has been following the country's orders for generations, serving around the saint.

古文：北秀容既在刬内，差近京师，岂以沃脊更迁远地？ 
现代文：北秀容既然也在分封之内，又靠近京师，臣哪能因封地贫脊与否迁居远地而与我皇分开。 
English: Since Kitasujuro was also within the fief and close to the capital, how could the vassal be separated from the emperor due to the poor condition of the fief and whether or not he moved to a distant place?

古文：太祖许之。
现代文：太祖答应了他的请求。
English: His great-grandfather allowed him to enter the capital.

古文：所居之处，曾有狗氐地，因而穿之，得甘泉焉，至今名狗氐泉。
现代文：羽健居住的地方，曾经有狗舔地，于是人们沿顺着狗舔的地方往下挖，得到一眼甘泉，至今仍叫狗舔泉。
English: There used to be a dog licking ground where Fei Jian lived, so people dug down along the dog licking place to get a glimpse of the spring, which is still called the dog licking spring.

古文：羽健，世祖时卒。
现代文：尔朱羽健，世祖时谢世。
English: Zhu Yu Jian, the founder of the world.

古文：曾祖郁德，祖代勤，继为领民酋长。
现代文：曾祖郁德，祖代勤，相继任领民酋长。
English: Zengzu Yu De, Zedui Qin, successively served as territorial chiefs.

古文：代勤，世祖敬哀皇后之舅。
现代文：代勤，是世祖敬哀皇后的舅舅。
English: The deputy was the uncle of the Empress Dowager.

古文：以外亲兼数征伐有功，给复百年，除立义将军。
现代文：代勤以皇帝外亲加上屡次征战有功，皇帝又加他百年之荫，升任立义将军。
English: On behalf of the emperor's relatives, the emperor awarded him the title of General Liyi.

古文：曾围山而猎，部民射兽，误中其髀，代勤仍令拔箭，竟不推问，曰： 此既过误，何忍加罪？ 
现代文：他曾经率民围山打猎，百姓射虎，误伤他的大腿，代勤让人拔去箭头，也不查究是谁干的，说： 这既然是过失，我哪里还能兴师问罪呢？ 
English: He once led the people around the mountain to hunt, the people shot a tiger, accidentally injuring his thigh, the agency let people pull out the arrows, and did not investigate who did it, saying: Since this is a mistake, where can I find a teacher to ask for punishment?

古文：部内闻之，咸感其意。
现代文：治下百姓听说这事，都被他的慈爱之心打动。
English: When the people under his rule heard about this, they were all moved by his loving heart.

古文：高宗末，假宁南将军，除肆州刺史。
现代文：高宗末年，朝廷让他假宁南将军，任肆州刺史。
English: At the end of Gaozong's life, the imperial court made him pretend to be the general of Ningnan, and he was appointed as the prefect of Zhouzhou.

古文：高祖赐爵梁郡公。
现代文：高祖赐给他梁郡公爵位。
English: Gao Zu gave him the title of Duke of Liang County.

古文：以老致仕，岁赐帛百匹以为常。
现代文：尔朱代勤因年老退休，每年都受朝廷布帛百匹的赏赐。
English: Because of his old age, Lzhu Daiqin retired, and every year he was rewarded by the Imperial Court with one hundred horses.

古文：年九十一，卒。
现代文：活到九十一岁，逝世。
English: He lived to the age of ninety-one and passed away.

古文：赐帛五百匹、布二百匹，赠镇南将军、并州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：朝廷赐给他帛五百匹、布二百匹，赠予镇南将军、并州刺史，谥号庄。
English: The imperial court gave him 500 yakitori and 200 cloth yakitori, as well as the generalship of Zhenan and Shuzhou, and the title of Zhuangzhuang.

古文：孝庄初，荣有翼戴之勋，追赠太师、司徒公、录尚书事。
现代文：孝庄初年，尔朱荣因有辅佐拥戴皇帝的功绩，代勤又被朝廷追赠为太师、司徒公、录尚书事。
English: In the first year of Xiaozhuang, Er Zhu Rong was posthumously awarded by the imperial court as the Grand Master, the Steward, and the Recorder for his services in supporting the emperor.

古文：父新兴，太和中，继为酋长。
现代文：尔朱荣父亲新兴，太和年间，继任为酋长。
English: Er Zhu Rong's father was newly born, and during the reign of Emperor Taizu, he succeeded to the position of chieftain.

古文：家世豪擅，财货丰嬴。
现代文：家中豪富，财货充足。
English: The family is wealthy and has plenty of goods.

古文：曾行马群，见一白蛇，头有两角，游于马前。
现代文：新兴曾经行于马群之间，看见一条白蛇，头上长了两只角，游动在马群前面。
English: Xinxing once walked among the horses and saw a white snake with two horns on its head swimming in front of the horses.

古文：新兴异之，谓曰： 尔若有神，令我畜牧蕃息。 
现代文：新兴觉得十分奇怪，对它说： 你如有神灵，就让我的牲畜兴旺发达。 
English: Xinxing felt very strange and said to it, "If you have a god, let my livestock flourish."

古文：自是之后，日觉滋盛，牛羊驼马，色别为群，谷量而已。
现代文：从此以后，新兴治下牛羊之类，日见滋盛，牛羊驼马，色各为群，不计其数，粟谷麦黍，收成极好。
English: Since then, the newly emerging cattle and sheep under the rule have flourished, and the cattle, sheep, camels and horses have been herded in countless numbers. The harvest of millet and barley has been excellent.

古文：朝廷每有征讨，辄献私马，兼备资粮，助裨军用。
现代文：朝廷每次有征战行动，新兴就奉献他养的私人马匹，还备好军粮，以补军需。
English: Every time the imperial court went to war, he offered his own horses and prepared military rations for the army's needs.

古文：高祖嘉之，除右将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖嘉赏他的行为，命他为右将军、光禄大夫。
English: Gao Zu appreciated his actions and appointed him as the right general and Guanglu doctor.

古文：及迁洛后，特听冬朝京师，夏归部落。
现代文：等到都城迁到洛阳之后，皇帝特许他冬天在京朝上，夏天便返回部落。
English: After the capital was moved to Luoyang, the emperor allowed him to spend the winter in Beijing and return to his tribe in the summer.

古文：每入朝，诸王公朝贵竞以珍玩遗之，新兴亦报以名马。
现代文：新兴每次入时，众多王公显贵竞相以珍宝玩好送给他，新兴则以名马作为回报。
English: Every time Xinxing entered, many princes and dignitaries competed to give him precious treasures, while Xinxing received famous horses in return.

古文：转散骑常侍、平北将军、秀容第一领民酋长。
现代文：后转任散骑常侍、平北将军、秀容地区第一领民酋长。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of straggler, general of North Pyongan Province, and chief of the first territorial people in Sooryong Province.

古文：新兴每春秋二时，恆与妻子阅畜牧于川泽，射猎自娱。
现代文：新兴每年春秋二季，总是与妻子孩子们一起在川泽之间巡阅畜群，并围山打猎借以自娱。
English: Every spring and autumn, he and his wife go to Yamakawa-Ozawa Junior High School to inspect the situation of animal husbandry, and ride horses to hunt for entertainment.

古文：肃宗世，以年老启求传爵于荣，朝廷许之。
现代文：肃宗朝，新兴因年岁已高，请求朝廷传爵位给儿子尔朱荣，朝廷同意了。
English: Su Zong Dynasty, emerging due to old age, asked the court to pass the title to his son, Er Zhu Rong, and the court agreed.

古文：正光中卒，年七十四。
现代文：新兴正光年间去世，享年七十四岁。
English: Xinxing Zhengguang died at the age of seventy-four.

古文：赠散骑常侍、平北将军、恆州刺史，谥曰简。
现代文：朝廷赠给他散骑常侍、平北将军、恒州刺史，谥号简。
English: The imperial court presented him with a knight-errant, a general of the North Korean army, a member of the State Council, and the nickname "Jane."

古文：孝庄初，赠假黄钺、侍中、太师、相国、西河郡王。
现代文：孝庄初年，朝廷又赠他假黄钺、侍中、太师、相国、西河郡王各种称号。
English: In the first year of Xiaozhuang's reign, the imperial court also gave him the titles of pseudo-yellow envoy, chamberlain, grand master, brother-in-law, and king of West River County.

古文：荣洁白，美容貌，幼而神机明决。
现代文：尔朱荣皮肤洁白，容貌姣美，幼年时代便神机妙算，断决明达。
English: Le Zhu Rong is fair-skinned, good-looking, super-intelligent from an early age, and good at making decisions.

古文：及长，好射猎，每设围誓众，便为军陈之法，号令严肃，众莫敢犯。
现代文：等到长大之后，喜爱打猎，每次设围誓众，就按军阵的做法，号令严肃，无人敢稍有犯越。
English: When he grows up, he likes to hunt. Every time he sets up an encirclement, he follows the practice of the military line, the call is serious, and no one dares to transgress.

古文：秀容界有池三所，在高山之上，清深不测，相传曰祁连池，魏言天池也。父新兴，曾与荣游池上，忽闻箫鼓之音。
现代文：秀容地界内有三口池塘，都处于高山之上，水清亮，深度不测，相传叫做祁连池，魏朝称它们为天池，他的父亲尔朱新兴，曾经与荣一起在池边游玩，突然间，就听到箫管鼓竹的声音。
English: There are three ponds within the borders of Xiurong, all of which are located on high mountains. The water is clear and bright, and the depth is unpredictable. According to legend, they are called Qilian Ponds. The Wei Dynasty called them Heavenly Ponds. His father, Er Zhu Xinxing, used to play with Rong by the pond, and suddenly, he heard the sound of gongs and drums.

古文：新兴谓荣曰： 古老相传，凡闻此声皆至公辅。
现代文：新兴对尔朱荣说： 古来相传，凡是听到这种声音的人都可官至公辅。
English: Xinxing said to Le Zhurong: It has been passed down from ancient times that anyone who hears this voice can be an official or a public servant.

古文：吾今年已衰暮，当为汝耳。
现代文：我今年岁已高，这征兆当在你身上应验。
English: I am old this year, and this sign should be fulfilled in you.

古文：汝其勉之。 
现代文：你要发愤。 
English: You need to get angry.

古文：荣袭爵后，除直寝、游击将军。
现代文：尔朱荣继承爵位之后，任直寝、游击将军。
English: After Er Zhu Rong inherited the title, he was appointed as a guerrilla general.

古文：正光中，四方兵起，遂散畜牧，招合义勇，给其衣马。
现代文：正光年间，天下兵起，于是，尔朱荣不再从事牧业，分散牲畜，招集兵士，发给他们衣服马匹。
English: During the Zhengguang era, the country was at war. As a result, Er Zhu Rong no longer engaged in animal husbandry, dispersed livestock, recruited soldiers, and gave them clothes and horses.

古文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰寇掠北鄙，诏假荣节、冠军将军、别将，隶都督李崇北征。
现代文：蠕蠕主阿那环侵犯抢掠皇魏北方，朝廷下诏让荣代节，任冠军将军、别将，隶属都督李崇北征。
English: Anahuan invaded and plundered the northern part of the imperial Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court decreed the Rongde Festival. He was appointed as a champion general and a non-commissioned officer, and was subordinated to the governor Li Chongbei.

古文：荣率其所部四千人追击，度碛，不及而还。
现代文：尔朱荣率领部下四千人追击阿那环，越过戈壁地带，没有追上，撤兵而还。
English: Le Zhurong led his four thousand men in pursuit of Anahuan, crossed the Gobi region, did not catch up, withdrew and returned.

古文：秀容内附胡民乞扶莫于破郡杀太守；南秀容牧子万子乞真反叛，杀太仆卿陆延；并州牧子素和婆崘嶮作逆；荣并前后讨平之。
现代文：秀容地区归附的胡民乞扶莫于攻破郡城，杀了太守；南秀容牧子万子乞真反叛魏朝，杀死了太仆卿陆延；并州牧子素和婆山仑山佥也起兵叛逆。
English: The Hu people who were attached to the Xiurong area begged for help to break through the county seat and killed the governor; the South Xiurong herdsman, Wanzi, begged for real rebellion against the Wei Dynasty and killed the servant of the emperor, Lu Yan; and the state herdsman, Zi Su, and the mother mountain, Lun Shan, also rebelled.

古文：迁直阁将军、冠军将军，仍别将。
现代文：尔朱荣前后都带兵一并把他们平定了。又迁任直尔将军、冠军将军，仍为别将。
English: Both before and after, Le Zhurong led his soldiers to defeat them together. He was also transferred to the post of General Naur, Champion General, and is still a distinguished general.

古文：内附叛胡乞、步落坚胡刘阿如等作乱瓜肆，敕勒北列步若反于沃阳，荣并灭之。
现代文：内附魏朝的胡乞、步落坚胡、刘阿如等又在瓜州、肆州等地叛乱，敕勒的北勒步若在沃阳谋反，尔朱荣一并扑灭了叛乱。
English: Hu Qian, Pu Luo Jianhu and Liu Aru, who were affiliated with the Wei Dynasty, also rebelled in Guazhou, Wuzhou and other places. If Mu Le's Bei Le Bu plotted a rebellion in Woyang, Er Zhu Rong also extinguished the rebellion.

古文：以功封安平县开国侯，食邑一千户。
现代文：因为军功，朝廷封他为安平县开国侯，食邑一千户。
English: Because of his military exploits, the imperial court made him the founding lord of Anping County, with a thousand households.

古文：寻加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：不久又加授他为通直散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi.

古文：敕勒斛律洛阳作逆桑乾西，与费也头牧子迭相掎角，荣率骑破洛阳于深井，遂牧子于河西。
现代文：敕勒的斛律洛阳在桑乾西叛乱，与费也头牧子互为犄角，交相呼应，尔朱荣率领骑兵在深井打败斛律洛阳，把牧子费也头流放到黄河以西。
English: Zhao's Bailu Luoyang rebelled in the west of Sangqian and was at loggerheads with the Feiyadu herdsman, which echoed each other. Er Zhu Rong led the cavalry to defeat Bailu Luoyang in Shujing and exiled the herdsman Feiyadu to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：进号平北将军、光禄大夫，假安北将军，为北道都督。
现代文：朝廷给他加号为平北将军、光禄大夫，假安北将军，任北道都督。
English: The imperial court gave him the additional titles of General of North Pyongan Province, Doctor of Guanglu Province, General of North Pyongan Province, and Governor of North Pyongan Province.

古文：寻除武卫将军，俄加使持节、安北将军、都督恆朔讨虏诸军、假抚军将军，进封博陵郡公，增邑五百户。
现代文：不久又升武卫将军，很快又加使持节，安北将军，都督恒、朔州讨虏的各路大军，假抚军将军，晋封博陵郡公，又增食邑五百户。
English: Soon he was promoted to General Wuwei, and soon he was promoted to General Anbei, General Duku Heng, General Shuozhou, General Fufu, General Boling County, and another five hundred households.

古文：其梁郡前爵，听赐第二子。
现代文：他前面被授的梁州爵位，听其转赐第二个儿子。
English: He was previously awarded the title of the nobility of Liangzhou, to be passed on to his second son.

古文：时荣率众至肆州，刺史尉庆宾畏恶之，闭城不纳。
现代文：当时尔朱荣率领军队到肆州，肆州刺史尉庆宾畏惧讨厌他，紧闭城门，不欢迎他。
English: At that time, when Er Zhu Rong led the army to Wuzhou, the Wuzhou chief officer Qing Bin feared and hated him, closed the city gate tightly, and did not welcome him.

古文：荣怒，攻拔之，乃署其从叔羽生为刺史，执庆宾于秀容。
现代文：尔朱荣大怒，攻下城池，便让他的堂叔尔朱羽生任肆州刺史，在秀容把庆宾抓了起来。
English: Le Zhu Rong was furious, captured the city, and then let his uncle, Le Zhu Yansheng, serve as the governor of Wuzhou, and arrested the celebrants in Xiu Rong.

古文：自是荣兵威渐盛，朝廷亦不能罪责也。
现代文：这个时候尔朱荣兵威渐渐旺盛，朝廷对他此次举动也不能怎么样。
English: At this time, Zhu Rong's military prowess gradually became strong, and the imperial court could not do anything about his move.

古文：寻除镇北将军。
现代文：不久，朝廷又命他为镇北将军。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed him as the general of Zhenbei.

古文：鲜于修礼之反也，荣表东讨，复进号征东将军、右卫将军、假车骑将军、都督并肆汾广恆云六州诸军事，进为大都督，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：鲜于修礼反叛朝廷，尔朱荣上表请求向东讨伐，又进号为征东将军、右卫将军，都督并、肆、汾、广、恒、云六州诸军事，进官为大都督，加授金紫光禄大夫。
English: Having rebelled against the imperial court only a few days before the ceremony, Er Zhu Rong made a request for a crusade to the east, and was promoted to General of the East Conquest, General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and the military governor of the six states of Anhui, Hebei, Guangxi, Henan and Yunnan. He was also promoted to the position of Grand Governor and awarded the title of Golden Purple Glitter Doctor.

古文：时杜洛周陷中山，于时车驾声将北讨，以荣为左军，不行。
现代文：当时杜洛周陷于中山，这个时候，皇帝声称将亲征北方，以尔朱荣为左军，未成行。
English: At that time, Du Luo Zhou was trapped in Zhongshan. At this time, the emperor claimed that he would personally march to the north, with Er Zhu Rong as the left army, but did not go.

古文：及葛荣吞洛周，凶势转盛。
现代文：等到葛荣吞并洛周，气势汹汹，日见逼人。
English: Wait until Ge Rong annexes Luo Zhou, the momentum is formidable, the sun is pressing.

古文：荣恐其南逼鄴城，表求遣骑三千东援相州，肃宗不许。
现代文：尔朱荣担心葛荣会南逼邺城，上表请求派给他骑兵三千东援相州，肃宗没有答应。
English: Le Zhu Rong was worried that Ge Rong would go south to force the city of Handan. He asked Su Zong to send him 3,000 cavalrymen to the east to help Sangzhou. Su Zong did not agree.

古文：又迁车骑将军、右光禄大夫，寻进位仪同三司。
现代文：又迁升他为车骑将军、右光禄大夫，不久又进位仪同三司。
English: He was also promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Doctor of the Right Hand, and soon promoted to the Third Division.

古文：荣以山东贼盛，虑其西逸，乃遣兵固守滏口以防之。
现代文：尔朱荣想太行山以东贼势越来越盛，为防止他们向西发展，便派军队固守滏口以防敌人侵入。
English: He also thought that the thieves in Shandong were powerful, and he was afraid that they would attack to the west, so he sent soldiers to guard the Hekou as a precaution.

古文：复上书曰： 臣前以二州频反，大军丧败，河北无援，实虑南侵；故令精骑三千出援相州，京师影响，断其南望，贼闻此众，当亦息图。
现代文：又上书说： 臣以前因为二州频频反叛，大军丧败，黄河以北没有援军，实在是担心敌人南侵，所以命令精锐骑兵三千人出援相州，京城响应，断他南望之心，敌人听说这种声势，就会放弃南侵打算。
English: The letter also said: Because the two states frequently rebelled, the great army was defeated, and there was no reinforcement north of the Yellow River, the minister was really worried about the enemy's invasion of the south. Therefore, he ordered three thousand elite cavalrymen to come to the aid of Xiangzhou, and the capital responded, breaking his southward-looking heart. When the enemy heard this momentum, he would give up the plan to invade the south.

古文：使还，奉敕云： 念生枭戮，宝夤受擒，丑奴、明达，并送诚款，三辅告谧，关陇载宁。
现代文：使者还朝，奉敕说： 念生被杀，宝夤受擒，丑奴、明达都向朝廷传递诚意，三辅平安，关、陇宁静。
English: The messenger also said to Feng Yu: "Nian Sheng was killed, Baojun was captured, Ugly Slave and Mingda both conveyed their sincerity to the imperial court, Sanfu was safe, and Guan and Yu were calm.

古文：费穆虎旅，大翦妖蛮；两绛狂蜀，渐已稽颡。 
现代文：费穆勇猛军队，大杀妖孳蛮人；两绛狂妄的蜀人，都已低头认罪。 
English: Fei Mu's brave army killed a lot of savages; the two arrogant Shu people have bowed down and confessed.

古文：又承北海王颢率众二万出镇相州。
现代文：又承蒙北海王颢率领人马两万镇守相州。
English: In addition, thanks to the leadership of the North Sea King He, twenty thousand men and horses were sent to defend Xiangzhou.

古文：北海皇孙，名位崇重，镇抚鄴城，实副群望。
现代文：北海王乃是皇孙，名位崇高尊贵，镇守抚慰邺城，确实担得起人们的厚望。
English: The North Sea King is the grandson of the emperor, with a lofty and honorable title, and the town guard of Fuzhou, Shandong. He truly deserves people's high hopes.

古文：惟愿广其配衣，及机早遣。
现代文：臣希望增加他们的配给，尽早派遣。
English: The minister hopes to increase their rations and send them as soon as possible.

古文：今关西虽平，兵未可役，山南邻贼，理无发召，王师虽众，频被摧北，人情危怯，实谓难用，若不更思方略，无以万全。
现代文：今天关西虽然平定，然士兵未可役使，太行山南面邻近的敌人，理无发召，王师虽然众多，频频被其打败，人们担惊受怕，形势实在难以应付。朝廷若不改弦更张，重思方略，那就无法以保万全。
English: Today, although Kansai is pacified, the soldiers cannot be used, the enemy in the south of Taihang Mountain is nearby, and there is no reason to call out. Although there are many kings, they are frequently defeated by them. People are scared and frightened, and the situation is really difficult to cope with. If the imperial court does not change its tune and rethink its strategy, it will not be able to guarantee everything.

古文：如臣愚量，蠕蠕主阿那瑰荷国厚恩，未应忘报，求乞一使慰喻那瑰。
现代文：按微臣愚陋的想法，蠕蠕主阿那环荷戴国家厚恩，未必就忘报答，臣请求派一名使者慰问那环。
English: According to the foolish idea of the minor vassal, if the lord Anahing bestowed a national favor, he would not forget to repay it. The vassal requested that an envoy be sent to console the ring.

古文：即遣发兵东引，直趣下口，扬威振武，以蹑其背；北海之军，镇抚相部，严加警备，以当其前；臣麾下虽少，辄尽力命，自井陉以北，隘口以西，分防险要，攻其肘腋。
现代文：随即朝廷发兵向东，直趋下口，扬威振武，以捣其背；北海的军队，镇抚相部，加强警备，以挡那环前路；微臣统领的兵士虽少，也尽最大努力，自井陉以北，隘口以西，分别防守险要之地，攻击其肘腋部位。
English: Thereupon, the imperial court sent troops to the east, straight to the mouth of the lower estuary, wielding force to strike its back; the army of the North Sea, the relief phase, strengthened vigilance to block the ring road; although the soldiers commanded by Weizhong were few, they also did their best to defend the critical place from the north of Jingyao and the west of the pass, and attacked its elbow.

古文：葛荣虽并洛周，威恩未著，人类差异，形势可分。 
现代文：葛荣虽然吞并洛周，皇上威力未加于他，且他部下人心不齐，完全可以分而化之。 
English: Although Ge Rong has absorbed Dulozhou's troops, his prestige has not yet been established, and his subordinates are not a clan, which can cause them to fall apart.

古文：于是荣遂严勒部曲，广召义勇，北捍马邑，东塞井陉。
现代文：于是，尔朱荣便严令约整部下，广招义勇之士，北方捍守马邑，东边塞填井陉。
English: As a result, Er Zhurong ordered all his subordinates to recruit a wide range of volunteers, defend Ma'eup in the north, and fill in the shafts in the east.

古文：寻属肃宗崩，事出仓卒。荣闻之大怒，谓郑俨、徐纥为之，与元天穆等密议称兵，入匡朝廷，讨定之。
现代文：不久碰上肃宗驾崩，皇帝死得十分突然，尔朱荣听说，勃然大怒，声称肯定是郑俨、徐纥做的手脚，他与元天穆秘密商议带兵入京，拯救朝廷，讨伐逆贼，安定局势。
English: Soon after, Su Zong passed away, and the emperor died very suddenly. When Le Zhu Rong heard of this, he flew into a rage, claiming that it must have been the work of Zheng Qi and Xu Bei. He secretly negotiated with Yuan Tianmu to bring soldiers to Beijing, save the imperial court, fight against traitors, and stabilize the situation.

古文：乃抗表曰： 伏承大行皇帝，背弃万方，奉讳号踊，五内摧剥。
现代文：于是上表直言说： 臣惊闻德高望重的我皇帝背弃万民而去，痛苦万分，号啕顿哭，五脏六腑为之摧裂。
English: Therefore, the upper table bluntly said: "The minister was shocked to hear that my emperor, who is highly respected, abandoned all the people and left. He was in great pain, crying loudly and crying, and his internal organs were destroyed.

古文：仰寻诏旨，实用惊惋。
现代文：臣仰寻诏书旨意，实在震惊扼腕。
English: The minister was shocked to find out what the imperial edict meant.

古文：今海内草草，异口一言，皆云大行皇帝，鸩毒致祸。
现代文：如今，天下百姓，议论纷纷，异口同声，都说德高我皇，猝然离世，是被毒害所致。
English: Today, people all over the world are saying with one voice that the sudden death of our highly moral emperor was caused by poisoning.

古文：臣等外听讼言，内自追测。
现代文：臣等耳听众说，静心细想。
English: The minister waited for the audience to say, meditating.

古文：去月二十五日圣体康悆，至于二十六日奄忽升遐。
现代文：上个月二十五日圣体有病，到了二十六日便突然去世。
English: On the 25th of last month, the Blessed Virgin fell ill, and on the 26th she died suddenly.

古文：即事观望，实有所惑。
现代文：思前想后，这确实让人弄不明白。
English: When you think about it, it's really quite baffling.

古文：且天子寝疾，侍臣不离左右，亲贵名医，瞻仰患状，面奉音旨，亲承顾托。
现代文：况且天子有病，侍奉大臣不离左右，亲属贵戚，皇室御医，瞻仰病情，面奉陛下音旨，亲身仰承圣上顾托。
English: Moreover, the Son of Heaven is ill, and the ministers who serve him are always around him, as well as his relatives and dignitaries, and the royal physicians, who look into his condition, obey His Majesty's will, and personally obey the Holy Gutho.

古文：岂容不豫初不召医，崩弃曾无亲奉，欲使天下不为怪愕，四海不为丧气，岂可得乎？
现代文：哪里会有刚生病时不召医生，逝世后没有料理的事情，这要让天下人不感到奇怪惊愕，四海百姓不为之垂头丧气，办得到吗？
English: Where can there be a case of not calling a doctor when you are just sick, and not cooking after death, which would not make people around the world feel strange and surprised, and the people around the world would not lose heart, can it be done?

古文：复皇后女生，称为储两，疑惑朝野，虚行庆宥。宗庙之灵见欺，兆民之望已失；使七百危于累卵，社稷坠于一朝。方选君婴孩之中，寄治乳抱之日，使奸竖专朝，贼臣乱纪，惟欲指影以行权，假形而弄诏，此则掩眼捕雀，塞耳盗钟。
现代文：又皇后生女，称为储君，疑惑朝野，表面悲哀，实则庆幸，宗庙之中，祖先被欺，天下百姓，离心离德，致使七百危如累卵，国家毁于一朝，正是选君于婴孩之中，寄治乳抱之日，必然导致奸臣逆竖把持朝政，乱臣贼子破坏纲纪，他们便可随心所欲地指影以行权力，借形而弄诏令，这就是蒙住眼睛捕捉麻雀，塞着耳朵盗取铜钟。
English: In addition, the empress gave birth to a daughter, called the crown prince, who was suspicious of the court and the country, sad on the surface, but actually happy. Among the ancestral temples, the ancestors were deceived, and the people of the world were alienated from the German people, resulting in seven hundred dangers. The country was destroyed in one day, just as the prince was chosen from among the babies. The day of nursing and cuddling inevitably led to the treacherous vassals holding the government of the court upside down, and the rogue vassals and thieves destroying the discipline. They could then point to the shadows to exercise power as they pleased, and use the form to make edicts

古文：今秦陇尘飞，赵魏雾合，宝夤、丑奴势逼豳雍，葛荣、就德凭陵河海，楚兵吴卒密迩在郊。
现代文：而今秦、陇尘土飞扬，赵、魏云起雾合，丑奴攻势逼近豳、雍，葛荣、就德侵犯黄河、海边一带，楚兵吴卒近如咫尺。
English: Now, the dust of Qin and Jiu is flying, the clouds of Zhao and Wei are shrouded in mist, the Ugly Slave Offensive is approaching Jiu, Yong, Ge Rong, and Zhude to invade the Yellow River and coastal areas, and the Chu soldiers of Wu Zhu are as close as a stone's throw away.

古文：古人有言：邦之不臧，邻之福也。
现代文：古人说：国家不幸，是邻国的福气。
English: The ancients said: the misfortune of a country is the blessing of its neighbors.

古文：一旦闻此，谁不窥窬？
现代文：他们一旦听说皇帝逝世，哪个不想占些便宜？
English: Once they heard of the emperor's death, who wouldn't want to take advantage?

古文：窃惟大行皇帝，圣德驭宇，继体正君，犹边烽迭举，妖寇不灭，况今从佞臣之计，随亲戚之谈，举潘嫔之女以诳百姓，奉未言之兒而临四海，欲使海内安乂，愚臣所未闻也。
现代文：臣想德高望重的皇帝以德治天下，且以正君登极，犹且边境烽火、狼烟不断，妖寇不灭，何况现在听从佞臣之计，按照亲戚的意见，共推潘妃的女儿哄骗百姓，奉举尚不会言语的小儿君临四海，这想使天下安宁和平，愚臣闻所未闻。
English: The courtiers wanted the highly respected emperor to rule the world with virtue, and ascend to the top as a righteous ruler. Moreover, the border was on fire, the wolf smoke continued, and the evil spirits would not be extinguished. What's more, they now listened to the strategy of the courtiers, and according to the opinions of relatives, they jointly pushed the daughter of Panfei to deceive the people, and promoted the child king who could not speak yet to the four seas. This wanted to make the world peaceful and peaceful, and was unheard of by the foolish courtiers.

古文：伏愿留圣善之慈，回须臾之虑，照臣忠诚，录臣至款，听臣赴阙，预参大议，问侍臣帝崩之由，访禁旅不知之状，以徐、郑之徒付之司败，雪同天之耻，谢远近之怨。
现代文：微臣诚挚希望朝廷留聪明贤良的爱慈之心，冷静下来，稍作考虑，洞照微臣赤胆忠心，体察微臣诚恳的意图，让我赶赴朝廷，参与大议，询问侍臣皇帝驾崩缘由，调查禁军所不知道的情况，把徐纥、郑俨之徒送诸刑律，以雪朝廷齐天大耻，谢答远近怨怒。
English: Weizhong sincerely hoped that the court would keep the wise, virtuous and loving heart of the emperor, calm down and consider for a moment, reflect on Weizhong's loyalty and consider Weizhong's sincere intentions, let me rush to the court, participate in the grand discussion, inquire about the reasons for the death of the emperor's courtiers, investigate the unknown situation of the forbidden army, and send Xu Xi and Zheng Xi's followers to the criminal law. The snow brought great shame to the court, and the thanks and answers were far from angry.

古文：然后更召宗亲，推其年德，声副遐迩，改承宝祚，则四海更苏，百姓幸甚。 
现代文：然后召集宗族亲属，推选其中年龄合适，声望很高的人，改承宝运，那就会使四海气象更新复苏，实是百姓的幸运。 
English: Then the clan relatives are called together, and a person of the right age and high reputation is selected to succeed the fortune. This will bring about a renewal and revival of the four seas. This is truly a blessing for the people.

古文：于是遂勒所统将赴京师。
现代文：于是尔朱荣带领将帅赶赴京师。
English: As a result, Er Zhu Rong led the generals to Beijing.

古文：灵太后甚惧，诏以李神轨为大都督，将于大行杜防。
现代文：灵太后十分害怕，下诏命李神轨为大都督，准备在大行设防阻挡。
English: The Empress Dowager was very afraid, and issued an edict ordering Li Shenshu to be the grand governor, and to prepare to set up a barrier in the capital.

古文：荣抗表之始，遣从子天光、亲信奚毅及仓头王相入洛，与从弟世隆密议废立。
现代文：尔朱荣上表直陈之始，派遣侄子尔朱天光、亲信奚毅以及仓头王相进入洛阳，让他们与自己的堂弟一起秘密商议废立之事。
English: At the beginning of Zhu Rong's protest on the table, he sent his followers Zhu Tianguang, close confidant Zou Yi and Cangtou Wang Fang to quietly enter Luoyang and conspire with his brother Zhu Shilong to depose the emperor.

古文：天光乃见庄帝，具论荣心，帝许之。
现代文：天光见到庄帝，陈述尔朱荣的心愿，皇帝赞许尔朱荣的想法。
English: When Zhu Tianguang met the Emperor of Xiaozhuang, Yuan Zi You, and discussed Zhu Rong's plan, Yuan Zi You agreed to take the throne.

古文：天光等还北，荣发晋阳。
现代文：尔朱天光等人回到北地，尔朱荣正从晋阳出发。
English: Lzhu Tianguang and others returned to the north, and Lzhu Rong was leaving from Jinyang.

古文：犹疑所立，乃以铜铸高祖及咸阳王禧等六王子孙像，成者当奉为主，惟庄帝独就。
现代文：听说如此，犹自怀疑朝廷所立是否属实，于是便以铜铸造高祖以及咸阳王禧等六王子孙像，造成的是谁谁便应当被奉为君主，只有庄帝像成功了。
English: Hearing this, Yu Zi doubted whether it was true that it was erected by the imperial court, so he cast the statues of Gao Zu and the six princes and grandsons such as Xianyang Wang Xi in copper. The result was that anyone could be regarded as a monarch, but only the statue of Zhuang Di was successful.

古文：师次河内，重遣王相密来奉迎，帝与兄彭城王劭、弟始平王子正于高渚潜渡以赴之。
现代文：尔朱荣军队驻扎河内，他又派王相秘密入京奉迎皇帝，皇帝与其兄彭城王劭、弟始平王子正从高渚偷偷渡过黄河来到尔朱荣驻军处。
English: The Emperor and his brother Pengcheng Wang Yao and his brother Prince Shi Ping were secretly crossing the Yellow River from Gaozhu to the Lvzhurong garrison.

古文：荣军将士咸称万岁。
现代文：尔朱荣的将士齐声高喊皇帝万岁。
English: Zhu Rong's soldiers shouted "long live the emperor" in unison.

古文：于时武泰元年四月九日也。
现代文：当时是武泰元年四月九日。
English: At that time, it was April 9th, the first year of Wu Tai.

古文：十一日，荣奉帝为主，诏以荣为使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、开府、兼尚书令、领军将军、领左右、太原王，食邑二万户。
现代文：十一日，尔朱荣拥戴庄帝为君主，庄帝下诏任命尔朱荣为持节使、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、开府，兼任尚书令、领军将军、领左右、太原王，食邑二万户。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Le Zhurong received Zhuangdi as the monarch, and Zhuangdi issued an imperial edict to appoint Le Zhurong as the chief envoy, the attendant, the governor of the military, the general, and the head of the government, and also served as the commander, the leading general, the leader of the left and right, the king of Taiyuan, and 20,000 households.

古文：十二日，百官皆朝于行宫。
现代文：十二日，文武百官全都在行宫朝拜皇帝。
English: On the twelfth day, all the civil and military officials went to the palace to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：十三日，荣惑武卫将军费穆之说，乃引迎驾百官于行宫西北，云欲祭天。
现代文：十三日，尔朱荣被武卫将军费穆的说教所迷惑，便引导迎驾的文武百官到行宫西北，说打算祭祀苍天。
English: On the thirteenth day, Er Zhu Rong was confused by the preaching of Feimu, the general of the armed forces, and led the hundreds of civil and military officials to the northwest of the palace, saying that he intended to sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：朝士既集，列骑围绕，责天下丧乱，明帝卒崩之由，云皆缘此等贪虐，不相匡弼所致。
现代文：朝廷官僚集合到一起之后，尔朱荣的骑兵列队环绕，把他们团团围住，尔朱荣责问大臣们天下丧乱，明帝猝然驾崩的缘由，说这全都怪你们这帮贪婪酷虐的臣子，不相匡救辅佐所导致的结果。
English: After the imperial court bureaucrats gathered together, the cavalry of Er Zhurong lined up around and surrounded them. Er Zhurong asked the ministers the reason for the chaos in the world and the sudden death of the Ming Emperor, saying that it was all the fault of you, a group of greedy and cruel courtiers, and the result of not helping each other.

古文：因纵兵乱害，王公卿士皆敛手就戮，死者千三百余人。皇弟、皇兄并亦见害，灵太后、少主其日暴崩。
现代文：说完，便让士兵乱杀乱砍，王公卿士全都敛手就戮，死者达一千三百余人，皇弟、皇兄也一起被害，灵太后、年少的君主那天也一齐突然死亡。
English: Having said that, the soldiers were allowed to kill indiscriminately, the princes and princesses all joined hands to kill, the dead amounted to more than 1300 people, the prince and princess were also killed together, and the queen mother and the young monarch also died suddenly that day.

古文：荣遂有大志，令御史赵元则造禅文，遣数十人迁帝于河桥。
现代文：尔朱荣于是滋生大志，命令御史赵元则制造禅文，派数十人把庄帝迁到河桥安顿。
English: As a result, Zhu Rong nurtured a great ambition, ordered the imperial historian Zhao Yuanze to create a Zen poem, and sent dozens of people to relocate Zhuangdi to Heqiao.

古文：至夜四更中，复奉帝南还营幕。
现代文：到了夜里四更时，又拥皇帝南还至行宫幕营。
English: When it was four o'clock in the evening, Emperor Nan and his entourage went to the palace camp.

古文：帝忧愤无计，乃令人喻旨于荣曰： 帝王迭袭，盛衰无常，既属屯运，四方瓦解。
现代文：庄帝忧愤交加，无计可施，于是命人向尔朱荣宣明旨意说： 帝王更替频繁，盛衰没有常度，而今大魏既遭噩运，天下瓦解。
English: Emperor Zhuang was so sad and angry that he had nothing to do, so he ordered someone to announce his will to Le Zhurong, saying: Emperors change frequently, there is no constant rise and fall, and now that the Great Wei Dynasty has suffered bad luck, the world is disintegrating.

古文：将军仗义而起，前无横陈，此乃天意，非人力也。
现代文：将军您仗义而起，所向披靡，这是天意，不是人力所能。
English: General, you have stood up for righteousness, and you have been victorious. This is God's will, not man's ability.

古文：我本相投，规存性命，帝王重位，岂敢妄希？
现代文：我投奔这里，本为保存性命，帝王这样高位岂敢妄自希求。
English: I came here to save my life. I wouldn't dare to aspire to such a high position as emperor.

古文：直是将军见逼，权顺所请耳。
现代文：面对将军您的逼迫，我所能做的只能权且顺乎您所请而已。
English: In the face of your persecution, I can only do what you ask me to do.

古文：今玺运已移，天命有在，宜时即尊号。
现代文：而今国运已经转移，天命在您，将军您应及时登位。
English: But now the national movement has shifted, the destiny is in you, general, you should ascend the throne in time.

古文：将军必若推而不居，存魏社稷，亦任更择亲贤，共相辅戴。 
现代文：将军您假如一定推辞不就，打算保存大魏社稷，也任您重择亲贤，共同辅佐拥戴大魏江山。 
English: General, if your resignation is not enough, you plan to preserve the Great Wei Dynasty, and also let you re-elect relatives and sages to jointly support and uphold the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：荣既有异图，遂铸金为己像，数四不成。
现代文：尔朱荣本已有篡权企图，于是用金铸造自己的铜像，连铸四次，都未成功。
English: Le Zhu Rong had already attempted to usurp power, so he used gold to cast his own bronze statue, casting it four times in a row, all without success.

古文：时幽州人刘灵助善卜占，为荣所信，言天时人事必不可尔。
现代文：当时幽州人刘灵助擅长占卜，被尔朱荣所信任，他说天时人事不可勉强啊。
English: At that time, Liu Lingsu, a resident of Yuzhou, was good at divination and was trusted by Er Zhu Rong. He said that people should not be forced to do things.

古文：荣亦精神恍惚，不自支持，久而方悟，遂便愧悔。
现代文：尔朱荣也精神恍惚，难以自持，很久才醒悟过来，继而便愧惭后悔起来。
English: Le Zhu Rong was also in a daze, unable to control himself. It took him a long time to come to his senses, and then he felt ashamed and regretful.

古文：于是献武王、荣外兵参军司马子如等切谏，陈不可之理。
现代文：正在此时，献武王、尔朱荣外兵参军司马子如等痛切直言，陈述不可取而代之的道理。
English: It was at this time that the foreign soldiers who joined the army, such as Xianwu Wang, Er Zhu Rong, and Sima Zi Ru, spoke frankly and stated the reason why they could not be replaced.

古文：荣曰： 愆误若是，惟当以死谢朝廷。今日安危之机，计将何出？ 
现代文：尔朱荣说： 像我这样罪大恶极的错误，我只有一死以谢朝廷，今天朝廷处在如此危险的关头，有什么计策可救国家。 
English: Le Zhu Rong said, "I have only one death to thank the imperial court for such a heinous mistake. Today, the imperial court is at such a dangerous juncture, is there any way to save the country?"

古文：献武王等曰： 未若还奉长乐，以安天下。 
现代文：武王等人说： 不如归还奉戴长乐，以安定天下。 
English: King Wu and others said, "It would be better to return the Fong Dai Changle to stabilize the world."

古文：于是还奉庄帝。
现代文：这样便还奉庄帝即帝位。
English: In this way, Emperor Zhuang was also enthroned.

古文：十四日，舆驾入宫。
现代文：十四日，皇帝车驾入洛阳帝宫。
English: On the 14th, the emperor's carriage drove into the Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：于时或云荣欲迁都晋阳，或云欲肆兵大掠，迭相惊恐，人情骇震，京邑士子不一存，率皆逃窜，无敢出者。直卫空虚，官守废旷。
现代文：这些时，民间有的说要迁都晋阳，有的说尔朱荣纵兵大肆掠夺，人们纷纷惊恐难当，人情汹汹，骇悸震忄栗，京城士子全都外逃，一个不剩，没谁再敢出头露面，衙门空虚，官府废旷。
English: At these times, some people said that the capital should be moved to Jinyang, while others said that the Zhu Rong soldiers plundered the city. People were terrified, the situation was terrible, and they were shocked. All the officials in Beijing fled. There was no one left, and no one dared to show his face again. The gate was empty, and the government office was deserted.

古文：荣闻之，上书曰： 臣世荷蕃寄，征讨累年，奉忠王室，志存效死。
现代文：尔朱荣听说这种情况，上书说： 臣我世世代代身受朝廷厚望，连年征讨，忠于王室，志在效死。
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard of this situation, he wrote: "For generations, I have been held in high regard by the imperial court, I have been solicited for years, I am loyal to the royal family, and I am determined to die in service.

古文：直以太后淫乱，孝明暴崩，遂率义兵，扶立社稷。
现代文：只因太后淫乱，孝明暴崩，臣便率领义兵，以图扶立社稷。
English: It was only because the empress dowager was promiscuous and Takaaki died violently that the vassal led the volunteers to help establish the shrine.

古文：陛下登祚之始，人情未安，大兵交际，难可齐一，诸王朝贵，横死者众，臣今粉躯不足塞往责以谢亡者。
现代文：陛下刚刚登基，人情未安，大兵交杂，难以齐一，以致诸王朝贵横遭死亡的人数众多，而今微臣微躯难以堵塞以往的罪责，难以得到亡者的谅解。
English: His Majesty has just ascended to the throne, the human condition is not stable, the soldiers are mixed, it is difficult to be unified, so that the number of people who have died in the dynasties is large, and now it is difficult to block the past guilt, and it is difficult to get the understanding of the deceased.

古文：然追荣褒德，谓之不朽，乞降天慈，微申私责。
现代文：然而臣追思死难大臣们的声望德行，真可谓是不朽之人，乞求上天降慈恩之心，微申私责。
English: However, the minister thought about the reputation and virtue of the dying ministers, who were truly immortal people, begged for mercy from heaven, and made a small apology.

古文：无上王请追尊帝号，诸王、刺史乞赠三司，其位班三品请赠令仆，五品之官各赠方伯，六品已下及白民赠以镇郡。
现代文：无上王大人请追赠他帝号，请赠诸王公、刺史们三司之号，死难臣僚中位置处三品之中的请求赠与令仆的称号，五品之官请赠方伯，六品以下以及平民赠以镇郡称号。
English: If there is no supreme king, please bestow upon him the imperial title; if there are kings and princes, please bestow upon them the title of the three divisions; if there is a dying minister who is in the middle of the three ranks, please bestow upon him the title of the servant; if there is an official with five ranks, please bestow upon him the title of the provincial official; if there is a commoner with six ranks or less, please bestow upon him the title of the township.

古文：诸死者无后听继，即授封爵。
现代文：那些死后无后人能继承这些称号的，请求圣上授予他封号爵位。
English: Those who die without heirs to inherit these titles, ask the saint to grant him a knighthood.

古文：均其高下，节级别科，使恩洽存亡，有慰生死。 
现代文：按他们品位高下、级别高低，授予他们相应的称号，务使皇恩及存达亡，以慰生藉死。 
English: According to one's status and rank, kindness is bestowed on everyone, living and dead, so that they may be comforted.

古文：诏曰： 览表不胜鲠塞。
现代文：庄帝下诏说： 朕览表不胜梗塞。
English: Zhuang Di issued an edict saying, "I cannot bear the infarction.

古文：朕德行无感，致兹酷滥，寻绎往事，实切于怀。
现代文：朕德行平庸，难感天地，导致如此残酷滥杀的局面出现，回首往事，真是痛入骨髓。
English: I have mediocre morals, and it is hard to feel the world, which led to the emergence of such a cruel and indiscriminate situation. Looking back on the past, it is really painful to the bone marrow.

古文：可如所表。 
现代文：可按表疏中所说的去做。 
English: You can do what it says in the table.

古文：自兹已后，赠终叨滥，庸人贱品，动至大官，为识者所不贵。
现代文：从此以后，赠荫一事，渐渐变得滥而无味，平庸的人、品位微贱的官员，动不动就做上大官，这被有识之士所看不起。
English: Since then, the giving of shade has gradually become extravagant and tasteless. Mediocre people and low-grade officials become high-ranking officials at every turn, which is looked down upon by people with insight.

古文：武定中，齐文襄王始革其失，追褒有典焉。
现代文：武定年间，齐文襄王开始纠正其过失，追赠褒扬渐有章法。
English: During the Wuding era, King Qibunxiang began to correct his mistakes, and the awarding of posthumous commendations gradually became a regular practice.

古文：荣启帝遣使循城劳问，于是人情遂安，朝士逃亡者亦稍来归阙。
现代文：尔朱荣启奏皇帝派使者沿城安慰那些受惊吓的人，从这以后人心渐渐安定下来，朝中逃亡的官员也渐渐归到朝廷。
English: The emperor sent emissaries around the city to comfort those who were frightened, and from then on, people's hearts gradually calmed down, and officials who had fled the court gradually returned to the imperial court.

古文：荣又奏请番直，朔望之日引见三公、令仆、尚书、九卿及司州牧、河南尹、洛阳河阴执事之官，参论国治，经纶王道，以为常式。
现代文：尔朱荣又奏请轮番当值，每逢朔望那天，当值官员引见三公、令仆、尚书、九卿以及司州牧、河南尹、洛阳河阴执事等官，参与讨论治国方略、王道经纶，作为惯例沿袭下去。
English: Le Zhurong also requested the rotation of duty, and on every Shouwang Day, the officers on duty introduced the three kings, the servants, the Shangshu, the nine nobles, and the governors of the state, the Henan Yin, the Luoyang Heyin and other officials to participate in the discussion of the strategy of governing the country and the king's economic policy, as a common practice.

古文：五月，荣还晋阳。
现代文：五月，尔朱荣返回晋阳。
English: In May, Er Zhu Rong returned to Jinyang.

古文：七月，诏曰： 乾坤统物，星象赞其功；皇王御运，股肱匡其业。
现代文：七月，皇帝下诏说： 天地统领万物，星象增其光辉；皇帝统治天下，大臣助其大业。
English: In July, the emperor issued an edict saying: Heaven and earth govern all things, and the stars add to their brilliance; the emperor rules the world, and the ministers assist him in his great cause.

古文：是以周道中缺，齐晋立济世之忠；殷祚或亏，彭韦振救时之节。
现代文：所以周道中缺，齐、晋立下济世之忠；殷运亏损，彭、韦振起救时之节。
English: Therefore, Zhou Dao was deficient in the middle, Qi and Jin were appointed to be loyal to the world; Yin Yun lost money, and Peng and Wei Zhen started to save time.

古文：自前朝失御，厄运荐臻，太原王荣爰戴朕躬，推临万国，勋逾伊霍，功格二仪，王室不坏，伊人是赖。
现代文：自从大魏前朝统治颠扑，噩运到来，太原王尔朱荣于是拥戴朕躬，以君临万国。尔朱荣的功勋超过伊、霍，功劳齐天地，大魏王室重振皇风，全靠了尔朱荣。
English: Since the reign of the former Wei Dynasty was in turmoil and bad luck came, the Taiyuan King Er Zhu Rong then embraced us and reigned over all countries. Er Zhu Rong's merits exceeded those of Yi and Huo, and his merits were equal to those of heaven and earth. The royal family of the Great Wei Dynasty reinvigorated the imperial style, all thanks to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：可柱国大将军、兼录尚书事，余如故。 
现代文：因此朕授他为柱国大将军、兼录尚书事，其他官职照旧。 
English: Therefore, I awarded him the title of General of the Pillar of the State, as well as the title of Secretary of State, and the other official positions remain unchanged.

古文：时葛荣将向京师，众号百万。
现代文：这时，葛荣拥军号称百万，矛头直指京师。
English: At this time, Ge Rong Rong's army was reputed to be one million strong, and the spearhead pointed directly at the Beijing Division.

古文：相州刺史李神轨闭门自守。
现代文：相州刺史李神轨闭城自守。
English: Sangju stabbing history Li Shenlu closed the city to defend itself.

古文：贼锋已过汲郡，所在村坞悉被残略。
现代文：敌人前部已过汲郡，所经过的村庄都横遭劫掠。
English: The enemy's advance has passed through Kyu-gun, and all the villages it has passed through have been plundered.

古文：荣启求讨之。
现代文：尔朱荣启奏皇帝，请求讨伐。
English: Le Zhurong appealed to the emperor, requesting a crusade.

古文：九月，乃率精骑七千，马皆有副，倍道兼行，东出滏口。
现代文：九月，尔朱荣率领精锐骑兵七千，战马都有备用的，日夜兼程，东出滏口。
English: In September, Er Zhu Rong led seven thousand elite cavalry, and the horses were all on standby. They traveled day and night, and reached the east exit of the pass.

古文：葛荣为贼既久，横行河北，时众寡非敌，议者谓无制贼之理。
现代文：葛荣长期为贼，横行黄河以北广大地区，尔朱荣七千骑兵与他的军队比较起来，悬殊极大，人们议论纷纷：这哪能制服逆贼啊。
English: Ge Rong had been a thief for a long time, rampaging across a vast area north of the Yellow River. Compared with his army, the difference between Ge Rong's seven thousand cavalrymen and his army was extremely great. People argued: How can this subdue a traitor?

古文：葛荣闻之，喜见于色，乃令其众曰： 此易与耳。
现代文：葛荣听说此事，也高兴坏了，便吩咐部下说： 这太容易对付了。
English: When Ge Rong heard about this, he was overjoyed and ordered his subordinates to say, "This is too easy to deal with.

古文：诸人俱办长绳，至便缚取。 
现代文：你们只管都准备好长绳子，他们一到，绑起来就是。 
English: All you have to do is have a long rope ready, and when they arrive, tie them up.

古文：葛荣自鄴以北列陈数十里，箕张而进。
现代文：葛荣自邺以北摆下数十里长阵，阵如箕形，张翼推进。
English: Ge Rong set up a tens-of-miles-long line from the north to the south, the line was like a cocoon, and the wings were pushed forward.

古文：荣潜军山谷为奇兵，分督将已上三人为一处，处有数百骑，令所在扬尘鼓噪，使贼不测多少。
现代文：尔朱荣偷偷在山谷伏军作为奇兵，分督将以上的军官三个人为一处，每处数百名骑兵，命令他们在埋伏的地方扬尘呐喊，以使敌人弄不清有多少人马。
English: Le Zhurong secretly ambushed the army in the valley as a miracle soldier. The lieutenant governor put the above three officers in one place, each with hundreds of cavalry, and ordered them to throw dust and shout in the ambush place, so that the enemy could not figure out how many men and horses.

古文：又以人马逼战，刀不如棒，密勒军士马上各赍神棒一枚，置于马侧。
现代文：又派遣人马上前邀战，尔朱荣以刀不如棒的威力大，秘密吩咐军人各备神棒一根，放在马的侧面。
English: He also sent someone to immediately invite them to fight. Er Zhurong used a sword, which was not as powerful as a club, to secretly order the soldiers to each prepare a divining rod and place it on the side of the horse.

古文：至于战时，不听斩级，以棒棒之而已，虑废腾遂也。
现代文：说等到战斗发生时，不计斩级，用棒击死敌人就行了，以免耽误追击敌军。
English: He said that when a battle occurs, it is enough to kill the enemy with a stick, regardless of rank, so as not to delay the pursuit of the enemy.

古文：乃分命壮勇所当冲突，号令严明，战士同奋。
现代文：于是分别命令壮士们在各处冲突敌阵，号令严明，将领士兵争先杀敌。
English: Therefore, they ordered the strong men to clash with the enemy in various places, issued strict orders, and the generals and soldiers raced to kill the enemy.

古文：荣身自陷陈，出于贼后，表里合击，大破之。
现代文：尔朱荣亲自冲锋陷阵，在敌阵后部出现，这样前后夹击，大破敌军。
English: Le Zhu Rong personally charged into the enemy lines and appeared in the rear of the enemy lines, thus clamping back and forth and smashing the enemy forces.

古文：于陈擒葛荣，余众悉降。
现代文：在阵中活捉葛荣，敌人纷纷投降。
English: He captured Ge Rong alive in the battle, and the enemy surrendered one after another.

古文：荣以贼徒既众，若即分割，恐其疑惧，或更结聚，乃普告勒，各从所乐，亲属相随，任所居止。
现代文：尔朱荣考虑敌人人数众多，假如立即把他们分开，恐怕他们心生疑惧，或许又结聚起来，成为后患，于是普告各人自便，亲属任其相随，居住在他们想居住的地方。
English: Considering the large number of enemies, if they were immediately separated, they would be afraid that they would be suspicious and might come together again and become a hindrance, so he told everyone to do as they pleased, and let their relatives follow them and live where they wanted to live.

古文：于是群情喜悦，登即四散，数十万众，一朝散尽。
现代文：这样，大家十分高兴，随即星分云散，数十万人马全都散去。
English: As a result, everyone was happy and immediately dispersed. Hundreds of thousands of people all dispersed at once.

古文：待出百里之外，乃始分道押领，随便安置，咸得其宜。
现代文：等到他们跑出百里之外，尔朱荣才开始派兵分头押领，把这些人安置在合适的地方，俘虏们都被安置得很好。
English: They waited until the dispersed soldiers were a hundred miles away before they were sent on their separate ways, and when they found a suitable place, they were resettled. These people were all given satisfactory accommodation.

古文：擢其渠帅，量才授用，新附者咸安。
现代文：然后筛选其主将，量力任用，新归附的人都安定下来。
English: Then they screened their captains and appointed them as they saw fit, and the newly-annexed people settled down.

古文：时人服其处分机速。
现代文：当时人佩服他的办事快捷。
English: People are impressed that he handled it correctly and quickly.

古文：乃槛车送葛荣赴阙。
现代文：又用牢车把葛荣送往京城。
English: He also sent Ge Rong to the capital in a prison van.

古文：诏曰： 功格天地，锡命之位必崇；道济生民，褒赏之名宜大。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 荣卿功齐天地，爵服之类必须高贵；道救百姓，嘉赏之名必须伟大。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Rongqing's merits are equal to heaven and earth, the knight's uniform and the like must be noble; the way to save the people, the name of the award must be great.

古文：是以有莘赞亳，不次之号爰归；渭叟翼周，殊世之班载集。
现代文：正因为如此所以有莘赞辅亳州，于是朝廷赐给他最高贵的称号；姜望翼蔽周朝，于是他在朝廷中处于特殊的位置。
English: It was for this reason that he was given the title of "supreme nobleman" by the imperial court. Jiang Wangye was the ruler of the Zhou Dynasty, so he held a special position in the imperial court.

古文：况导源积石，袭构昆山，门踵英猷，弼成鸿业，抗高天之摧柱，振厚地之绝维，德冠五侯，勋高九伯者哉！
现代文：何况导源积石，袭构昆山，庭集群英，助成鸿业，扶颓柱于高天，振绝维于厚地，德行冠绝五侯，功勋高出九伯的人呢！
English: What's more, it is the people who are the source of the jagged rocks, who are the successors of Kunshan, who are the masters of the gardens, who are the supporters of the great undertakings, who are the pillars of heaven, who are the pillars of the earth, who are the masters of virtue, who are the masters of the five elements, and who have made great achievements!

古文：太原王荣代荷蕃宠，世载忠烈，入匡颓运，出剿元凶。使积年之雾，倏焉涤荡；数载之尘，一朝清谧。
现代文：太原王尔朱荣代代蒙承恩宠，世世都是忠烈，他入则拯颓败国运，出则剿祸了元凶，使多年迷雾一朝散去，几年尘埃迅速清除。
English: Taiyuan King Er Zhu Rong was favored from generation to generation. He was loyal throughout his life. When he entered the country, he saved the country from defeat. When he left, he blamed the culprit, causing the fog of many years to dissipate overnight and the dust to quickly clear in a few years.

古文：燕恆既泰，赵魏还苏，比绩况功，古今莫二。若不式稽旧典，增是礼数，将何以昭德报功，远明国范？
现代文：燕、代既安，赵、魏还苏，与前人比较他的成绩功勋，古今无双，假如不稽查比照旧典成式，增加礼遇之数，那将凭什么来昭德报功，远明国范？
English: Yan, on behalf of both An, Zhao, Wei and Su, compared his achievements and merits with those of his predecessors. There is no match between the past and the present. If you do not check and compare with the old ceremony, and increase the number of courtesy, then what will you rely on to show virtue and reward merit, and be a far-sighted country?

古文：可大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事，增邑一万户，通前三万，余官悉如故。 
现代文：可授予他大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事，增加邑户一万户，加上前面之数总共三万，其他官职照旧。 
English: He can be awarded the title of grand chancellor, governor of Hebei, Kansai, and other military regions, increase the number of households in the county by 10,000, and add the previous number to a total of 30,000, and other official positions will remain unchanged.

古文：初，荣之将讨葛荣也，军次襄垣，遂令军士列围大猎。
现代文：当初，尔朱荣将要讨伐葛荣时，军驻襄垣，便命战士列围打猎。
English: At first, when Er Zhu Rong was going to fight Ge Rong, the army was stationed in Xiangyuan, and ordered the soldiers to surround and hunt.

古文：有双兔起于马前，荣乃跃马弯弓而誓之曰： 中之则擒葛荣，不中则否。 
现代文：有两只兔子跃起于战马之前，尔朱荣于是跃马弯弓对天立誓说： 射中就能擒获葛荣，不中则不行。 
English: Two rabbits jumped up in front of the warhorse, so Ge Rong jumped up and swore to the heavens with a bow and arrow: "I can capture Ge Rong with a shot, but not without a shot."

古文：既而并应弦而殪，三军咸悦。
现代文：不一会儿，两只兔子都应弦而倒，三军将士都很高兴。
English: After saying that, the two rabbits fell to the ground, and the soldiers of the three armies were very excited.

古文：及破贼之后，即命立碑于其所，号 双兔碑 。
现代文：等到大破敌军之后，尔朱荣就让人在射倒兔子的地方立起一块碑，称 双兔碑 。
English: After defeating the enemy army, Lzhu Rong ordered a monument to be erected in the place where the rabbit was shot down, called the Double Rabbit Monument.

古文：荣将战之夜，梦一人从葛荣索千牛刀，而葛荣初不肯与。
现代文：尔朱荣将与葛荣决战的那天晚上，梦见一个人向葛荣索要千牛刀，而葛荣一开始不肯给他。
English: On the night of the decisive battle between Le Zhurong and Ge Rong, he dreamed that a man asked Ge Rong for a thousand-cattle knife, but Ge Rong refused to give it to him at first.

古文：此人自称：我是道武皇帝，汝何敢违！
现代文：这个人称： 我是道武皇帝，你敢违抗！ 
English: This person said: I am Emperor Daowu, how dare you defy me!

古文：葛荣乃奉刀，此人手持授荣。
现代文：葛荣于是献上千牛刀，这人手执其刀交给尔朱荣。
English: Ge Rong then presented a thousand-cattle knife, and the man handed his sword to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：既寤而喜，自知必胜。
现代文：醒来之后，尔朱荣十分高兴，自知此战必胜无疑。
English: After waking up, Le Zhu Rong was very happy, knowing that this battle would be won without a doubt.

古文：又诏曰： 我皇魏道契神元，德光灵范，源先二象，化穆三才。玉历与日月惟休，金鼎共乾坤俱永。
现代文：皇帝又下诏说： 我皇魏道合神元，德照灵范，源先二象，化和五才，皇运与日月同长久，金鼎共天地齐永远。
English: The emperor also issued the following edict: I, the emperor, am the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of wisdom, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue, the embodiment of virtue.

古文：而正光之末，皇运时屯，百揆咸乱，九宫失叙，朝野抚膺，士女嗟怨，遂使四海土崩，九区瓦解。
现代文：但正光末年，皇运时挫，四方皆乱，九宫失序，朝野长叹，士女嗟怨，遂使得四海土崩，九州瓦解。
English: However, towards the end of Masamitsu's life, the imperial fortunes were in a tailspin, all four quarters were in turmoil, the nine palaces were out of order, the court was in turmoil, and nobles and women were at loggerheads. As a result, the four seas collapsed and Kyushu disintegrated.

古文：逆贼杜周，虔刘燕代；妖寇葛荣，假噬魏赵。
现代文：逆贼杜周，杀戮于燕州、代州；妖寇葛荣，横行于魏州、赵州。
English: The traitor Du Zhou killed people in Yanzhou and Daizhou; the demon Ge Rong rampaged through Weizhou and Zhaozhou.

古文：常山、易水，戎鼓夜惊；冰井、丛台，胡尘昼合。
现代文：常山、易水，战鼓夜起；冰井、丛台，胡尘昼合。
English: Changshan, Yishui, war drums at night; glaciers, clumps, and dust at noon.

古文：朔南久已丘墟，河北殆成灰烬。
现代文：朔南久是荒芜之地，黄河以北殆成灰烬。
English: Shuangnan has long been a barren land, and the area north of the Yellow River has been reduced to ashes.

古文：宗庙怀匪安之虑，社稷急不测之忧。
现代文：宗庙常有不安之虑，国家总怀不测之忧。
English: The ancestral temple is often worried, and the country is always worried.

古文：大丞相、太原王荣道镜域中，德光区外，神昭藏往，思实知来，义踵先勋，忠资曩烈。
现代文：大丞相、太原王尔朱荣道照域中，德光域外，神机昭明藏匿往古，思考现实预知未来，大义紧跟先勋，忠诚足资往烈。
English: Emperor Taizong and King Taiyuan were in the light, but not in the light of virtue. In ancient times, they had the ability to see the future, think about the present and foresee the future. They followed their forefathers in righteousness and remained loyal to the end.

古文：遂能大建义谋，收集忠勇，熊罴竞逐，虎豹争先，轩翥南溟，抟风北极，气震林原，势动山岳，吊民伐罪，歼此鲸鲵。戮卒多于长平，积器高于熊耳。
现代文：遂能大建义谋，收集忠勇，将士们如熊罴竞逐，虎豹争先，纵横南北，披靡东西，灭此鲸鲵。杀死的敌贼多于长平坑数，积累的器物高于熊耳。
English: Then, he was able to build a great plan of righteousness, collect loyal and brave soldiers, and the soldiers raced like bear cubs, and the tigers and leopards raced ahead, from north to south, from east to west, and exterminated the whale cubs. The number of enemy thieves killed was more than the number of Changping craters, and the accumulated artifacts were higher than the ears of a bear.

古文：秦晋闻声而丧胆，齐莒侧听而詟息。
现代文：秦晋闻声而丧胆，齐莒侧听而恐惧。
English: Qin Jin heard the voice and was disheartened, Qi Xuan heard the side and was afraid.

古文：中兴之业是乎再隆，太平之基兹焉更始。
现代文：皇道中兴大业于是再兴，太平基业从此开始。
English: As a result, the great cause of reviving the imperial road was revived, and the Taiping Foundation began from this time.

古文：虽复伊霍宣翼之功，桓文崇赞之道，何足以仿佛鸿踪，比勋盛烈，道格普天，仁沾率土，振古以来，未有其比。
现代文：即使伊尹、霍光宣明政教翼蔽朝纲之功，齐桓、晋文推重人才、赞辅周室的做法，也难以与尔朱荣并驾齐驱，比较功勋。尔朱荣道德齐天，仁润万民，自古以来，未有可比。
English: Even if Yi Yin and Huo Guang Xuanming's political and educational wings have made great achievements in covering the imperial program, and Qi Huan and Jinwen have promoted talents and praised and assisted Zhou Shuxin's practice, it is difficult to keep pace with Le Zhu Rong and compare their merits. Le Zhu Rong has the same morality and benevolence for all people, and there has been no comparison since ancient times.

古文：若不广锡山河，大开土宇，何以表大义之崇高，标盛德之广远？
现代文：假若朝廷不广赐山河，大开宇土，何以彰表崇高的大义，标记广远的盛德？
English: If the imperial court does not bestow mountains and rivers widely and open up the world, how can it display lofty righteousness and mark far-reaching virtue?

古文：可以冀州之长乐、相州之南赵、定州之博陵、沧州之浮阳、平州之辽西、燕州之上谷、幽州之渔阳等七郡各万户，通前满十万户为太原国邑。 
现代文：可以把冀州的长乐郡、相州的南赵郡、定州的博陵郡、沧州的浮阳郡、平州的辽西郡、燕州的上谷郡、幽州的渔阳郡等七郡，每郡各一万户，加上前面所赐总计十万户赐给尔朱荣，称太原国邑。 
English: Seven counties including Changle County in Jizhou, Nan Zhao County in Xiangzhou, Boling County in Dingzhou, Fuyang County in Cangzhou, Liaoxi County in Pingzhou, Shanggu County in Yanzhou, and Yuyang County in Yuzhou, each with 10,000 households, plus the total of 100,000 households given earlier, can be given to Erzhurong and called Taiyuan Guo'e.

古文：又进位太师，余如故。
现代文：尔朱荣又进位太师，其他官职照旧。
English: Le Zhu Rong was promoted to the rank of grandmaster, and other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：建义初，北海王元颢南奔萧衍，衍乃立为魏主，资以兵将。
现代文：建义初年，北海王元颢投奔南方的萧衍，萧衍于是立他为魏主，给他兵马将帅。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the North Sea king Yuan Shao defected to the south of Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan then made him the ruler of Wei and gave him the title of commander of the soldiers and horses.

古文：时邢杲寇乱三齐，与颢应接。
现代文：当时邢杲在三齐作乱，与元颢遥相呼应。
English: At that time, Zou made trouble in Sanqi, echoing Yuan Shunyao.

古文：朝廷以颢孤弱，不以为虑。
现代文：朝廷认为元颢势孤力弱，没有把他放在心上。
English: The imperial court believed that Yuan Shikai was weak and powerless, and did not take him seriously.

古文：永安三年春，诏大将军元穆先平齐地，然后回师征颢。
现代文：永安二年春天，诏书令大将军元穆先平齐地，然后回师征讨元颢。
English: In the spring of the second year of Yongan, the imperial edict ordered the general Yuan Mu to first level the ground, and then return to the division to solicit Yuan Xuan.

古文：颢以大军未还，乘虚径进，既陷梁国，鼓行而西，荥阳、虎牢并皆不守。
现代文：而元颢乘元穆大军征齐未还，乘虚而入，攻陷梁国之后，鼓噪西进，荥阳、虎牢关全都失守。
English: However, the great army of Yuan Shikai and Yuan Mu did not complete the recruitment, but took advantage of the situation and entered Liang Province. After the fall of Liang Province, they marched westward in a tumultuous manner, and lost Poyang and Hougongguan.

古文：五月，车驾出幸河北。
现代文：这年五月份，皇帝出逃黄河以北。
English: In May of that year, the emperor fled north of the Yellow River.

古文：事出不虞，天下改望。
现代文：事出意料之外，天下为之变色。
English: When something unexpected happens, the whole world changes color.

古文：荣闻之，即时驰传，朝行宫于上党之长子，行其部分。
现代文：尔朱荣听说，立即驰马传唤，把皇帝行宫安在上党长子，行其部分。
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard of this, he immediately rode out on horseback to summon the eldest son of the upper party to install the emperor in the palace.

古文：舆驾于是南辕，荣为前驱，旬日之间，兵马大集，资粮器仗，继踵而至。
现代文：皇帝车马于是向南进发，尔朱荣统军在前面开路，十天之内，兵马云集，粮草兵器紧随而至。
English: The emperor's chariots and horses then headed south, and the Zhurong United Army opened the road ahead. Within ten days, soldiers and horses gathered, followed by grain and grass weapons.

古文：天穆既平邢杲，亦渡河以会车驾。
现代文：天穆既平邢杲，也率军渡过黄河与皇帝会合。
English: Tianmu not only conquered the country, but also led the army across the Yellow River to meet with the emperor.

古文：颢都督宗正珍孙、河内太守元袭固守不降，荣攻而克之，斩珍孙、元袭以徇。
现代文：元颢都督宗正珍孙、河内太守元袭固守城池，不愿投降，尔朱荣攻克城池，斩杀珍孙、元袭。
English: The great-grandson of the former imperial governor Zong Zheng Zhen and the former governor of Hanoi, Zong Zheng Zhen firmly defended the city and did not want to surrender, but Zhu Rong conquered the city and killed Zong Zhen Zhen and Zong Zhen Zhen.

古文：帝幸河内城。
现代文：皇帝到河内城。
English: The emperor arrived in Hanoi.

古文：荣与颢相持于河上，颢令都督安丰王延明缘河据守。
现代文：尔朱荣与元颢在黄河两岸相持对峙，元颢命都督安丰王元延明据河固守。
English: Zhu Rong and Yuan Shao confronted each other on both sides of the Yellow River. Yuan Shao ordered the governor of Anfeng, Wang Yuan Yanming, to hold fast to the river.

古文：荣既未有舟船，不得即渡，议欲还北，更图后举。
现代文：尔朱荣军中没有渡船，不能马上渡过，便商议回军北方，以等来日。
English: There were no ferries in the Zhu Rong army, so they could not cross immediately, so they discussed returning to the north to wait for the next day.

古文：黄门郎杨侃、高道穆等并谓大军若还，失天下之望，固执以为不可。
现代文：黄门郎杨侃、高道穆等人说大军假如回撤，就会大失天下期望，坚持认为不能这样做。
English: Huangmenlang Yang Kan, Gao Daomu and others said that if the large army withdrew, it would greatly lose the world's expectations, insisting that this could not be done.

古文：语在侃等传。
现代文：语在侃等传中。
English: The language is transmitted in rhymes.

古文：属马渚诸杨云有小船数艘，求为乡导，荣乃令都督尔朱兆等率精骑夜济，登岸奋击。
现代文：恰在此时，马渚众杨姓说有几只小船，请求充当向导，前去征求，于是尔朱荣命令都督尔朱兆等人率领精锐骑兵夜渡黄河，上岸奋击敌军。
English: Just at this time, Ma Nagisa, surnamed Yang, said that there were several small boats, asked to act as a guide, went to solicit, so Er Zhu Rong ordered the governor Er Zhu Zhao and others to lead the elite cavalry to cross the Yellow River at night and go ashore to fight the enemy.

古文：颢子领军将军冠受率马步五千拒战，兆大破之，临陈擒冠受。
现代文：元颢的儿子领军将军元冠受率领步、骑兵五千人迎战，尔朱兆大破元冠受，战斗中抓获冠受。
English: The son of Geng Yao, Geng Guanzhu, led the leading army, with five thousand cavalry facing the battle. Zhu Zhaoda defeated Geng Guanzhu and captured Guanzhu in the battle.

古文：延明闻冠受见擒，遂自逃散，颢便率麾下南奔。
现代文：延明听说元冠受被捉拿，便自个儿逃奔而去，元颢也领部属向南逃窜。
English: When Yanming heard that Yuan Guan was captured, he ran away on his own. Yuan Shao also fled southwards.

古文：事在其传。
现代文：事在其传。
English: The story goes on and on.

古文：车驾渡河，入居华林园。
现代文：皇帝车驾渡过黄河，入居华林园。
English: The emperor's carriage drove across the Yellow River and moved into the Hualin Garden.

古文：诏曰： 周武奉时，藉十乱以纂历；汉祖先天，资三杰以除暴。
现代文：下诏说： 周武奉时，借十乱以更改皇历；汉祖先天，凭三杰以除去暴逆。
English: The next edict said: Zhou Wubong, borrow ten disorders to change the imperial calendar; Han ancestor Tian, rely on the three heroes to remove the rebellion.

古文：理民济治，斯道未爽。
现代文：理民济治，此道未失。
English: Rule by the people, for the people, and this way is not lost.

古文：使持节、柱国大将军、大丞相、太原王荣，蕴伏风烟，抱含日月，总奇正以成术，兼文武而为资。
现代文：使持节、柱国大将军、大丞相、太原王尔朱荣，藏伏风烟，抱含日月，总含奇正谋术，兼包文武资才。
English: The Envoys' Festival, the Great General of the Pillar of State, the Great Minister of War, and the King of Taiyuan, Er Zhu Rong, contain the wind and smoke, embrace the sun and moon, and always contain the strange and positive strategy, as well as the literary, military and financial resources.

古文：昔处乱朝，韬光戢翼，秣马冀北，厉兵晋阳，伫龙颜而振腕，想日角以叹息。
现代文：昔处乱朝，藏光隐翼，秣马冀北，厉兵晋阳，亻宁龙颜而振腕，想日角以叹息。
English: In the past, there were chaotic dynasties, the Hidden Light and Hidden Wings, the Horse and Hebei, the Strong Jin and Yang, and the Dragon and Ning, and they shook their arms and sighed.

古文：忠勇奋发，虎士如林，义功始立，所向风靡。
现代文：忠勇奋发，虎士如林，所向披靡，始立义功。
English: Loyal and brave, the tigers are like the forest, they are invincible, and they have made great contributions.

古文：故能芟夷群恶，振此颓纲，俾朕寡昧，获承鸿绪。
现代文：所以能铲除群恶，重振颓倒朝纲，而朕寡德暗昧，得承尔朱荣鸿福。
English: Therefore, we can eradicate the evil of the crowd and reinvigorate the corrupt imperial system, but we have few virtues and are obscure, and we have to accept Zhu Ronghongfu.

古文：虽大位克正，而众盗未息。
现代文：但虽然皇位已正，而众盗贼并未正息。
English: But although the throne has been restored, the thieves have not.

古文：葛荣跋扈，仍乱中原，建旗伐罪，授首歼馘。
现代文：葛荣飞扬跋扈，还在中原作乱，尔朱荣率领义军，讨伐罪敌，尽灭贼党。
English: Ge Rong flew high and made trouble in the Central Plains, while Er Zhu Rong led the rebel army, fought against the criminal enemy, and did his best to exterminate the thief party.

古文：元颢凶顽，构成巨衅，阻弄吴楚，亏污宗社。
现代文：元颢凶险顽固，构成巨大毒瘤，阻乱吴楚，玷污宗社。
English: The Yuan dynasty was vicious and obstinate, constituting a huge cancer, disturbing Wu Chu and tarnishing the patriarchate.

古文：朕徒御北徂，劬劳鞍甲。
现代文：朕御驾北往，马甲辛劳。
English: I'm driving north, my waistcoat is soaked in sweat.

古文：王闻难星奔，一举大定，下洽民和，上匡王室。
现代文：太原王闻难星奔，一举平定乱贼，下应民心，上匡王室。
English: The King of Taiyuan heard of the star-crossed lovers, quelled the ruffians in one fell swoop, responded to the people's hearts, and promoted the royal family.

古文：鸿勋巨绩，书契所未纪；饮至策勋，事绝于比况。
现代文：鸿勋巨绩，书册查无记载；拯救君民，事迹无人比况。
English: The great achievements of Hongxun, no records found in the books; the rescue of the princes and the people, the deeds are unparalleled.

古文：非常之功，必有非常之赏，可天柱大将军。
现代文：非常之功，必须以非常之赏才能相配，可命为天柱大将军。
English: Great merit, must be matched with great reward, can be ordered to be the general of Tianzhu.

古文：此官虽访古无闻，今员未有，太祖已前增置此号，式遵典故，用锡殊礼。
现代文：这个官职虽然访古无闻，今时也没有，但太祖已经增设这个称号，按照典章故例，朕用来作为嘉奖的特殊礼式。
English: Although this official position was unknown in ancient times and does not exist today, the great-grandfather has added this title, which is used as a special ceremony of commendation in accordance with the laws and regulations.

古文：又宜开土宇，可增封十万，通前二十万，加前后部羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：另还宜开辟土地疆域，可增加封户十万，加上前面共二十万户，另外加前后部羽葆仪仗、音乐鼓吹等待遇。
English: In addition, it is also advisable to open up the land territory, which can increase the number of fenced households by 100,000, plus a total of 200,000 households in the front, plus the front and rear parts of feathered ceremonial, music propaganda and other treatment.

古文：余如故。 
现代文：其余照旧。 
English: Everything else remains the same.

古文：荣寻还晋阳。
现代文：尔朱荣不久归还晋阳。
English: Er Zhu Rong soon returned to Jinyang.

古文：先是，葛荣枝党韩娄仍据幽平二州，荣遣都督侯渊讨斩之。
现代文：在这以前，葛荣枝党韩娄仍然据守幽州、平州两州，尔朱荣派遣都督侯渊率部讨伐，斩杀韩娄。
English: Prior to this, the Ge Rong branch of the party, Han Kuo, still held the two states of Yuzhou and Pingzhou. Er Zhu Rong sent the governor Hou Yuan to lead the crusade and killed Han Kuo.

古文：时贼帅万俟丑奴、萧宝夤拥众豳泾，凶势日盛。
现代文：当时敌帅万俟丑奴、萧宝夤拥兵幽、泾二州，气势汹汹，日甚一日。
English: At that time, the enemy commander Wan Xun Ugly, Xiao Bao, Fan Yu, and Zou Erzhou, the momentum was fierce, and the day was very long.

古文：荣遣其从子天光为雍州刺史，令率都督贺拔岳、侯莫、陈悦等总众入关讨之。
现代文：尔朱荣派遣他的侄子尔朱天光任雍州刺史，命令他率领都督贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等一齐率军入关讨伐。
English: Le Zhurong sent his nephew Le Zhu Tianguang to Yongzhou to take charge of the history of the city, and ordered him to lead the capital He Batyue, Hou Mo Chen Yue and other troops to enter the border.

古文：天光既至雍州，以众少不敌，逡巡未集。
现代文：尔朱天光到了雍州，以人少不敌，徘徊未集。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang arrived in Yongzhou, with fewer people than the enemy, wandering uncollected.

古文：荣大怒，遣其骑兵参军刘贵驰驿诣军，加天光杖罚。
现代文：尔朱荣大怒，派他的骑兵参军刘贵前去天光军中，罚天光杖刑。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very angry and sent his cavalry to join Liu Gui's army. Liu Gui galloped into Tian Guang's army and punished Tian Guang with a cane.

古文：天光等大惧，乃进讨，连破之，擒丑奴、宝夤，并槛车送阙。
现代文：尔朱天光等人大为恐惧，于是发兵讨敌，连破敌军，擒获丑奴、宝夤，囚于槛车，一并送往朝廷。
English: Lzhu Tianguang and others were very afraid, so they sent troops to fight the enemy, broke the enemy army, captured ugly slaves and treasure, imprisoned them in the threshold car, and sent them to the imperial court together.

古文：天光又擒王庆云、万俟道乐，关西悉平。
现代文：尔朱天光又擒获王庆云、万俟道乐，关西之地全部平定。
English: Zhu Tianguang also captured Wang Qingyun and Wanzhong Dole, and all of Kansai was pacified.

古文：于是天下大难，便以尽矣。
现代文：这时，天下大难，都已平尽了。
English: At this time, the world is in great difficulty, and everything has been leveled.

古文：荣性好猎，不舍寒暑，至于列围而进，必须齐一，虽遇阻险，不得回避，虎豹逸围者坐死。
现代文：尔朱荣天性好猎，天气寒暑，在所不辞，至于圈围打猎，人马必须号令整齐，即使遇到阻隔险要，人马也不得回避，虎豹冲出重围的，所狩的将士就得处死。
English: Lr Zhu Rong is a natural hunter. The weather is cold and hot, so he does not hesitate to go hunting. As for the hunting circle, the men and horses must be ordered neatly. Even if they encounter obstacles, the men and horses must not be avoided. If the tiger leopard rushes out of the heavy encirclement, the hunted soldiers will be executed.

古文：其下甚苦之。
现代文：部下很是以此为苦。
English: My subordinates suffer a lot because of this.

古文：太宰元天穆从容谓荣曰： 大王勋济天下，四方无事，惟宜调政养民，顺时搜狩。何必盛夏驰逐，伤犯和气。 
现代文：太宰元天穆心平气和地对尔朱荣说： 大王您勋济天下，四方无事，眼下只宜调理政教，赐养百姓，至于打猎，按时汇狩就行了，何必要盛夏之日，驰兵驱逐，这样也伤害侵犯了天地和气呀。 
English: Dazai Yuan Tianmu calmly said to Le Zhurong: Great King, you have blessed the world, there is nothing wrong in the four directions. At the moment, it is only appropriate to adjust politics and religion, and feed the people. As for hunting, it is enough to hunt on time. Why is it necessary to expel soldiers in the middle of summer? This also harms heaven and earth.

古文：荣便攘肘谓天穆曰： 太后女主，不能自正，推奉天子者，此是人臣常节。
现代文：尔朱荣指手划脚地对天穆说： 太后女主，不能自正，推崇奉举天子的，这是人臣应当做的事。
English: He took Tianmu's arm and said, "Empress Dowager Hu, this woman is not on the right path, please support Tianzi, this is the duty of a courtier."

古文：葛荣之徒，本是奴才，乘时作乱，妄自署假，譬如奴走，擒获便休。
现代文：葛荣之徒，本是奴才，乘机作乱，哪分寒暑，对于朝廷来说，就像奴才出逃，擒拿住便完事了。
English: Ge Rong's followers were originally slaves, taking the opportunity to make trouble, no matter how cold or hot it was. For the imperial court, they were like slaves who ran away, but if they were caught, it was all over.

古文：顷来受国大宠，未能开拓境土，混一海内，何宜今日便言勋也！
现代文：最近以来蒙受朝廷大恩，却没能开拓疆土，统一海内，哪能现在就说功勋呢？
English: Recently, we have received great favor from the imperial court, but we have not been able to open up the territory and unify the country. How can we say that it is a merit now?

古文：如闻朝士犹自宽纵，今秋欲共兄戒勒士马，校猎嵩原，令贪污朝贵入围搏虎。
现代文：假如朝士您也愿放松一下，今年秋天我尔朱荣和您一起统率军马，在嵩原校猎，让官员中贪赃枉法者进入围场与虎搏斗。
English: If you would also like to relax, this autumn, I will lead the army horse together with you to hunt in Songyuan, and let the corrupt officials enter the paddock to fight the tiger.

古文：仍出鲁阳，历三荆，悉拥生蛮北填六镇。
现代文：然后出鲁阳，历三荆，把荆蛮之民驱填北方六镇。
English: Then he went out of Luyang, traveled to Sanjing, and drove the barbarian people of Jing into six towns in the north.

古文：回军之际，因平汾胡。
现代文：回军之际，顺道平定汾州胡民。
English: When the team returned to the army, they surrendered to the Hu people in Shandong Province.

古文：明年简练精骑，分出江淮，萧衍若降，乞万户侯。
现代文：明年操练精锐骑兵，分路出击江、淮，萧衍若投降，请其为万户侯。
English: Next year, the elite cavalry will be trained, and they will be sent out to attack Jiangsu and Huai, and if Xiao Yan surrenders, he will be invited to become the lord of 10,000 households.

古文：如其不降，径渡数千骑，便往缚取。
现代文：如果他不投降，派数千骑兵径渡长江，缚其归阙。
English: If he does not surrender, send thousands of cavalry to cross the Yangtze River and tie him up.

古文：待六合宁一，八表无尘，然后共兄奉天子，巡四方，观风俗，布政教，如此乃可称勋耳。
现代文：等到六合安宁，八表平静，然后我与兄一起奉赡天子，巡察四方，观察民情风俗，宣明政教，像这样才能称得上有功勋。
English: Wait until there is peace at the six horizons and calm at the eight horizons, and then I and my brother will serve the Son of Heaven, inspect the four directions, observe folk customs, and preach politics and religion. Only in this way can I be called meritorious.

古文：今若止猎，兵士懈怠，安可复用也。 
现代文：今天如果停止狩猎，兵士懈怠，那么国家有事，怎能赴敌呢？ 
English: If hunting stops today and soldiers slack off, how can they go to the enemy when the country is in trouble?

古文：荣身虽居外，恆遥制朝廷。广布亲戚，列为左右，伺察动静，大小必知。
现代文：尔朱荣虽然身居朝外，经常遥控朝廷，广泛布置亲戚于朝中，列为左右近臣，伺察朝中动静，风吹草动，大小必知。
English: Although he lives outside the imperial court, Le Zhu Rong often controls the imperial court remotely, arranges relatives widely in the imperial court, and is classified as a close vassal of the left and right, and observes the movement of the imperial court, the wind blows and the grass moves, and the size must be known.

古文：或有侥幸求官者，皆诣荣承候，得其启请，无不遂之。
现代文：或有侥幸求得官职的，都到尔朱荣王府奉承侍候，得到尔朱荣的认可，没有什么事得不到满足的。
English: Those who were lucky enough to get an official position would go to the palace of King Le Zhurong to flatter the attendants and get the approval of King Le Zhurong. There was nothing they could not be satisfied with.

古文：曾关补定州曲阳县令，吏部尚书李神俊以阶悬不奉，别更拟人。
现代文：朝中曾经准备补任定州曲阳县令，吏部尚书李神隽因此缺悬在那里，打算另外任命别人。
English: In the past, the Korean government had planned to fill the post of the governor of Quyang County in Denzhou. As a result, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Li Shensheng, was absent, and it was planned to appoint someone else.

古文：荣闻大怒，即遣其所补者往夺其任。
现代文：尔朱荣听说，勃然大怒，立即派遣他自个儿补上的县令前往曲阳取夺原县令。
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard of this, he flew into a rage and immediately dispatched his own replacement county magistrate to Quyang to seize the original county magistrate.

古文：荣使入京，虽复微蔑，朝贵见之莫不倾靡；及至阙下，未得通奏，恃荣威势，至乃忿怒。
现代文：尔朱荣的使者入京，虽然官轻职微，但朝中贵戚见到他无不逢迎拍马；等到他来到朝廷，未被通报，他恃凭尔朱荣威宠，到了朝堂，怒气冲冲。
English: When he came to the imperial court, without being notified, he was favored by Zhu Rong and arrived at the imperial court in a rage.

古文：荣曾启北人为河南诸州，庄帝未许。
现代文：尔朱荣曾经启奏皇上让北人任黄河以南诸州职官，庄帝没有应允。
English: Zhu Rong once petitioned the emperor to let the northerners serve as officials in the states south of the Yellow River, but Emperor Zhuang did not agree.

古文：天穆入见，面启曰： 天柱既有大功，若请普代天下官属，恐陛下亦不得违之。如何启数人为州，便停不用！ 
现代文：元天穆入见皇上，启奏说： 天柱既有大功，他如真的要求全面取代天下所有官职，恐怕陛下您也不得不照做，而今尔朱荣只是推荐几个人任州职，您却停而不用！ 
English: Yuan Tianmu entered to see the emperor, and the prelude said: Tianzhu had great merit, and if he really demanded the full replacement of all official positions in the world, I am afraid that Your Majesty would have to do the same, but now Zhu Rong only recommends a few people to hold state positions, but you stop and do not use them!

古文：帝正色曰： 天柱若不为人臣，朕亦须代；如其犹存臣节，无代天下百官理。
现代文：皇帝正色说： 天柱若不是人臣，朕也只有遂其心愿；如果他仍存有些人臣之节，那就没有代任天下百官的道理。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang said sharply, "If General Tianzhu does not become a courtier of the imperial court, even I can replace him; if he still has the etiquette of a minister, there is no reason to replace the world's hundred officials."

古文：此事复何足论！ 
现代文：这事还有什么可讨论的。 
English: What else is there to discuss?

古文：荣闻所启不允，大为恚恨，曰： 天子由谁得立？
现代文：尔朱荣听说所荐的官职没被批准，大为恼火，说： 天子是因为谁才得以登基的？
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard that the proposed post had not been approved, he was very angry and said: Who was the reason for the Son of Heaven to be enthroned?

古文：今乃不用我语。 
现代文：而今却不听我的话。 
English: And now they don't listen to me.

古文：庄帝外迫于荣，恆怏怏不悦，兼惩荣河阴之事，恐终难保。
现代文：庄帝感到尔朱荣的压力，常常怏怏不乐，加上苦于尔朱荣河阴的事情，担心自己最终性命难保。
English: Zhuang Di felt the pressure of Lzhu Rong, often unhappy, coupled with suffering from Lzhu Rong Yin, worried about his ultimate life.

古文：又城阳王徽、侍中李彧等欲擅威权，惧荣害之，复相间构，日月滋甚，于是庄帝密有图荣之意。
现代文：又有城阳王元徽，侍中李尔等人想独揽大权，担心尔朱荣加害于己，经常在皇帝面前说尔朱荣的坏话。流言填耳，日甚一日，于是庄帝心中暗起除掉尔朱荣的意图。
English: In addition, King Yuan Hui of Chengyang, Li Er, an attendant, and others wanted to monopolize power, worried that Er Zhu Rong would harm themselves, and often spoke ill of Er Zhu Rong in front of the emperor. Rumors filled their ears, day after day, so Emperor Zhuang secretly had the intention to get rid of Er Zhu Rong.

古文：三年九月，荣启将入朝。朝士虑其有变，庄帝又畏恶之。
现代文：三年九月，尔朱荣启奏准备入朝，朝中官宦担心有变，庄帝也畏惧厌恶尔朱荣。
English: In September of the third year, when Er Zhu Rong was preparing to enter the imperial court, the middle-ranking officials in the imperial court were worried about changes, and Emperor Zhuang was also afraid of and disliked Er Zhu Rong.

古文：荣从弟世隆与荣书，劝其不来，荣妻北乡郡长公主亦劝不行，荣并不从。
现代文：尔朱荣堂弟尔朱世隆给他写信，劝他不要入朝，荣妻北乡郡长公主也劝他不要成行。尔朱荣不听。
English: Zhu Rong's cousin, Zhu Shilong, wrote to him, advising him not to enter the imperial court, and his wife, Princess Beixiang, also advised him not to go. Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：帝既图荣，荣至入见，即欲害之，以天穆在并，恐为后患，故隐忍未发。
现代文：庄帝既想除掉尔朱荣，尔朱荣入朝拜见时，便想动手，只因元天穆在并州，担心他会成为后患，所以隐忍不发。
English: Emperor Zhuang not only wanted to get rid of Lzhu Rong, but when Lzhu Rong entered the imperial court to pay homage, he wanted to take action, but because Yuan Tianmu was in the annexation of the state, he was worried that he would become a hindrance, so he could not bear it.

古文：荣之入洛，有人告荣，云帝欲图之。
现代文：这次尔朱荣来到洛阳，有人告诉他，皇帝想除掉他。
English: This time, when Le Zhu Rong came to Luoyang, someone told him that the emperor wanted to get rid of him.

古文：荣即具奏，帝曰： 外人告云，亦言王欲害我，我岂信之？ 
现代文：尔朱荣把这一切都告诉了皇帝，皇帝说： 别人告诉我说您想害我，我相信他们吗？ 
English: Le Zhu Rong told all this to the emperor. The emperor said, "If others tell me you want to harm me, should I believe them?

古文：于是荣不自疑，每入谒帝，从人不过数十，又皆挺身不持兵仗。
现代文：于是尔朱荣便打消了疑心，每回入朝见皇帝，所带随从不过数十人，又都赤手空拳不带武器。
English: As a result, Er Rong Rong no longer doubted. Every time he entered the court to worship the emperor, there were only dozens of people following him, and they were all bare-handed without weapons.

古文：及天穆至，帝伏兵于明光殿东廊，引荣及荣长子菩提、天穆等俱入。
现代文：这次，元天穆也来了。皇帝在明光殿东廊埋下伏兵，引导尔朱荣及其长子尔朱菩提、元天穆等来内廷。
English: This time, Yuan Tianmu also came. The emperor planted an ambush in the east corridor of the Mingguang Palace and led Er Zhu Rong and his eldest son, Er Zhu Bodhi, and Yuan Tianmu to the inner court.

古文：坐定，光禄少卿鲁安、典御李侃晞等抽刀而至，荣窘迫，起投御坐。
现代文：坐定，光禄少卿鲁安、典御李侃尔等人抽刀冲上前来，尔朱荣眼看形势不对，起身投向皇帝。
English: After sitting down, Guanglu Shaoqing Lu'an, Emperor Li Qian'er and others rushed forward with drawn swords. Seeing that the situation was not right, Er Zhu Rong got up and threw himself at the emperor.

古文：帝先横刀膝下，遂手刃之，安等乱斫，荣与天穆、菩提同时俱死。
现代文：皇帝预先横刀膝下，一刀砍了过去，杀了尔朱荣，鲁安等人挥刀乱砍，尔朱荣与元天穆、尔朱菩提同时死去。
English: In advance, the emperor knelt down with his sword, slashed the past with a single stroke, killed Le Zhu Rong, Luan and others swung their swords and slashed, and Le Zhu Rong died at the same time as Yuan Tianmu and Le Zhu Bodhi.

古文：荣时年三十八。
现代文：尔朱荣当时三十八岁。
English: Le Zhu Rong was 38 years old at the time.

古文：于是内外喜叫，声满京城。
现代文：他们死后，朝廷文武欢呼雀跃，整个京城人声鼎沸。
English: After their death, the imperial court cheered and the entire capital was in an uproar.

古文：既而大赦。
现代文：紧接着，皇帝大赦天下。
English: Soon, Zhu Rong's party members were amnestied.

古文：前废帝初，世隆等得志，乃诏曰： 故使持节、侍中、都督河北诸军事、天柱大将军、大丞相、太师、领左右、兼录尚书、北道大行台、太原王荣，功济区夏，诚贯幽明，天不慭遗，奄从物化。
现代文：前废帝初年，尔朱世隆等得志，皇帝下诏说： 已故使持节、侍中、都督河北诸军事、天柱大将军、大丞相、太师、领左右、兼录尚书、北道大行台、太原王尔朱荣，功济华夏，诚贯幽明，天不忍弃，让其早离人去。
English: In the first year of the former deposed emperor, Er Zhu Shilong and others made their wishes come true, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: The late envoy Ji Jie, the attendant, the governor of Hebei Province, the military, the general of Tianzhu, the prime minister, the grand master, the leader of the left and right, the concurrently recorded scholar, the great scholar of the North Road, and the king of Taiyuan, Er Zhu Rong, have made great contributions to China, have been sincere and consistent, and have not been abandoned by heaven. Let him leave the world as soon as possible.

古文：追终褒绩，列代通谟；纪德铭勋，前王令范。
现代文：总其一生，思其功勋，是各代通例；纪其德操，铭其勋业，为前王令范。
English: It is the general practice of all generations to think about one's lifetime and one's merits; to remember one's virtues and one's meritorious deeds is the former king's rule.

古文：可赠假黄钺、相国、录尚书事、司州牧、使持节、侍中、将军，王如故。 
现代文：朕赠尔朱荣为假黄钺、相国、录尚书事、司州牧，使持节、侍中、将军、王仍如从前。 
English: As far as I know, Zhu Rong is still the same as before: he is still the False Huang Di, the Father of the Nation, the Keeper of the Records, the Custodian of the State, the Emissary, the Chamberlain, the General, and the King.

古文：又诏曰： 故假黄钺、持节、侍中、相国、录尚书、都督中外诸军事、天柱大将军、司州牧、太原王荣，惟岳降灵，应期作辅，功侔伊霍，德契桓文。
现代文：又下诏说： 已故假黄钺、持节、侍中、相国、录尚书、都督中外诸军事、天柱大将军、司州牧、太原王尔朱荣，乃是五岳显灵，让他应期辅佐朝廷。他功齐伊尹、霍光，德合齐桓、晋文。
English: The imperial edict also said: "The late Huang Xuanqian, Ji Jie, Zhi Zhong, Zi Guo, Luo Shangshu, the military governors of various countries, the general of Tianzhu, the governor of Shizhou, and the king of Taiyuan, Er Zhu Rong, are the Five Great Spirits, let him assist the imperial court in due time. He has made great contributions to Yi Yin, Huo Guang, De He Qi Huan, and Jinwen.

古文：方籍栋梁，永康国命，道长运短，震悼兼深。
现代文：他乃是国家栋梁，可长保国命，然而道长命短，暴薨之后，朕震惊嗟悼，痛苦尤深。
English: He is the pillar of the country and can protect the life of the country for a long time. However, the road of long life is short. After the violent crackdown, I was shocked and saddened, and the pain was particularly deep.

古文：前已褒赠，用彰厥美。
现代文：前已褒扬赠号，意在表彰其美。
English: It has previously been awarded a number of awards in recognition of its beauty.

古文：然礼数弗穷，文物有阙，远近之望，犹或未尽。
现代文：然而礼数未尽，文物有缺，远近人心，恐怕意觉未备。
English: However, the number of ceremonies has not been exhausted, there is a lack of cultural relics, and it is far from the hearts of the people. I am afraid that the intention is not ready.

古文：宜循旧典，更加殊锡。
现代文：朕觉得宜遵循旧典，更加特殊恩赐。
English: I think it is appropriate to follow the old scripture, more special gifts.

古文：可追号为晋王，加九锡，给九旒銮辂、虎贲、班剑三百人、辒辌车；准晋太宰、安平献王故事，谥曰武。 
现代文：可以追号为晋王，加九锡，赐给九旒銮辂、虎贲、班剑三百人、卧车、按晋太宰、安平献王旧例，谥称武。 
English: He can be given the posthumous title of Jin Wang, add Jiuxi, and bestow Jiuzhaigou, Tigress, Three Hundred Swordsmen, Sleeping Car, Jin Dazai, and Anping on the king according to the old custom, and be called Wu.

古文：诏曰： 武泰之末，乾枢中圮，丕基宝命，有若缀旒。
现代文：诏书说： 武泰末年，乾坤中颓，国命大业，有如缀珠。
English: The imperial edict said: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Wu of Tai, in the midst of great achievements, the great cause of national destiny is like an ornamental bead.

古文：晋王荣固天所纵，世秉忠诚，一匡邦国，再造区夏，俾我颓纲，于斯复振。
现代文：晋王尔朱荣乃天赐于魏，世怀忠诚，一拯国家，再造华夏，让我将倒的朝纲，一朝复振。
English: Zhu Rong, the king of Jin, was a gift from heaven to the Wei Dynasty. He was loyal to the world, saved the country, and re-established the Chinese nation. He restored the dynasty that I had overthrown.

古文：虽勋铭王府，德被管弦，而从祀之礼，于兹尚阙，非所以酬懋赏于当时，腾殊绩于不朽。
现代文：而现在虽然勋铭王府，德披管弦，但在从祀的礼节上尚有欠缺，不足以酬大赏于当时，彰殊绩于不朽。
English: And now, although the royal palace is decorated with the royal insignia, and the orchestra is dressed in the national costume, there is still a deficiency in the etiquette of worship, which is not enough to reward the great reward at that time, and to commend the great achievement in immortality.

古文：宜遵旧典，配享高祖庙庭。 
现代文：应遵循旧典，让他配享高祖庙庭。 
English: The old law should be followed, and he should be allowed to enjoy the ancestral temple garden.

古文：菩提，肃宗末，拜羽林监。
现代文：尔朱菩提，肃宗末年，拜授羽林监。
English: Er Zhu Bodhi, the last year of Su Zong's reign, was awarded the title of Forest Supervisor.

古文：寻转直阁将军。
现代文：不久转任直尔将军。
English: He was soon transferred to General Naur.

古文：孝庄初，以荣翼戴之勋，超授散骑常侍、平北将军、中书令。
现代文：庄帝初年，因尔朱荣拥戴之功，超阶拜授散骑常侍、平北将军、中书令。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, because of Zhu Rong's support, he was awarded the title of "super-ranked knight errant," "general of the North," and "order of the book."

古文：转太常卿，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中、特进。
现代文：转任太常卿，迁任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中、特进。
English: He was transferred to the post of the Grand Councilor, the post of the General of the Cavalry, the post of the Third Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and the posts of the Junior Chamberlain and the Special Envoy.

古文：死时年十四。
现代文：死时年仅十四。
English: He was only fourteen when he died.

古文：前废帝初，赠侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、冀州刺史，谥曰惠。
现代文：前废帝初年，赠侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、冀州刺史，谥称惠。
English: In the first year of the former dethroned emperor, he bestowed the titles of chamberlain, grand cavalry general, governor of Jizhou Province, governor of Jizhou Province, and so on.

古文：菩提弟义罗，孝庄初，除散骑常侍、武卫将军。
现代文：尔朱菩提的弟弟叉罗，庄帝初年，授散骑常侍、武卫将军。
English: Er Zhu Bodhi's younger brother, Shiloh, in the first year of Emperor Zhuang, was given the title of imperial equerry and general of the imperial guards.

古文：初袭爵梁郡公，又进爵为王。
现代文：初袭任梁郡公，又晋爵为王。
English: He was first appointed as the Prince of Liang County, and then promoted to the peerage.

古文：寻卒，赠侍中、车骑将军、司空公、雍州刺史。
现代文：不久病逝，朝廷赠侍中、车骑将军、司空公、雍州刺史。
English: He died of illness soon after, and the imperial court presented him with the titles of chamberlain, general of cavalry and cavalry, lord of the skies, and prince of Yongzhou.

古文：义罗弟文殊，建义初，封平昌郡开国公，进爵为王。
现代文：叉罗的弟弟文殊，建义初年，封平昌郡开国公，晋爵为王。
English: Xiluo's younger brother Wenshu, in the first year of Jianyi, was named the founding father of Pyeongchang County and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：孝静初，转袭荣爵太原王。
现代文：孝静初年，转袭荣爵位为太原王。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jing's reign, he succeeded to the title of King of Taiyuan.

古文：薨于晋阳，时年九岁。
现代文：死于晋阳，时年九岁。
English: He died in Jinyang at the age of nine.

古文：文殊弟文暢，初封昌乐郡开国公，食邑二千户。
现代文：文殊的弟弟文畅，开始封昌乐郡开国公，食邑二千户。
English: Wenshu's younger brother, Wenshang, began to be the founding father of Changle County, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：以荣破葛贼之勋，进爵为王，增邑千户。
现代文：因尔朱荣破葛荣叛贼的功勋，晋爵为王，增加食邑一千户。
English: Because of Zhu Rong's exploits in defeating Ge Rong's traitors, he was promoted to the peerage, and the number of his households increased by a thousand.

古文：超授散骑常侍、抚军将军。后除肆州刺史，仍本将军，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：超阶授散骑常侍、抚军将军，后来任肆州刺史，仍为抚军将军，加开府仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the rank of super-ranked attendant of the imperial court, equestrian of the imperial cavalry, and general of the imperial army, and later he was appointed as the governor of Zhouzhou Province, and still he was the general of the imperial army. He was also appointed to the post of the prefect of Kaifu and the three departments.

古文：武定三年春，坐与前东郡太守任曹等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：武定三年春，因与前东郡太守任胄等人谋反，被杀。
English: In the spring of the third year of Wuding's reign, he was killed for plotting a rebellion with the former East County Governor Ren Zang and others.

古文：时年十八。
现代文：时年十八。
English: He was 18 years old at the time.

古文：文暢弟文略，袭爵梁郡王。
现代文：文畅弟文略，袭爵梁郡王。
English: Wen Chang's younger brother, Wen Liang, inherited the title of Count.

古文：武定末，抚军将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：武定末年，为抚军将军、光禄大夫。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he became the general of the Fuzhu army and the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：史臣曰：太祖抚运乘时，奄开王业。
现代文：史臣有言：魏太祖乘时而起，开创大魏王业。
English: Shi Zhen said: Wei Taizu took advantage of the opportunity and created the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：世祖以武功一海内，高祖以文德革天下。
现代文：魏世祖以武功统一海内，魏高祖以文德革新天下。
English: The ancestor of the Wei Dynasty unified China with martial arts, and the ancestor of the Wei Dynasty revolutionized the world with literature.

古文：世宗之后，政道颇亏。
现代文：魏世宗以后，政道日亏一日。
English: After Wei Shizong, the political system became worse day by day.

古文：及明皇幼冲，女主南面。
现代文：到了魏明皇时代，明皇幼小，女主掌权。
English: By the time of Emperor Wei Ming, Emperor Ming was still a child, and the empress was in power.

古文：始则于忠专恣，继以元义权重，握赏罚之柄，擅生杀之威；荣悴在亲疏，贵贱由离合；附会者结之以子女，进趋者要之以金帛。
现代文：开始于忠专横恣肆，接着元叉权重一时，手握赏罚大权，操纵生杀威势，大臣们的荣耀忧伤视其与他们关系的亲疏远近，高贵贫贱看其与他们的远离近合，以致出现附会他们的以子女姻亲为筹码，逢迎的以金银丝帛为门票。
English: It began with the arbitrary use of loyalty, followed by the momentary weight of the Yuan fork, the power to reward and punish, and the power to manipulate life and death. The glory and sorrow of the ministers regarded their relationship with them as close and distant, and the nobility and poverty regarded their relationship with them as close and distant. As a result, their children and in-laws were used as a bargaining chip, and the gold, silver and silk were used as tickets.

古文：且佞谀用事，功勤不赏，居官肆其聚敛，乘势极其陵暴。
现代文：而且奸佞谄谀者把持朝政，以致为官忠诚勤勉者与赏嘉无缘，为官的只管大肆聚敛财物，得势者任意胡作非为。
English: Moreover, crooks and scoundrels are in charge of the government, so that those who are loyal and diligent as officials have no chance of being awarded. Officials only need to amass wealth, and those who gain power can do anything they want.

古文：于是四海嚣然，已有群飞之渐矣。
现代文：此时，四海之内，群情激愤，已大有人心思变的危险了。
English: At this time, all over the world, the crowd is outraged, and there is already a danger that many people will change their minds.

古文：逮于灵后反政，宣淫于朝。
现代文：等到灵后拂逆朝政，在朝中大泄淫威。
English: Wait until after the funeral to overthrow the government and flaunt your power in the court.

古文：郑俨手运天机，口吐王制。李轨、徐纥刺促以求先，元略、元徽喔咿以竞入。
现代文：郑俨手运天机、口吐王制，李轨、徐纥忙迫以求先，元略、元徽鼓噪以争入。
English: Zheng Yao won the game by sleight of hand and the game by word of mouth, Li Rail and Xu Yao were busy trying to get ahead, and Yuan Li and Yuan Hui were busy competing to get in.

古文：私利毕举，公道尽亡，遐迩怨愤，天下鼎沸。
现代文：私利尽出，公道全亡，远近怨愤，天下鼎沸。
English: Self-interest is all-pervasive, justice is dead, resentment is near and far, and the whole world is seething.

古文：倾覆之征，于此至矣。
现代文：国运倾覆的征兆，开始出现了。
English: Signs of the overthrow of the Kuomintang began to appear.

古文：尔朱荣缘将帅之列，藉部众之用，属肃宗暴崩，民怨神怒，遂有匡颓拯弊之志，援主逐恶之图，盖天启之也。
现代文：尔朱荣处将帅之列，借手中兵力，恰遇肃宗猝死，民怨神怒，便产生匡颓拯弊的意图，帮助君主驱逐邪恶的想法，这是老天的旨意呀。
English: It is God's will that, when the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of the people caused by the sudden death of Emperor Sozong and the wrath of

古文：于是上下离心，文武解体，咸企忠义之声，俱听桓文之举。
现代文：当时，上下离心，文武解体，大家都企求忠义的声音，都听从齐桓、晋文之举措。
English: At that time, with the separation of church and state, the disintegration of civil and military, and everyone seeking loyalty, they all obeyed the measures of Qi Kuan and Jinwen.

古文：劳不汗马，朝野靡然，扶翼懿亲，宗祏有主，祀魏配天，不殒旧物。
现代文：劳不汗马，朝野心服，扶戴皇室，宗社有主，祀魏配天，不坏旧制。
English: Don't work hard, don't be ambitious, support the royal family, have a head of the family, worship Wei Baitian, and don't break the old system.

古文：及夫擒葛荣，诛元颢，戮邢杲，翦韩娄，丑奴、宝夤咸枭马市。
现代文：等到擒获葛荣，诛杀元颢，戮除邢杲，翦灭韩娄，丑奴、宝夤都在马市斩首。
English: By the time they captured Ge Rong, they had killed Yuan Zang, killed Duan Zang, killed Han Zang, and beheaded Ugly Bastard and Bao Zang in Ma City.

古文：此诸魁者，或据象魏，或僭号令，人谓秉皇符，身各谋帝业，非徒鼠窃狗盗，一城一聚而已。
现代文：这众多贼魁，或据大魏一方，或僭立称号旗幡，人们说他们手握大魏皇符，暗自各谋帝业，并不是那些鼠窃狗盗之徒，干的是一城一聚的勾当。
English: These numerous leaders of thieves, either according to the Great Wei side, or standing under the banner of the title, people say that they hold the Great Wei imperial symbols in their hands, secretly plotting their own empires, are not those rat thieves, they are doing the work of a city.

古文：苟非荣之致力，克夷大难，则不知几人称帝，几人称王也。
现代文：假如不是尔朱荣竭尽全力，扑杀大难，那就不知有几人称帝，几人称王了。
English: If Le Zhurong had not made every effort to put down the Great Calamity, then I don't know how many people would have been crowned emperor and how many would have been crowned king.

古文：然则荣之功烈，亦已茂乎！
现代文：这样，尔朱荣功勋勇烈，也已盛极一时了。
English: In this way, Lzhu Rong's heroic exploits have also been extremely popular.

古文：而始则希觊非望，睥睨宸极；终乃灵后、少帝，沉流不反；河阴之下，衣冠涂地。
现代文：而开始尔朱荣则静观时局，斜眼帝位；终而灵后、少帝沉流不反。河阴之下，朝廷官员，尽数被诛。
English: At the beginning, however, Er Zhu Rong watched the situation calmly, with a sidelong glance at the imperial throne; eventually, after his death, the young emperor went with the flow. Under the shadow of the river, the imperial officials were all executed.

古文：此其所以得罪人神，而终于夷戮也。
现代文：这就是他得罪神人，终于被杀的原因。
English: This is the reason why he offended the godman and was finally killed.

古文：向使荣无奸忍之失，修德义之风，则彭、韦、伊、霍夫何足数？
现代文：如果尔朱荣无奸忍之心，杀戮之失，修好德操仁义的风仪，那么彭、韦、伊、霍哪能与他的功劳相比。
English: If Le Zhu Rong has no treachery and forbearance, the loss of killing, and the cultivation of morality, benevolence and righteousness, then how can Peng, Wei, Yi, and Huo compare with his merits.

古文：至于末迹见猜，地逼贻毙，斯则蒯通致说于韩王也。
现代文：至于行迹被猜疑，终被杀戮，这就与蒯通献说于韩王的结局相类同了。
English: As for being suspected of his whereabouts and eventually killed, this is similar to the end of the story told by Yan Tong to King Han.

