古文：孔子于乡党，恂恂如也，似不能言者；其在宗庙朝庭，便便言，唯谨尔。
现代文：孔子在家乡时，非常恭顺温和，好似不会说话的样子。但他在宗庙里、朝廷上，说话却明白畅达，只是说得很谨慎。
English: When Confucius was in his hometown, he was very submissive and gentle, as if he could not speak. But in his ancestral temple and at court, he spoke clearly and fluently, but he spoke very carefully.

古文：朝，与下大夫言，侃侃如也；与上大夫言，訚訚如也。君在，踧踖如也，与与如也。
现代文：上朝的时候，国君还没有到来，孔子同下大夫说话，温和而快乐；同上大夫说话，正直而恭敬；国君已经来了，恭敬而心中不安，但是仪态又安祥适度。
English: At the time of the Shang Dynasty, the sovereign had not yet arrived. Confucius spoke to the lower doctor, gentle and happy; he spoke to the upper doctor, honest and respectful; the sovereign had already arrived, respectful and uneasy in his heart, but his demeanor was calm and appropriate.

古文：君召使摈，色勃如也，足躩如也。
现代文：国君召孔子去接待宾客，他的面色庄重矜持，步伐轻快。
English: The sovereign summoned Confucius to receive the guests. His countenance was dignified and reserved, and his pace brisk.

古文：揖所与立，左右手，衣前后襜如也。
现代文：向同他站在一起的人作揖，向左向右拱手，衣裳随之前后摆动，却显得整齐。
English: He gestured to the people standing with him, waving his hands from side to side, his clothes swinging back and forth, but they looked neat.

古文：趋进，翼如也。
现代文：快步向前时，好像鸟儿舒展开了翅膀。
English: As he walked briskly forward, it was as if Shu, the bird, had spread his wings.

古文：宾退，必复命曰： 宾不顾矣。 
现代文：宾客告退了，他一定向君王回报说： 客人已经不回头了。 
English: When the guests left, he must have told the king: The guests are not coming back.

古文：入公门，鞠躬如也，如不容。
现代文：孔子走进朝堂的大门，显出小心谨慎的样子，好像没有容身之地。
English: Confucius walked into the gate of the imperial hall with a cautious air, as if there was no room for him.

古文：立不中门，行不履阈。
现代文：他不站在门的中间，进门时不踩门坎。
English: He doesn't stand in the middle of the door, he doesn't step on the doorknob when he comes in.

古文：过位，色勃如也，足躩如也，其言似不足者。
现代文：经过国君的座位时，脸色变得庄重起来，脚步也快起来，说话的声音低微得像气力不足似的。
English: When he passed the seat of the sovereign, his face became solemn, his step quickened, and his voice was low, as if he lacked strength.

古文：摄齐升堂，鞠躬如也，屏气似不息者。
现代文：他提起衣服的下摆走上堂去，显得小心谨慎，憋住气，好像不呼吸一样。
English: He picked up the hem of his robe and walked up the hall, appearing cautious and holding his breath as if he wasn't breathing.

古文：出，降一等，逞颜色，怡怡如也；没阶，趋进，翼如也；复其位，踧踖如也。
现代文：走出来，下了一级台阶，面色舒展，怡然和乐。走完了台阶，快步向前，姿态好像鸟儿展翅一样。
English: He came out and went down a flight of steps, his face stretched, happy and joyful. When he had completed the steps, he walked quickly forward, his posture like a bird spreading its wings.

古文：执圭，鞠躬如也，如不胜。上如揖，下如授。
现代文：回到自己的位置，又是恭敬而谨慎的样子。
English: He returns to his place, respectful and cautious.

古文：勃如战色，足蹜蹜如有循。享礼，有容色。
现代文：孔子出使别的诸侯国，行聘问礼时拿着圭，恭敬谨慎，像是拿不动的样子。
English: When Confucius was sent on a mission to other principalities, he held his gong respectfully and cautiously, as if he couldn't move it.

古文：私觌，愉愉如也。
现代文：和国君举行私下会见的时候，更轻松愉快了。
English: When I had a private meeting with the Emperor, it was more relaxed and enjoyable.

古文：君子不以绀緅饰，红紫不以为亵服。
现代文：君子不用青中透红或黑中透红的布做镶边，红色和紫色不用来做平常家居的便服。
English: A gentleman does not use a crimson-red or black-red cloth to make a border, and red and purple are not used to make casual clothes for ordinary households.

古文：当暑袗絺绤，必表而出之。
现代文：暑天，穿细葛布或粗葛布做的单衣，一定是套在外面。
English: On a hot day, if you wear a singlet made of fine or coarse georgette, it must be worn outside.

古文：缁衣羔裘，素衣麑裘，黄衣狐裘。
现代文：黑色的衣配羔羊皮袍，白色的衣配小鹿皮袍，黄色的衣配狐皮袍。
English: A black robe and a lambskin robe, a white robe and a fawn robe, a yellow robe and a fox robe.

古文：亵裘长，短右袂。
现代文：居家穿的皮袄比较长，可是右边的袖子要短一些。
English: The fur coat worn at home is relatively long, but the right sleeve is shorter.

古文：必有寝衣，长一身有半。
现代文：睡觉一定要有小被，长度是人身长的一倍半。
English: Sleep must have a small quilt, the length of which is one and a half times the length of a person.

古文：狐貉之厚以居。
现代文：用厚厚的狐貉皮做坐垫。
English: Use the thick mink fur to make a cushion.

古文：去丧，无所不佩。
现代文：服丧期满之后，任何饰物都可以佩带。
English: After the period of mourning is over, any jewelry can be worn.

古文：非帷裳，必杀之。
现代文：不是上朝和祭祀时穿的礼服，一定要经过裁剪。
English: If it is not a ceremonial dress worn in the last century or during a religious service, it must be tailored.

古文：羔裘玄冠不以吊。
现代文：羊羔皮袍和黑色礼帽都不能穿戴着去吊丧。
English: Neither lambskin coats nor black caps can be worn to funerals.

古文：吉月，必朝服而朝。
现代文：每月初一，一定要穿着上朝的礼服去朝贺。
English: On the first day of the month, be sure to wear a morning dress to morning greetings.

古文：齐，必有明衣，布。
现代文：斋戒沐浴的时候，一定要有浴衣，用布做的。
English: When fasting and bathing, be sure to have a yukata, made of cloth.

古文：齐必变食，居必迁坐。
现代文：斋戒的时候，一定要改变平常的饮食，居住也一定搬移地方，
English: When fasting, it is necessary to change the usual diet, and the place of residence must also be moved.

古文：食不厌精，脍不厌细。
现代文：粮食不嫌舂得精，鱼和肉不嫌切得细。
English: Grain should be finely chopped, fish and meat should be finely chopped.

古文：食饐而餲，鱼馁而肉败，不食；色恶，不食；臭恶，不食；失饪，不食；不时，不食；割不正，不食；不得其酱，不食。
现代文：粮食霉烂发臭，鱼和肉腐烂，都不吃。食物颜色难看，不吃。
English: Mouldy and smelly grain, rotting fish and meat, do not eat. The food colour is ugly, do not eat.

古文：肉虽多，不使胜食气。
现代文：气味难闻，不吃。烹调不当，不吃。
English: If it smells bad, don't eat it. If it's not cooked properly, don't eat it.

古文：唯酒无量，不及乱。
现代文：不到该当吃食时候，不吃。
English: When it's time to eat, don't eat less than you should.

古文：沽酒市脯，不食。
现代文：从市上买来的肉干和酒，不吃。
English: Dried meat and wine bought from the market are not to be eaten.

古文：不撤姜食，不多食。
现代文：每餐必须有姜，但也不多吃。
English: Every meal must have ginger, but don't eat too much.

古文：祭于公，不宿肉。
现代文：参加国家祭祀典礼，分到的祭肉当天就食用不放过夜。
English: Participate in the national sacrificial ceremony, and eat the allocated sacrificial meat on the same day and do not leave it overnight.

古文：祭肉不出三日，出三日不食之矣。
现代文：一般祭肉的留存不超过三天。放超过了三天，就不吃了。
English: Generally, sacrificial meat is kept for no more than three days. If it is kept for more than three days, it is not eaten.

古文：食不语，寝不言。虽疏食菜羹，瓜祭，必齐如也。
现代文：嘴里吃着东西的时候不说话，到了该睡觉的时候就不要发出声音吵到他人。虽然是粗米饭蔬菜汤，饭前也要取一些出来祭祖，而且祭的时候还一定恭恭敬敬，好像斋戒了的一样。
English: Don't talk while eating with your mouth full, and when it's time to sleep, don't make a noise that disturbs others. Although it's a coarse rice and vegetable soup, you should take some out before the meal to offer to the ancestors, and you must be respectful during the offering, as if you were fasting.

古文：席不正，不坐。
现代文：铺在地面上席子放得不端正，不坐。
English: If the seat is not right, Confucius will not sit.

古文：乡人饮酒，杖者出，斯出矣。
现代文：同本乡人在一块儿饮酒，等老年人都出去了，自己这才出去。
English: He drinks alcohol with his fellow countrymen and waits for the elderly to go out before going out himself.

古文：乡人傩，朝服而立于阼阶。
现代文：乡里人举行迎神驱疫的仪式时，孔子穿着朝服站在东边的台阶上。
English: When the villagers held a ceremony to welcome the gods and drive out the epidemic, Confucius stood on the eastern steps in his imperial robes.

古文：问人于他邦，再拜而送之。
现代文：孔子托人向住在其他诸侯国的朋友问候时，便向受托者拜两次送行。
English: When sending greetings to friends living in other provinces, Confucius' trustees bowed twice to the trustees.

古文：康子馈药，拜而受之。曰： 丘未达，不敢尝。 
现代文：季康子给孔子赠送药品，孔子拜谢之后接受了，说： 我对这种药的药性不了解，不敢尝用试服。 
English: Ji Kangzi gave Confucius medicine as a gift. Confucius thanked him and accepted it, saying, "I don't understand the medicinal properties of this medicine, and I don't dare to try it.

古文：厩焚，子退朝，曰： 伤人乎？ 
现代文：马棚失火烧掉了，孔子退朝回来，说： 伤到人了吗？ 
English: The stable caught fire and burned down. Confucius retreated to the back and said, "Did you hurt anyone?"

古文：不问马。
现代文：不问马的情况怎么样。
English: I don't care how the horse is.

古文：君赐食，必正席先尝之；君赐腥，必熟而荐之；君赐生，必畜之。
现代文：国君赐给食物，孔子一定会摆正席位先尝一尝。国君赐给生肉，他一定会煮熟了，先给祖先上供。
English: If the emperor gave him food, Confucius would sit down and taste it first. If the emperor gave him raw meat, he would cook it first and then offer it to his ancestors.

古文：侍食于君，君祭，先饭。
现代文：国君赐给活物，他一定会养起来。
English: If you give a living creature to a king, he will surely raise it up.

古文：疾，君视之，东首，加朝服，拖绅。君命召，不俟驾行矣。
现代文：陪侍国君吃饭，当国君进行饭前祭祀的时候，他先取国君面前的饭菜为他尝食。
English: He accompanies the sovereign at meals, and when the sovereign is performing a pre-meal ritual, he first takes the meal in front of the sovereign and tastes it for him.

古文：入太庙，每事问。朋友死，无所归，曰： 于我殡。 
现代文：孔子病了，国君来探望他，他便头朝东躺着，身上盖上朝服，拖着大带子。
English: Confucius was ill, and the sovereign came to visit him. He lay with his head to the east, his body covered with a royal robe and a large sash.

古文：朋友之馈，虽车马，非祭肉，不拜。
现代文：国君召见孔子，他不等车马驾好就先步行走去了。
English: The sovereign summoned Confucius, and he did not wait for the carriage to be ready, but went on foot first.

古文：寝不尸，居不容。
现代文：孔子到了太庙，每件事都要问一问。
English: When Confucius arrived at the Imperial Temple, he had to ask questions about everything.

古文：见齐衰者，虽狎，必变。
现代文：孔子朋友去世了，没有亲属负责敛埋，孔子说： 我来负责为他办理后事吧。 
English: When a friend of Confucius died and there was no relative to bury him, Confucius said, "Let me take care of his funeral."

古文：见冕者与瞽者，虽亵，必以貌。
现代文：对于朋友的馈赠，即使是车和马，只要不是祭祀用的肉，孔子在接受时，也不会行拜谢礼。
English: For gifts from friends, even if they are cars and horses, as long as they are not sacrificial meat, Confucius will not bow when accepting them.

古文：凶服者式之，式负版者。
现代文：孔子睡觉不像死尸那样直挺着，平时在家闲住不讲究那么多礼仪。
English: Confucius did not sleep as upright as a corpse, and did not pay so much attention to etiquette when idling at home.

古文：有盛馔，必变色而作。迅雷风烈，必变。
现代文：见穿齐衰这种丧服的人，即使关系再亲密，也必定严肃。
English: Even if the relationship is intimate, it is bound to be serious when you see someone wearing this mourning dress.

古文：升车，必正立，执绥。车中不内顾，不疾言，不亲指。
现代文：登车时，一定先端端正正地站直，然后拉着车上的绳索上车，在车上，不回头看，不急切说话，不指指画画。
English: When boarding, you must stand up straight, then pull the rope on the car to get on the car. On the car, do not look back, do not talk eagerly, do not point to draw.

古文：色斯举矣，翔而后集。曰： 山梁雌雉，时哉时哉！ 
现代文：孔子在山谷中行走，看见一群野鸡在那儿飞，孔子神色动了一下，野鸡飞着盘旋了一阵后，又落在了一处。孔子说： 这些山梁上的母野鸡，得其时呀！得其时呀！ 
English: When Confucius was walking in the valley, he saw a flock of pheasants flying there. Confucius' face lit up. The pheasants flew and circled for a while, and then landed somewhere else. Confucius said: "These hen pheasants on the mountain beam, it's time! It's time!

古文：子路共之，三嗅而作。
现代文：子路向它们拱拱手，野鸡振几下翅膀飞走了。
English: The pheasant gave them the slip and flew away, shaking its wings a few times.

