古文：赵方，字彦直，衡山人。
现代文：赵方，字彦直，衡山人。
English: Zhao Fang, Aza Hikonao, Hengshan people.

古文：父棠，少从胡宏学，慷慨有大志。
现代文：他的父亲赵棠，少年时跟胡宏学习，慷慨有大志。
English: His father, Zhao Tang, who studied with Hu Hong when he was a boy, was generous and ambitious.

古文：尝见张浚于督府，浚雅敬其才，欲以右选官之，棠不为屈。
现代文：曾在督府见到张浚，张浚很敬佩他的才能，想以右选使他做官，赵棠不被屈服。
English: He once saw Zhang Jun in the governor's office. Zhang Jun admired his talent very much and wanted to make him an official with the right choice. Zhao Tang was not to be bowed down to.

古文：累以策言兵事，浚奇之，命子栻与棠交，方遂从栻学。
现代文：他多次上策谈论兵事，张浚认为他是奇才，让儿子张木式和赵棠交往，赵方就跟张木式学习。
English: He talked about military affairs many times, and Zhang Jun thought he was a genius. He let his son Zhang Mu Xi and Zhao Tang interact, and Zhao Fang Rong studied with Zhang Mu Xi.

古文：淳熙八年举进士，调蒲圻尉，疑狱多所委决。
现代文：赵方在淳熙八年被推举参加进士考试，调为蒲圻县尉，有疑问的案件多被他解决。
English: Zhao Fang was selected to participate in the promotion examination in the eighth year of Chunxi, and was transferred to the county lieutenant of Bophu County. He solved most of the doubtful cases.

古文：授大宁监教授，俗陋甚，方择可教者亲训诱之，人皆感励，自是始有进士。
现代文：他被授予大宁监教授，这里风俗鄙陋，赵方选出可教的学生亲自教导，人们都受到感染勉励，从此才有进士。
English: He was awarded the title of Danying Supervising Professor. The customs here are despicable. Zhao Fang selected students who could be taught and personally taught them. People were encouraged by the infection and have only been promoted since then.

古文：知青阳县，告其守史弥远曰： 催科不扰，是催科中抚字；刑罚无差，是刑罚中教化。 人以为名言。
现代文：赵方为青阳县知县，他对知州史弥远说 ：催租不骚扰，是催租合乎抚恤；刑罚无差错，是刑罚符合教化。 人们把这话作为名言。
English: Zhao Fang is from Zhixian County, Qingyang County, and he said to Zhizhou Shiyuan: "Rent-soliciting is not harassment, but rent-soliciting is in line with pension; punishment is without error, but punishment is in line with enlightenment." People took this as a famous saying.

古文：主管江西安抚司机宜文字，京湖帅李大性辟知随州。
现代文：赵方主管江西安抚司机宜文字，京湖帅李大性征召他为随州知州。
English: Zhao Fang, the head of Jiangxi, pacified the driver Yi Zi, and the Beijing Lake Commander Li Dasheng recruited him as Suizhou Zhizhou.

古文：南北初讲和，旱蝗相仍，方亲走四郊以祷，一夕大雨，蝗尽死，岁大熟。
现代文：南北刚讲和，旱灾蝗灾相继发生，赵方亲自到郊外祈祷，一晚上天降大雨，蝗虫全都死了，当年粮食丰收。
English: The north and the south had just made peace, droughts and locust plagues occurred one after another, Zhao Fang personally went to the suburbs to pray, the sky rained heavily one night, all the locusts died, and there was a bumper grain harvest that year.

古文：适和议成，诸郡浸弛备，方独招兵择将，拔土豪孟宗政等补以官。
现代文：恰好达成和议，各地都渐渐地放松警备，赵方独自招兵选将，提拔土豪孟宗政等补给官职。
English: Just as the peace talks were reached, all regions gradually relaxed their guard. Zhao alone recruited and selected generals, and promoted local strongman Meng Zongzheng to supply official positions.

古文：提举京西常平兼转运判官、提点刑狱。
现代文：赵方任提举京西常平兼转运判官、提点刑狱。
English: Zhao Fang was appointed as the Beijing West Changping and Transfer Judge, and was sentenced to prison.

古文：时刘光祖以耆德为帅，方事以师礼，自言： 吾性太刚，每见刘公，使人更和缓。 尝请光祖书 劝谨和缓 四字，揭坐隅以为戒。
现代文：当时刘光祖因年老有德为统帅，赵方对他如老师，赵方自己说： 我性情太刚烈，每次见到刘公，使人变得和缓。 他曾请刘光祖写了 勤谨和缓 四个字，悬挂在座位上作为座右铭。
English: At that time, Liu Guangzu was the commander-in-chief due to his old age and virtue, Zhao Fang treated him like a teacher, Zhao Fang himself said: My temperament is too strong, every time I see Liu Gong, it makes people become gentle.He asked Liu Guangzu to write "Diligence and gentleness" Four words, hanging on the seat as a motto.

古文：以金部员外郎召，寻加直秘阁，改湖北转运判官兼知鄂州。
现代文：他以金部员外郎的身份被召用，不久加官为直秘阁，改为湖北转运判官兼鄂州知州。
English: He was appointed to the post of Foreigner of the Ministry of Finance, and was soon promoted to the post of Direct Secretary, and changed to Hubei Transportation Judge and Ezhou Chizhou.

古文：升直焕章阁兼权江陵府，增修三海八匮，以壮形势。
现代文：他升为直焕章阁兼权江陵府，在江陵府增修了三海八柜，使形势更壮观。
English: He was promoted to Zhihuang Zhangge, concurrently with the power of Jiangling Prefecture, and built three seas and eight cabinets in Jiangling Prefecture, making the situation more spectacular.

古文：进秘阁修撰、知江陵府、主管湖北要抚司事兼权荆湖置司。
现代文：他升为秘阁修撰、江陵知府，主管湖北安抚司事兼权荆湖置司。
English: He was promoted to Shuxin of the Secret Cabinet, the governor of Gangneung Province, in charge of the Hubei Pacification Division and the Jinghu Placement Division.

古文：时金逼于兵，计其必南徙，日夜为备。
现代文：当时金兵逼近，赵方估计他们一定南来，就日夜做准备。
English: At that time, the Jin soldiers were approaching, and Zhao Fang estimated that they would certainly come south and prepare day and night.

古文：荆门有东西两山险要，方筑堡其上，增戍兵以遏其冲。
现代文：荆门有东西两山险要处，赵方在上面修筑堡垒，增加守兵以扼守要冲。
English: Jingmen has the key points of the east and west mountains, Zhao Fang built a fortress on it and increased the number of guards to guard the key points.

古文：进右文殿修撰。
现代文：他升为右文殿修撰。
English: Promoted to the post of Umonden Shoseki.

古文：金樊快明谋归宋，追兵至襄阳，方遣孟宗政、扈再兴以百骑邀之，杀千余人，金人遁去。
现代文：金国的樊快明谋求归宋，金的追兵到达襄阳，赵方派孟宗政、扈再兴率一百骑兵去截击，杀敌一千多人，金人逃走。
English: Jin's Zou Kuaiming sought to return to Song, Jin's pursuers reached Xiangyang, Zhao Fang sent Meng Zongzheng and Zou Zaixing with a hundred cavalry to intercept, killed more than a thousand enemies, and the Jin fled.

古文：权工部侍郎、宝谟阁待制、京湖制置使兼知襄阳府。
现代文：赵方任权工部侍郎、宝谟阁待制、京湖制置使兼襄阳知府。
English: Zhao Fang was appointed as the waiter of the power engineering department, the assistant of the Baomu Pavilion, the assistant of the Beijing Lake and the governor of Xiangyang.

古文：谍知金人决意犯境，乃下防夏之令。
现代文：他侦知金人决定进犯边境，就下达防夏的命令。
English: When he discovered that the Chinese had decided to invade the border, he gave the order to defend against the invasion.

古文：金相高琪及其枢密乌古伦庆寿犯陈、光化、随、枣理、信阳、均州、方夜半呼其子范、葵曰： 朝廷和战之说未定，观此益乱人意，吾策决矣，惟有提兵临边决战以报国耳。 遂抗疏主战，亲往襄阳。
现代文：金国宰相高琪和枢密乌古伦庆寿进犯陈、光化、随、枣阳、信阳、均州，赵方半夜叫起他的儿子赵范、赵葵说 ：朝廷和战的主张还不确定，看目前的情况能扰乱人们的想法，我已决定了，只有率军去边境和金人决战来报效国家了。 于是就上疏主战，亲自前往襄阳。
English: In the middle of the night, Zhao Fang called up his sons, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai, and said, "The imperial court's proposal for peace and war is still uncertain. Seeing that the current situation can disturb people's thoughts, I have decided that I can only serve the country by leading the army to the border and the decisive battle with the Jin people. So I went to the main battle and went to Xiangyang in person.

古文：金人围枣阳急，方遣宗政、再兴等援枣阳，仍增戍光化、信阳、均州，以联声势。
现代文：金人围枣阳很紧急，赵方派孟宗政、扈再兴等救援枣阳，仍增加光化、信阳、均州的守军，以便联成声势。
English: It was urgent for the Jin people to surround Zaoyang. Zhao Fang sent Meng Zongzheng, Zou Zaixing and others to rescue Zaoyang, and still increased the number of defenders from Gwanghwa, Xinyang and Junzhou in order to form a united front.

古文：已而枣阳守赵观败金人于城外，再兴、宗政至，与观夹击，又败之，枣阳围解。
现代文：不久枣阳守将赵观在城外打败金人，孟宗政、扈再兴到来，和赵观夹击金人，又打败了金人，枣阳被解围。
English: Soon after, Zaoyang's governor Zhao Guan defeated Jinren outside the city, Meng Zongzheng and Zou Zaixing arrived, and Zhao Guan clamped down on Jinren, defeated Jinren again, and Zaoyang was relieved.

古文：方申饬诸将，当遏于境上，不可使之入而后拒之于城下。
现代文：赵方告诫众将，应该把金人阻挡在边境上，不能让金人入境而后再在城下阻挡他们。
English: Zhao Fang admonished the generals that they should block the Jin people at the border, and they should not allow the Jin people to enter the country and then block them outside the city.

古文：时麦正熟，方遣兵护民刈之，令清野以俟。
现代文：当时麦子正熟，赵方派兵保护百姓收割，下令坚壁清野等待敌人。
English: At that time, the wheat was ripening, Zhao Fang sent soldiers to protect the people to harvest, and ordered the strong walls and clear fields to wait for the enemy.

古文：再疏力陈不可和者七，战议遂定。
现代文：又上疏极力陈述不能和金人讲和的七条理由，和金人作战的主张就决定了。
English: Shang So also tried his best to state the seven reasons why it is impossible to make peace with the Chinese, and the idea of fighting with the Chinese was decided.

古文：金将完颜赛不入境，兵号十万。
现代文：金军将领完颜赛不入境，军队号称十万。
English: The general of the Chinese army did not enter the country after the beauty contest, and the army was said to be 100,000 strong.

古文：方部分诸将，金人犯枣阳者，宗政败之于尚家川；犯随州者，刘世兴败之于磨子平。
现代文：赵方部署众将，进犯枣阳的金人，被孟宗政在尚家川打败；进犯随州的，被刘世兴在磨子平打败。
English: Zhao deployed his generals to attack Jinren in Zaoyang and was defeated by Meng Zongzheng in Shangjiachuan; he attacked Suizhou and was defeated by Liu Shixing in Maziping.

古文：相持逾年，方调世兴移师，与许国、再兴援枣阳；张兴、李雄韬援随州。
现代文：两军相持一年多，赵方调刘世兴移兵，和许国、扈再兴救援枣阳；张兴、李雄韬救援随州。
English: The two armies held each other for more than a year, Zhao Fang transferred Liu Shixing to move troops, and He Xu Guo and Zou Zaixing to rescue Zaoyang; Zhang Xing and Li Xiongkun to rescue Suzhou.

古文：随州围解，再兴等转战入枣阳。
现代文：随州解围后，扈再兴等转战进入枣阳。
English: After the siege of Suzhou was lifted, Zou Zaixing and others fought their way into Zaoyang.

古文：时宗政守城，伏兵城东，金人遇伏败走。
现代文：当时是孟宗政守枣阳，他在城东设伏兵，金人遇到伏击败走。
English: At that time, Meng Zongzheng was the governor of Zaoyang. He set up an ambush in the east of the city, and when the Jin people encountered the ambush, they fled.

古文：未几再至，再兴又败之，自是无日不战。
现代文：不久金人又来进攻，扈再兴又打败了他们，从此双方天天交战。
English: Not long after, the Jin attacked again, and Zou Zaixing defeated them again. Since then, the two sides have been fighting every day.

古文：金人三面来攻，宗政出东门，再兴出南门，世兴出北门，大合战败之。
现代文：金人从三面来进攻，孟宗政从东门出战，扈再兴从南门出战，刘世兴从北门出战，三路合兵打败金人。
English: The goldsmiths attacked from three sides. Meng Zongzheng fought from the east gate, Zou Zaixing fought from the south gate, and Liu Shixing fought from the north gate. The three armies defeated the goldsmiths.

古文：金人朝进莫退，力不能捍；诸将表里合谋，国自南山进，张威自瀼河进，世兴、李琪出城与国会，再兴出城与威会，掎角追击，金人遂溃。
现代文：金人早晨进攻晚上退走，力不能支；宋众将里外策应，许国从南山进攻，张威从氵襄河进攻，刘世兴、李琪出城同许国会合。扈再兴出城和张威会合，他们形成犄角之势，追击金人，金人溃败。
English: The Jin people attacked in the morning and retreated in the evening, unable to support themselves; the Song people responded to the attack from inside and outside, Xu Guo attacked from Nanshan, Zhang Wei attacked from Shixiang River, Liu Shixing and Li Qi went out of the city to meet with the Jin people. Zou Zaixing went out of the city to meet with Zhang Wei, they formed a cornered situation, pursued the Jin people, and the Jin people were defeated.

古文：光化守潘景伯亦设伏败金人于赵家桥，孟宗德又破之于随州鸭儿山，擒赛不妻弟王丑汉，金人遂诛赛不。
现代文：光化守将潘景伯也设伏兵在赵家桥打败金人，孟宗德又在随州的鸭儿山攻破金人，活捉完颜赛不的内弟王丑汉，金人就诛杀了赛不。
English: Gwanghwamun's general Pan Jingbo also set an ambush to defeat Jinren in Zhaojiaqiao, Meng Zongde defeated Jinren in Suizhou's Duck Mountain, and Wang Qiuhan, the younger brother of Yan Xie, was captured alive. Jinren then killed Xie.

古文：方以功迁龙图阁待制，封长沙县男，赐食邑。
现代文：赵方因功升为龙图阁待制，被封为长沙县男，赐给封地。
English: Zhao Fang was promoted to Longtuge due to his merits, and was named the man of Changsha County and given the fiefdom of Longtuge.

古文：金人复大举，命讹可围枣阳，堑其外，绕以土城。
现代文：金人又大举进攻，命令讹可包围枣阳，在城外挖堑壕，围上土城。
English: The goldsmiths launched another large-scale attack, ordering the minions to encircle Zaoyang, dig trenches outside the city, and encircle Tucheng.

古文：方计其空巢穴而来，若捣其虚，则枣阳之围自解。
现代文：赵方估计金人会倾巢而来，如果进攻他们空虚的地方，那么自然就能解除枣阳之围。
English: Zhao Fang estimated that the Jin people would come to the nest, and if they attacked the empty place, then they would naturally be able to lift the encirclement of Zaoyang.

古文：乃命国东向唐州，再兴西向邓州，又命子范监军，葵后殿。
现代文：于是就命令许国往东去唐州，扈再兴往西去邓州，命令儿子赵范为监军，赵葵殿后。
English: So he ordered Xu Guo to go east to Tangzhou, Zou Zaixing to go west to Dengzhou, and ordered his son Zhao Fan to supervise the army, after Zhao Kwai.

古文：时宗政在城中，日夜鏖战，焚其攻具，金人不敢近城。
现代文：当时孟宗政在枣阳城中，同金人日夜鏖战，焚烧金人的攻城器具，金人不敢靠近城池。
English: At that time, Meng Zongzheng was in Zaoyang Castle, fighting with Jinren day and night, burning Jinren's siege equipment, and Jinren did not dare to approach the castle.

古文：西师由光化境出，砦于三尖山，拔顺阳县，金人率众仰攻，大败。
现代文：宋的西路军从光化出发，在三尖山扎营，攻破顺阳县，金人率众仰攻，大败。
English: Song's Western Route Army set out from Gwanghwamun, encamped in Sanjishan, and broke through Shunyang County. Jinren led the crowd to attack, and was defeated.

古文：再兴与国两道并进，掠唐、邓境，焚其城栅粮储。
现代文：扈再兴和许国两路并进，掠金人占领的唐、邓二州，烧金人的城栅和粮草。
English: The two roads of Zou Zaixing and Xu Guo advanced side by side, and the two states of Tang and Deng occupied by the gold diggers, the city gates and grain and grass of the gold burners.

古文：枣阳城坚，金顿兵八十余日，方知其气已竭，乃召国、再兴还，并东师隶于再兴，克期合战。
现代文：枣阳城很坚固，金人在城下停留八十多天，赵方知道他们的士气已竭，就召回许国、扈再兴，并让东路军隶属扈再兴，限期合兵作战。
English: Zaoyang Castle was very strong, and the Jin people stayed under the castle for more than eighty days. Zhao Fang knew that their morale was exhausted, so he recalled Xu Guo and Zou Zaixing, and made the Eastern Route Army subordinate to Zou Zaixing, and they fought together for a limited period.

古文：再兴败金人于瀼河，又败之城南，宗政自城中出夹击，杀其众三万，金人大溃，讹可单骑遁，获其赀粮、器甲不可胜计。
现代文：扈再兴在氵襄河打败金人，又在城南打败他们，孟宗政从城中出兵夹击敌人，杀敌三万，金人大败，讹可单骑逃跑，缴获金人的粮草、器甲不可胜计。
English: Zou Zaixing defeated the Jin people at the Lixiang River, and defeated them in the south of the city. Meng Zongzheng sent troops from the city to pin down the enemy, killing 30,000 enemies. The Jin people were defeated, and Zou could escape alone. The grain, grass and armor of the Jin people could not be defeated.

古文：进方焕章阁直学士。
现代文：赵方进升为焕章阁直学士。
English: Zhao Fangjin Sheng was awarded the title of Huanzhanggou Direct Bachelor.

古文：奏乞均官军民兵廪给，自备马者倍之。
现代文：赵方上奏请求政府给官军和民兵的粮食要平均，对自备马发放的粮食加倍。
English: Zhao Fang Shangso requested the government to give the official army and the militia an equal amount of grain, and to double the grain distributed to the self-supplied horses.

古文：又奏： 使民兵夏归，以省月给，秋复诣屯守御。 从之。
现代文：又上奏说 ：让民兵夏季归农，来节省每月的费用，秋季再来驻屯守御。 皇上允许。
English: Another report said: Let the militia return to farming in the summer to save monthly expenses, and come back in the fall to guard the emperor. The emperor allowed it.

古文：方料金人数不得志于枣阳，必将同时并攻诸城，当先发以制之。
现代文：赵方料想金人在枣阳多次不得志，必将同时进攻各城，应该先发制人。
English: Zhao Fang thought that the Jin people had failed many times in Zaoyang and would attack all cities at the same time. It was necessary to preempt them.

古文：命国、宗政出师向唐，再兴向邓，戒之曰： 毋深入，毋攻城，第溃其保甲，毁其城砦，空其赀粮而已。 宗政进破湖阳县，擒其千户赵兴儿；国遣部将耶律均与金人战于比阳，戮其将李提控；再兴破高头城，大败金兵，遂薄邓州。
现代文：他命令许国、孟宗政向唐州出兵，扈再兴向邓州发兵，告诫他们说： 不要深入，不要攻城，只要击溃他的保甲兵，烧毁他的城寨，使他的粮草空乏就行。 孟宗政攻破湖阳县，捉金人的千户赵兴儿；许国派部将耶律均和金人在比阳交战，杀死金将李提控；扈再兴攻破高头城，大败金兵，于是逼近邓州。
English: He ordered Xu Guo and Meng Zongzheng to send troops to Tangzhou, and Zou Zaixing to send troops to Dengzhou, and warned them: Don't go deep, don't attack the city, just defeat his armor-piercing soldiers, burn down his walled city, and make his grain and grass fields empty. Meng Zongzheng attacked thousands of households of Zhao Xing'er, a gold hunter, in Huyang County; Xu Guo sent his troops to fight Yeruchun and Jinren in Biyang, and killed Li, a gold hunter; Zou Zaixing attacked Gaotou City, defeated the gold soldiers, and

古文：唐州兵来援，迎败之，降者踵至。
现代文：唐州金兵来援，被扈再兴打败，投降的接踵而至。
English: The gold soldiers from Tangzhou came to help, but were defeated by Zou Zaixing, and they surrendered one after another.

古文：已而金兵至樊城，方命再兴阵以待之，方视其师；金人三日不敢动，遂遁。
现代文：不久金兵到樊城，赵方命令扈再兴严阵以待，赵方检阅他的军队；金人三天不敢有什么举动，就逃走了。
English: Not long after, the gold soldiers arrived in Lucheng. Zhao Fang ordered Zou Jianxing to wait, and Zhao Fang inspected his army. The gold soldiers did not dare to do anything for three days, and fled.

古文：金将驸马阿海犯淮西，枢密完颜小驴屯唐州为后继。
现代文：金将驸马阿海进犯淮西，枢密完颜小驴驻屯在唐州为后援。
English: Jin sent his horse, Ahai, to invade Huaixi, while his donkey, Yanxiao, was stationed in Tangzhou as a backup.

古文：方先攻唐伐其谋，及使再兴发枣阳兵击其西，国发桐柏兵击其东。
现代文：赵方先进攻唐州破坏敌人的计划，并派扈再兴率枣阳兵攻敌人的西部，许国率桐柏兵攻敌人东部。
English: Zhao Fang advanced to attack Tangzhou to destroy the enemy's plan, and sent Zou Zaixing led Zaoyang soldiers to attack the enemy's west, and Xu Guo led Tong Bai soldiers to attack the enemy's east.

古文：再兴败金人于唐城，斩小驴，围其城五匝，垂下。
现代文：扈再兴在唐州城下打败金人，杀死完颜小驴，对唐州形成了五层包围圈，差点攻下唐州。
English: Zou Zaixing defeated Jinren at the foot of Tangzhou Castle, killed Yan Xiaoshe, formed a five-layer encirclement of Tangzhou, and almost captured Tangzhou.

古文：会蕲、黄继陷，诏趣方遣救，方亟命国保鄂，再兴援淮西。
现代文：正巧蕲、黄二州相继陷没，诏命赵方派兵救援，赵方立即命令许国保卫鄂城，扈再兴救援淮西。
English: It just so happened that Huan and Huang's two states fell one after another, and the emperor ordered Zhao Fang to send soldiers to rescue them. Zhao Fang immediately ordered Xu Guo to defend Hucheng, and Zhaoxing to rescue Huaxi.

古文：国还鄂州保江；再兴军至蕲之灵山，伺金人归而击之，土豪祝文蔚横突入阵，金人大败，国遣张宝将兵来会，李全等兵亦至，金人遂溃，再兴追逐六十里，擒其监军合答。
现代文：许国回鄂州保卫长江；扈再兴率军到蕲州的灵山，趁金人回来的机会攻击他，土豪祝文蔚冲入敌阵，金人大败，许国派张宝带兵来会合，李全等也率兵赶到，金人溃败，扈再兴追击六十里，捉住金兵监军合答。
English: Xu Guo returned to Ezhou to defend the Yangtze River; Zou Zaixing led his army to Lingshan in Ezhou, and took the opportunity to attack the Jin people when they returned. The local strongman Zhu Wenwei rushed into the enemy lines, and the Jin people were defeated. Xu Guo sent Zhang Bao to lead the troops to the meeting, and Li Quan and others also led the troops to arrive. The Jin people were defeated, and Zou Zaixing chased them for sixty miles, and caught the Jin soldiers.

古文：进方显谟阁直学士、太中大夫、权刑部尚书。
现代文：赵方进升为显谟阁直学士、太中大夫、权刑部尚书。
English: Zhao Fang Jinsheng became the direct bachelor of Xian Mougou, the doctor of Taizhong, and the chief of the criminal justice department.

古文：俄得疾，进徽猷阁学士、京湖制置大使。
现代文：不久赵方得病，进升为徽猷阁学士、京湖置制大使。
English: Soon after, Zhao Fang fell ill and was promoted to Huizhong Academy of Arts and Sciences and the ambassador of Beijing-Hubei Friendship.

古文：归还，力疾犒师，第其功上之。
现代文：回朝后，他勉强支撑病体犒劳军队，排列他们的功劳上奏给朝廷。他病重，说： 一日不死，就应该立一日纪纲。 
English: After returning to the imperial court, he reluctantly supported the sick and overworked troops, ranked their merits and reported to the imperial court. He was seriously ill and said, "If you don't die for a day, you should establish a one-day discipline."

古文：病革，曰： 未死一日，当立一日纪纲。 引再兴卧内，勉以协心报国。
现代文：他把扈再兴叫到卧室，勉励他忠心报国。赵方给宰相写信，论述边疆大计。
English: He called Zhao Zaixing to his bedroom and encouraged him to be loyal to the country. Zhao Fang wrote a letter to the prime minister, discussing the border plan.

古文：贻书宰相，论疆场大计。
现代文：不久赵方去世。当晚有颗大星在襄阳陨落。
English: Zhao Fang died soon after. That night, a great star fell in Xiangyang.

古文：寻卒。是夕有大星陨于襄阳。以端明殿学士、正议大夫致仕，赠银青光禄大夫，累赠太师，谥忠肃。
现代文：赵方以端明殿学士、正议大夫的身份辞官，他被赠官为银青光禄大夫，累赠为太师，谥号为 忠肃 。
English: Zhao Fang was awarded the title of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor," "Grand Master" and the posthumous title of "Chongsu" after he was appointed as a Duanmingden Scholar and Doctor of Law.

古文：方起自儒生，帅边十年，以战为守，合官民兵为一体，通制总司为一家。
现代文：赵方起身于儒生，统帅边防十年，以战为守，把官军、民兵合为一体，使经制司、总制司通为一家。
English: Zhao Fang rose up as a Confucian scholar, commanded the border defense for ten years, defended the war, combined the government army and the militia into one, and made the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Ministry of Education and Culture into one family.

古文：持军严，每令诸将饮酒勿醉，当使日日可战。
现代文：治军严谨，每每命令诸将不要喝醉酒，使他们天天能作战。
English: He was strict with his soldiers and ordered them not to get drunk, so that they could fight every day.

古文：淮、蜀沿边屡遭金人之祸，而京西一境独全。
现代文：淮、蜀沿边屡遭金人的祸害，而京西却能独自保全。
English: Huai and Shu regions have repeatedly suffered from the scourge of money men, while the western part of Beijing has been able to preserve itself.

古文：尝问相业于刘清之，清之以留意人才对。
现代文：他曾向刘清之询问做宰相的道理，刘清之回答说应该留意人才。
English: He once asked Liu Qingzhi the reason for being prime minister, and Liu Qingzhi replied that one should pay attention to talent.

古文：故知名士如陈晐、游九功辈皆拔为大吏，诸名将多在其麾下。
现代文：所以知名士如陈日亥、游九功等都被提拔为高官，很多名将都在他的麾下。
English: Therefore, well-known people such as Chen Rihai and You Jiu Gong were promoted to high-ranking officials, and many famous generals were under his command.

古文：若扈再兴、孟宗政皆起自土豪，推诚擢任，致其死力，藩屏一方，使朝廷无北顾之忧。
现代文：像扈再兴、孟宗政都起身于土豪，赵方对他们推诚布公，进行提拔，使他们为国效死力，守卫一方，使朝廷无北顾之忧。
English: Like Zou Zaixing and Meng Zongzheng, both of whom rose from local strongmen, Zhao Fang promoted them and encouraged them to work hard for the country and protect the country, so that the imperial court would have no worries.

古文：故其没也，人皆惜之。
现代文：因此赵方去世，人们都很惋惜。
English: Therefore, people are very sorry that Zhao Fang passed away.

古文：子董、薿、范、葵。
现代文：赵方有儿子赵董、赵鑊、赵范、赵葵。
English: Zhao Fang had sons Zhao Dong, Zhao Hao, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai.

古文：范、葵有传。
现代文：赵范、赵葵有传。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai are legendary.

