古文：奴官冢卢涣赵冬曦丁永兴严安之女娲墓李邈贾耽张式樊泽齐景公墓郭谊寿安土棺李思恭武瑜曹王墓韩建海陵夏氏庐陵彭氏武夷山林赞尧张绍军卒马黄谷冢秦进崇和文
现代文：奴官冢卢涣赵冬曦丁永兴严安之女娲墓李邈贾耽张式樊泽齐景公墓郭谊寿安土棺李思恭武瑜曹王墓韩建海陵夏氏庐陵彭氏武夷山林赞尧张绍军卒马黄谷冢秦进崇和文
English: His officials Lu Zhao Dongxi Ding Yongxing Yan'an's daughter tomb Li Jia Dang Zhang style Ze Qi Jing cemetery Guo Ji Shou An soil coffin Li Si Gongwu Yu Cao Wang tomb Han Jianhailing Mausoleum Xia clan Peng clan Wuyishan forest Zhang Shao's soldiers Ma Huanggu Qin Jin Chong and Wen

古文：奴官冢
现代文：奴官冢
English: 奴官

古文：酂县有后汉奴官冢，初，村人田于其侧，每至秋获。近冢地多失穗不稔。
现代文：酂县有座后汉奴官墓。当初村里人在墓的旁边种田，每到秋收的季节，靠近墓的田里便有很多之庄稼失去穗，而减少收成。
English: There is a post-Hanukkah official tomb in Handan County. At the beginning, villagers cultivated fields next to the tomb. Every autumn harvest season, many crops in the fields near the tomb lost their ears, reducing the harvest.

古文：积数岁，已苦之。
现代文：这样过了几年，村里人对此十分苦恼。
English: After a few years of this, the villagers are very distressed about it.

古文：后恒夜往伺之。见四大鹅，从冢中出，食禾，逐即入去。
现代文：后来便经常在夜里去探察，一天夜里，看见有四只大鹅从坟墓中出来吃庄稼，前去追赶便又回到墓中。
English: One night, he saw four geese come out of the grave to eat the crops. He chased them and then returned to the grave.

古文：村人素闻奴官冢有宝，乃相结开之。
现代文：村里人一向听说奴官墓中有宝物，于是就结伴去挖掘。
English: People in the village had always heard that there were treasures in the tomb, so they went digging together.

古文：初入埏前，见有鹅，鼓翅击人，贼以棒反击之。皆不复动。乃铜鹅也。
现代文：刚进入墓道，就看到有鹅张开翅膀击打人，盗贼用木棒反击，鹅都不动了，原来是铜鹅。
English: As soon as he entered the cemetery, he saw a goose open its wings and strike a man. The thief fought back with a wooden stick, but the goose did not move. It turned out to be a bronze goose.

古文：稍稍入外厅，得宝剑二枚，其它器物不可识者甚众。
现代文：再进入墓室外厅，得到两只宝剑，还有很多不认识的器物。
English: He then entered the outer hall of the tomb and obtained two swords, as well as many unknown objects.

古文：次至大藏，水深，有紫衣人当门立，与贼相击。
现代文：最后到了放置棺椁的主墓室，地上有很深的积水，有个穿紫衣的人站在门前同盗贼搏斗。
English: Finally, in the main burial chamber where the coffin was placed, there was a deep pool of water on the ground, and a man in purple stood in front of the door and fought with the thieves.

古文：贼等群争往击次，其人冲贼走出。
现代文：盗贼群起攻击，那个人冲出包围逃走。
English: Thieves swarmed the attack, and the man broke free and fled.

古文：入县大叫云： 贼劫吾墓。 
现代文：他到县衙大叫： 有贼劫我的墓！ 
English: He went to the county magistrate and shouted: A thief has robbed my grave!

古文：门主者曰： 君墓安在？ 
现代文：管事的人问他： 你的墓在哪里？ 
English: The administrator asked him: Where is your grave?

古文：答曰： 正奴官冢是也。 
现代文：回答说： 奴官墓就是我的墓。 
English: He replied: "His grave is my grave."

古文：县令使里长逐贼，至皆擒之。
现代文：县令派里长去驱赶盗贼，到墓地将盗贼全部抓获。
English: The county magistrate sent the mayor to drive away the thieves, and all the thieves were arrested at the cemetery.

古文：开元末。明州刺史进三十余事。
现代文：开元末年，明州刺史讲述了三十多件这类事。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, a Mingzhou historian recounted more than 30 such cases.

古文：卢涣
现代文：卢涣
English: Lu Wei

古文：黄门侍郎卢涣。为洺州刺史。
现代文：黄门侍郎卢涣，任洺州刺史。
English: Lu Yao, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：属邑翁山县，溪谷迥无人，尝有盗发墓。
现代文：属地翁山县的河谷中无人居住。曾有个盗墓的说，当初他刚走那里，看见车辙中有花砖。
English: The river valley in the prefecture's Aung San County is uninhabited. A grave robber once said that when he first went there, he saw tiles in the ruts.

古文：云： 初行，见车辙中有花砖，因揭之，知是古冢，乃结十人。县投状，请路旁居止，县许之。
现代文：揭开观看，知道是古墓。于是聚集了十个人，给县令写了封信，请求在谷中路旁居住。县令批准了。
English: After uncovering and viewing it, they knew it was an ancient tomb. So they gathered ten people and wrote a letter to the county magistrate, requesting to live next to Gu Zhong Road. The county magistrate approved.

古文：遂种麻，令外人无所见，即悉力发掘。
现代文：他们在古墓周围种上麻，使外人看不见里面，随后就全力挖掘。
English: They planted hemp around the ancient tomb, so that outsiders could not see inside, and then they dug with all their might.

古文：入其隧路，渐至圹中，有三石门，皆以铁封之。
现代文：打开隧道，渐渐进入墓穴。古墓有三个石门，全都用铁封住。
English: Open the tunnel and gradually enter the tomb. The ancient tomb has three stone doors, all sealed with iron.

古文：其盗先能诵咒，因斋戒近之。
现代文：盗墓贼会念咒语，因此斋戒念咒。
English: Grave robbers chant mantras, so fasting is chanting mantras.

古文：至日，两门开。
现代文：几天后，两门打开。
English: A few days later, two doors opened.

古文：每门中各有铜人铜马数百，持执干戈，其制精巧。
现代文：每个门内各有铜人铜马数百个，全都手持兵器，制作得非常精巧。
English: Inside each gate, there are hundreds of bronze men and horses, all armed with weapons, very elaborately made.

古文：盗又斋戒三日，中门半开，有黄衣人出曰： 汉征南将军刘，使来相闻，某生有征伐大勋，及死，敕令护葬，又铸铜人马等，以象存日仪卫。奉计来此，必要财货，所居之室，实无他物。
现代文：盗贼又斋戒三日，中门半开。有个穿黄衣服的人出来说： 汉征南将军刘让我来告诉你们，他生前多征战，立有大功，死后皇帝下令护葬，又铸了铜人马等，以保持生前那样的仪仗卫队，你们千方百计来这里，想要陪葬财物，但他所居住的墓室里，实在没有什么其他东西。
English: The thieves fasted again for three days, leaving the middle door ajar. A man in yellow clothes came out and said, "Liu, the Han general of the Southern Expedition, let me tell you that he fought many battles in his lifetime and accomplished great feats. After his death, the emperor ordered that he be escorted to the grave, and cast bronze statues and horses to maintain the honor guard as it was before his death. You have come here in every way, wanting to accompany the burial of wealth, but there is really nothing else in the tomb where he lived.

古文：且官葬不瘗宝货，何必苦以神咒相侵？
现代文：况且官葬不埋珍宝，何必苦苦用咒语相侵扰呢？
English: Besides, official funerals don't bury precious treasures, so why bother with spells?

古文：若更不已，当不免两损。 
现代文：假如再不停止挖掘，会免不了两方都受到损害。 
English: If the excavation is not stopped, both sides will inevitably be harmed.

古文：言讫复入，门合如初。
现代文：说完又进去了，门象先前那样关闭。
English: Then he went in again, and the door was shut as before.

古文：又诵咒数日不已，门开，一青衣又出传语。盗不听。
现代文：盗贼坚持多日不停地念诵咒语，门又开了。一个婢女又出来传话，盗贼还是不听，两扇门忽然打开。
English: The thief insisted on chanting the incantation for many days, and the door opened again. A maid came out to pass on the message, but the thief still did not listen, and the two doors suddenly opened.

古文：两扇欻辟，大水漂荡，盗皆溺死。
现代文：大水漂荡起来，盗贼都被淹死。有一个会游水的盗贼游了出来。
English: The water swirled around and the thieves were all drowned. One of the thieves, who could swim, swam out.

古文：一盗能泅而出，自缚诣官，具说本末。
现代文：自己捆住自己去见官自首，把盗墓的经过细节讲一遍。
English: Tie yourself up and go to the officials to turn yourself in. Tell them the details of how you robbed the grave.

古文：涣令复视其墓，中门内有一石床，骷髅枕之。水漂，已半垂子床下。
现代文：卢涣派人再去查看那个古墓，看到中门内有一张石床，有个骷髅躺在石床上，水漂上来，淹到床下一半。
English: Lu Wei sent someone to check the ancient tomb again, and saw that there was a stone bed in the middle of the door. A skeleton was lying on the stone bed, and the water was floating up and half under the bed.

古文：因却为封两门，窒隧路矣。
现代文：于是封了两门，堵塞了隧道。
English: So they sealed the two doors and blocked the tunnel.

古文：赵冬曦
现代文：赵冬曦
English: Zhao Dongxi

古文：华阴太守赵冬曦，先人垄在鼓城县。
现代文：华阴太守赵冬曦，祖先的坟墓在鼓城县。
English: Zhao Dongxi, the governor of Huayin, whose ancestor's grave is in Gucheng County.

古文：天宝初，将合附焉。启其父墓，而树根滋蔓，围绕父棺，悬之于空。
现代文：天宝初年，他想将父母合葬，挖开他父亲的坟墓，树根滋生蔓延，围绕父亲的棺木。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he wanted to bury his parents together, dig up his father's grave, and the roots of the tree grew around his father's coffin.

古文：遂不敢发。以母柩置于其旁，封墓而返。
现代文：把棺木悬离地面，不敢再挖，便把母亲的棺柩安放在旁边，封上墓穴回去了。
English: He suspended the coffin from the ground and, not daring to dig again, he placed his mother's coffin beside it, sealed the grave and went back.

古文：宣城太守刁缅，改葬二亲，缅亦纳母棺于其侧，封焉，后门绪昌盛也。
现代文：宣城太守刁缅，改葬父母，也把母亲的棺木埋葬其旁边。家族后代繁荣，人丁兴旺。
English: Emperor Xuancheng, the ruler of Yuming, changed the burial place of his parents, and also buried his mother's coffin next to his. The descendants of the family prospered, and the people thrived.

古文：冬曦兄弟七人，皆秀才，有名当世，四人至二千石。
现代文：赵冬曦兄弟七人，都是秀才，在当时很有名望，有四个人享俸禄二千石。
English: Zhao Dongxi's seven brothers, all of whom were talented, were very famous at the time, and four of them received a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：缅三为将军，门施长戟。
现代文：刁缅三次做了将军。门前放置长戟。
English: The Burmese general was made a general for the third time. A long pole was placed in front of the door.

古文：开元二十年。万年有人，父殁后，家渐富，遂葬母。
现代文：开元二十年，万年县有一个人父亲死后，家里渐渐富起来。
English: In the 20th year of the first century, after the death of a man's father in Wannian County, the family gradually became rich.

古文：父榇亦为萦绕，不可解。
现代文：后来他安葬母亲时，见到父亲的棺木也被树根围绕，无法分解。
English: Later, when he was burying his mother, he saw that his father's coffin was also surrounded by tree roots, unable to decompose.

古文：其人遂刀断之，根皆流血，遂以葬。
现代文：那个人就用刀砍断了树根，全都流出了血。
English: The man cut the roots of the tree with a knife, and all the blood came out.

古文：即而家道稍衰，死亡俱尽。丁永兴
现代文：自从他这次合葬父母以后，家道开始衰落，人也逐渐死光了。丁永兴
English: Since he buried his parents together this time, the family line began to decline, and people gradually died out. Ding Yongxing

古文：高唐县南有鲜卑城，旧传鲜卑聘燕，享于此城。
现代文：高唐县南有座鲜卑城，过去传说鲜卑遣使访问燕国，就在这座城中欢宴。
English: There is a Xianbei city in the south of Gaotang County. In the past, it is said that the Xianbei envoys visited Yan Province and feasted in this city.

古文：旁有盗跖冢，冢极高大，贼盗尝私祈焉。
现代文：城外有盗跖的墓，墓很高大，盗贼曾经私下在这里祭奠祈祷。
English: Outside the city there is the grave of the robber baron. The grave is very large. The robber used to pray here in private.

古文：天宝初，县令丁永兴，有群盗劫其部内。
现代文：天宝初年，县令是丁永兴。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, the county magistrate was Ding Yongxing.

古文：兴乃密令人冢旁伺之，果有祀者，乃执诣县，按杀之。
现代文：当时有一伙盗贼在本县作案，丁永兴暗中派人在盗跖墓旁埋伏，果然有人前来祭祀，便把他们缉拿到县衙，审问后处死。
English: At that time, a group of thieves committed a crime in this county. Ding Yongxing secretly sent people to ambush near the grave of the stolen money. As it turned out, some people came to offer sacrifices. They were arrested and taken to the county magistrate, and were interrogated and executed.

古文：自后祀者颇绝。
现代文：从那以后，祭祀的人便绝迹了。
English: Since then, the worshippers have disappeared.

古文：《皇览》言盗跖冢在河东。
现代文：《皇览》上说，盗跖墓在河东。
English: According to the "Imperial Review," the tomb of the thief is in the east of the river.

古文：按盗跖死于东陵，此地古名东平陵，疑此近之。
现代文：据考证盗跖死在东陵，这地方古地名叫东平陵，这里的盗跖墓比较可信。
English: According to the investigation, the thief died in Dongling. This place was called Dongpingling in ancient times. The thief's grave here is more credible.

古文：严安之
现代文：严安之
English: Yan Anzhi

古文：天宝初，严安之为万年县捕贼官。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝初年，严安之任万年县捕贼官。
English: In the first year of Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao, Yan An was appointed as the county thief-catcher.

古文：亭午，有中使黄衣乘马，自门驰入。宣敕曰： 城南十里某公主墓，见被贼劫。宣使往捕之，不得漏失。 
现代文：一天中午，有位黄衣太监骑马从大门跑进来，宣读皇帝的命令说： 城南十里某公主的墓，现在被盗贼挖劫，命令你带人去缉拿，不得使一人漏网。 
English: At noon one day, a yellow-robed eunuch ran in on horseback from the gate and read out the emperor's order: "The tomb of a princess ten miles south of the city is now being robbed by thieves. I order you to take someone with you to search for her. Do not let a single person slip through the net."

古文：安之即领所由并器杖，往掩捕。
现代文：严安之领命立刻带领手下人携带器械棍棒前去捕捉。
English: Yan An's leader ordered him to immediately lead his men to carry the equipment and clubs to catch them.

古文：见六七人，方穴地道，才及埏路，一时擒获。
现代文：赶到那里，看到那里六七个人刚刚进入墓道，全部被抓获。
English: When I got there, I saw that six or seven people had just entered the cemetery, and they were all arrested.

古文：安之令求中使不得，因思之曰： 贼方开冢，天子何以知之。 
现代文：严安之让人去找那个太监，没有找到。因而想道： 盗贼刚刚开始挖掘，皇帝怎么能知道呢？ 
English: Yan Anzhi sent someone to look for the eunuch, but they couldn't find him, so he thought: The thieves have just started digging, how can the emperor know?

古文：至县，乃尽召贼，讯其事。
现代文：到了县衙，把盗贼全部召集起来，审问盗墓的经过。
English: When he arrived at the county magistrate's office, he called all the thieves together and interrogated them about the theft of the tomb.

古文：贼曰： 才开墓，即觉有异，自知必败。
现代文：盗贼说： 刚打开墓道，就觉得有些异常，意识到这次盗墓一定要失败。
English: The thief said: "As soon as I opened the grave, I felt something was wrong and realised that this grave robbery was bound to fail.

古文：至第一门，有盟器敕使数人，黄衣骑马。内一人持鞭，状如走势，袱头脚亦如风吹直竖，眉目已来，悉皆飞动。
现代文：到了第一道门，看见有好几个冥器是为皇帝送信的黄衣太监骑在马上，其中有一个手里拿着鞭子，姿势像是正在纵马奔跑，头巾的一角象是被风吹得直竖起来，眼睛和眉毛也都在动。
English: At the first gate, he saw several necromancers riding on horseback, yellow-robed eunuchs who were carrying a message for the emperor. One of them held a whip in his hand, his posture was as if he was galloping on a horse. One corner of his turban seemed to have been blown upright by the wind, and his eyes and eyebrows were also moving.

古文：某即知必败也。 
现代文：我们更觉得这次盗墓一定不会成功。 
English: We are even more convinced that this grave robbery will not succeed.

古文：安之即思前敕使状貌，两盟器敕使耳。女娲墓
现代文：严安之明白了，那个持鞭的黄衣太监原来是陪葬的器物。女娲墓
English: Yan Anzhi understood that the yellow-robed eunuch holding a whip was originally a funerary object.

古文：潼关口河潬上，有树数株，虽水暴涨，亦不漂没。时人号为女娲墓。
现代文：潼关口河边沙滩上，有几棵树，虽然河水暴涨，也不能淹没和冲走它，当时人们称它为女娲墓。
English: There were a few trees on the sandy beach by the Shuguangkou River. Although the river was surging, it couldn't drown or wash it away. At that time, people called it the Tomb of the Nymphs.

古文：唐天宝十三年五月内，因大风吹失所在。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十三年五月里，这几棵树被大风吹走，不知吹到哪里去了。
English: In May of the 13th year of Tang Xuan Zong's heavenly treasure, these few trees were blown away by a strong wind, and I don't know where they went.

古文：乾元二年六月，虢州刺使王晋光上言： 今月一日，河上侧近，忽闻风雷。
现代文：唐肃宗乾元二年六月，虢州刺使王晋光上奏报告说： 本月一日，河上靠近岸边的地方，忽然有打雷刮风的声音。
English: In June of the second year of Qianyuan of the Suizong Dynasty of Tang Dynasty, Wang Jinguang, an envoy from Zhangzhou, reported: On the first day of this month, there was a sudden sound of thunder and wind on the river near the shore.

古文：晓见坟踊出，上有双柳树，下巨石，柳各高丈余。 
现代文：早上看见有坟墓从地下冒出来，上面有两棵柳树，下面有巨石，柳树每棵都高一丈多。 
English: In the morning I saw a grave emerging from the ground, with two willow trees above and huge boulders below. Each willow tree was much taller.

古文：李邈
现代文：李邈
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：刘晏判官李邈，庄在高陵，庄客欠租课，积五六年。邈因罢归庄，方将责之，见仓库盈美，输尚未毕。
现代文：刘晏判官李邈的庄院在高陵。佃户欠他的地租已有五、六年之久，李邈因罢官回到庄院准备去催讨，看见仓库堆满好东西。
English: Liu Ye's judge Li Ye's manor was in Gaoling. The tenant owed him five or six years' rent. Li Ye returned to the manor because he had been dismissed from his post and was preparing to demand payment. He saw that the warehouse was full of good things.

古文：邈怪问，悉曰： 某久为盗，近闻一古冢，冢西去庄十里，极高大，入松林二百步，方至墓。
现代文：还是不断地向里运。李邈觉得奇怪就问庄丁，一庄丁回答说： 我们长时间做盗贼，最近挖掘一座古墓，位置由庄院向西走十里地，坟墓非常高大。进入松林二百来步，就到墓地了。
English: Li Yao felt strange and asked Zhuang Ding. Zhuang Ding replied, "We have been thieves for a long time. Recently, we excavated an ancient tomb. The location is ten miles west from the manor house. The tomb is very tall. If you walk 200 steps into the pine forest, you will reach the cemetery."

古文：墓侧有碑，断倒草中，字磨灭不可读。
现代文：墓的旁边有块石碑，折断倒在草丛中，碑上的字迹已经磨损得不能够辩认了。
English: Next to the grave is a stone tablet, broken and lying in the grass, its writing worn beyond recognition.

古文：初旁掘数十丈，遇一石门，锢以铁计，累日洋粪沃之，方开。开时，箭出如雨，射杀数人。
现代文：刚开始从墓的侧面挖掘，挖了数十丈深时遇到一个石门，用铁水浇固。连日用粪水浇它，才打开，刚打开时，箭象雨点一样射出，射死好几个人，众人害怕想要出来。
English: They just started digging from the side of the tomb, and when they had dug dozens of feet deep, they came across a stone door, cemented with iron water. They poured dung water over it for days before opening it. When they first opened it, arrows shot out like raindrops, killing several people, and everyone was afraid to come out.

古文：众惧欲出，某审无他，必设机耳。
现代文：我仔细察看了一下，感到没有什么别的东西，一定是设置的机关罢了，就让他们向里面投石块。
English: I took a closer look and felt that there was nothing else, it must have been a set-up, so I asked them to throw stones at it.

古文：乃令投石其中，每投，箭辄出。
现代文：每投一次，箭就从里边射出来。
English: With each throw, the arrow shoots out from the inside.

古文：投十余石，箭不复发。
现代文：投了十多次石块，不再有箭向外射了。
English: More than a dozen stones were thrown, but no more arrows were shot.

古文：因列炬而入，至开重门，有木人数十，张目运剑，又伤数人。
现代文：于是就带人举着火把进入墓中，到打开第二个门的时候，看到有十多个木人，瞪着眼睛。舞动利剑，又伤了几个人。
English: So he led the people with torches into the tomb, and when he opened the second door, he saw more than ten wooden people, staring, waving sharp swords, and wounding several more people.

古文：众以棒击之，兵杖悉落。
现代文：众人用棍棒还击，兵器全被打落。
English: People fought back with clubs, and all the weapons were knocked down.

古文：四壁各画兵卫之像，南壁有大漆棺，悬以铁索，其下金玉珠玑堆积。
现代文：看看四壁，那上面都画着卫兵的形象。紧靠南面石壁有个很大的涂漆棺材，用铁索悬吊在半空。棺材下面堆满金、银、玉器、宝珠等。
English: Look at the four walls, there are images of guards painted on them. Close to the southern stone wall, there is a large lacquered coffin, suspended in mid-air by an iron cable. Under the coffin, there are piles of gold, silver, jade and precious stones.

古文：众惧，未即掠之。
现代文：大家看到后都很害怕，没有马上就去抢掠。
English: Everyone was scared when they saw it and didn't go looting right away.

古文：棺两角忽飒飒风起，有沙扑人面。
现代文：这时，棺材的两个角忽然飒飒作响，刮起风来，同时有沙子扑面而来。
English: At this time, the two corners of the coffin suddenly rattled, the wind blew, and sand hit the surface.

古文：须臾风甚，沙出如注，遂没至髁。
现代文：片刻之间风更大了，沙子喷出象淌水一样，不久就埋到膝盖以上。
English: The wind picked up momentarily, and the sand gushed out like water, soon burying people up to their knees.

古文：众惊恐退走，比出，门已塞矣。一人复为沙埋死。乃同酹地谢之，誓不发冢。 
现代文：大家非常惊慌纷纷退了出来。一到门外，门就被沙子堵塞住了，有一个人还被沙子埋死，于是大家一起洒酒祭奠谢罪，发誓再也不盗墓了。 
English: Everyone panicked and retreated. As soon as they reached the door, it was blocked by sand. One person was buried alive by the sand, so they all poured wine to atone for their sins and swore never to rob a grave again.

古文：《水经》言越王句践都琅琊，欲移尤常冢，冢中生风，飞沙射人，人不得近，遂止。
现代文：《水经》记载：越王勾践都琅琊，想迁移尤常墓。结果墓中起风，飞沙射人，人不能靠近，就中止了。
English: "Water Sutra" records: King Yue wanted to move the imperial tombs. As a result, the wind blew in the tombs, flying sand hit people, people could not get close, and it was stopped.

古文：按汉旧仪，将作营陵之内方丈，外设伏弩伏火弓矢与沙。
现代文：根据汉朝的制度，在作为主墓的墓一丈见方之外，设暗弩、暗火弓及沙。
English: According to the system of the Han Dynasty, in addition to the tomb, which is the main tomb, there is a dark coffin, a dark fire bow and sand.

古文：盖古制有此机也。
现代文：古代的墓葬制度里就有这种机关。
English: This kind of organ existed in the ancient burial system.

古文：贾耽
现代文：贾耽
English: Jia Tan

古文：贾耽在滑州境内。
现代文：贾耽带兵驻扎在滑州境内时，天大旱。
English: When Jia Tan and his soldiers were stationed in the territory of Nanzhou, there was a severe drought.

古文：天旱，耽召大将二人谓曰： 今岁荒，烦君二人救民也。 
现代文：贾耽召见二大将对他们说： 现在正值荒年，劳烦二位去拯救百姓。 
English: Jia Tan summoned the two generals and said to them, "This is a time of famine, and you two are working hard to save the people.

古文：皆言： 当利军州，死不足辞。 
现代文：二位将军说： 只要是有利于军队和民众的事，万死不辞。 
English: The two generals said: As long as it is beneficial to the army and the people, we will do our best.

古文：耽笑曰： 君可辱为健步。
现代文：贾耽笑着说： 你们受点委屈走一次长路。
English: Jia Tan smiled and said: You have to go a long way with a little bit of grievance.

古文：明日，当有两骑，衣惨绯。所乘马，蕃步鬣长。
现代文：明天，会有两个骑马的人，穿暗红色的衣服，骑的马迈蕃步披长鬃。
English: Tomorrow, there will be two men on horseback, dressed in dark red, riding a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：经市出城，可随之，识其所灭处，则吾事谐矣。 
现代文：他们经这市镇出城，你们要跟踪他们去。暗中观看确定他们消失的地方，我们的事情就成功了。 
English: They went out of town through this town, you're going to follow them, you're going to get a sneak peek, you're going to find out where they disappeared, and we're going to be successful.

古文：二将乃裹粮，衣皂衣，寻之。果有二绯衣，经市至野行二百余里，映大冢而灭。
现代文：于是二位将军就带着干粮，穿上黑色的衣服，去寻找那两个人，果然看见两个骑马穿红衣服的人，经过闹市到野外去了。俩人走了二百多里路，在一座大墓前一闪就消失了。
English: So the two generals set out with dry rations and dressed in black to look for the two men, and sure enough, they saw two men on horseback, dressed in red, riding through the bustling city to the open country. The two men walked more than two hundred miles and disappeared in a flash in front of a large tomb.

古文：遂垒石丧之，信宿而返。耽大喜，发数百人，具畚锸，与二将偕往发冢，获陈粟数十万斛，人竟不之测。
现代文：于是将军垒起几块石头作为标记，连夜返回，贾耽大喜，派出几百人，全都带着铁锹，箕畚，同两个将军一起前往挖掘古墓，获得陈粮数十万斛。人们怎么也猜测不出，贾耽是如何知道此处存粮的。
English: So the general set up a few stones as a marker, returned overnight, Jia Tan was overjoyed, and sent several hundred people, all with shovels and picks, together with two generals, to excavate ancient tombs and obtain hundreds of thousands of tons of old grain. People could not guess how Jia Tan knew that grain was stored here.

古文：张式
现代文：张式
English: Zhang style

古文：张式幼孤，奉遗命，葬于洛京。
现代文：张式幼年时候就死了父母，奉遗命欲将父母葬在洛京。
English: Zhang Shikai's parents died when he was a child, and he wanted to bury them in Loking in accordance with his last wishes.

古文：时周士龙识地形，称郭璞青乌之流也。
现代文：周士龙懂得地理，会看风水，称得上是郭璞、青乌一类的名家。
English: Zhou Shilong knows geography and can read feng shui, and can be said to be a famous family like Guo Gan and Qingwu.

古文：式与同之外野，历览三日而无获，夜宿村舍。
现代文：张式同他到野外勘察三天没有什么收获，夜晚宿在村民家中。
English: Zhang Shixi and he went to the field for three days to investigate, but there was nothing to be gained. At night, they stayed at a villager's home.

古文：时冬寒，室内唯一榻，式则籍地，士龙据榻以憩。
现代文：当时还值寒冬，室内只有一张床。张式打地铺，周士龙睡在床上。
English: At that time, it was still winter, and there was only one bed in the room. Zhou Shilong slept on the bed.

古文：士龙夜久不寐，式兼衣拥炉而寝。
现代文：周士龙夜里很久没睡着，张式和衣抱炉而睡。
English: Zhou Shilong did not fall asleep for a long time at night. He slept with his clothes around the stove.

古文：欻然惊魇曰： 亲家。 
现代文：忽然，张式在梦中喊到： 亲家 。
English: Suddenly, Zhang called out in his dream: "My family."

古文：士龙遽呼之，式固不自知，久而复寐。
现代文：周士龙急忙叫醒他，张式不知道自己喊的是什么。
English: Zhou Shilong woke him up in a hurry, and Zhang did not know what he was shouting.

古文：又惊魇曰： 亲家。 
现代文：过了一会，又睡下，张式又在梦中惊叫： 亲家 。
English: After a while, he fell asleep again, and Zhang again exclaimed in his dream: "My family."

古文：士龙又呼之，式亦自不知所谓。
现代文：周士龙又叫醒他，张式还是不知自己喊的什么。
English: Zhou Shilong woke him up again, but Zhang still didn't know what he was shouting.

古文：及晓，又与士龙同行。
现代文：天亮以后，俩人又一起出发到村南。
English: After dawn, the two set off together to the south of the village.

古文：南有村夫伐木，远见士龙相地，则荷斧遽至曰： 官等得非择葬地乎？
现代文：南面有个土山，周士龙勒住马远远看着说： 这山的气势太好了。 
English: There is a hill to the south. Zhou Shilong stopped his horse, looked at it from a distance and said, "This hill's momentum is too good.

古文：此地乃某之亲家所有。
现代文：就同张式步行观察测量了很长时间。
English: It has been measured for a long time on the same-span walking observation.

古文：如何？则某请导致焉。 
现代文：南山有个村夫在砍柴，远远看到周士龙在看风水。
English: There is a villager in Nanshan who is chopping firewood. In the distance, Zhou Shilong can be seen looking at feng shui.

古文：士龙谓式曰： 畴昔夜梦再惊，皆曰亲家。
现代文：就带着斧子快步走过来说： 两位官人莫非要选择坟地么？这个地方是我的亲家的，如果想要见他，我可以带你们到他家去。 
English: He quickly walked over with an axe and said, "Don't the two officials have to choose a cemetery? This place is my relative's, and if you want to see him, I can take you to his house."

古文：岂非神明前定之证与！ 遂卜葬焉，而式累世清贵。
现代文：周士龙对张式说： 昨天晚上你从梦中一再惊醒，喊的都是 亲家 ，这难道不是神明所定的证明吗！ 于是选中了这块墓地，后来张式家历代都清正富贵。
English: Zhou Shilong said to Zhang Shikun, "Yesterday night, you repeatedly woke up from your dream, and all you shouted was "family," isn't this the proof set by the gods! So they chose this cemetery, and later Zhang Shikun's family has been honest and rich throughout the ages.

古文：樊泽
现代文：樊泽
English: Shibusawa

古文：樊泽为襄阳节度使。有巡官张某者，父为邕管经略史，葬于邓州北数十里。
现代文：樊泽任襄阳节度使时，有个巡官张某，父亲曾做过邕管经略使，死后葬在邓州北面数十里的地方。
English: When Heze was the delegate to the Xiangyang Festival, there was an inspector Zhang Mou, whose father had been a delegate to the Xiangyang Festival, and who was buried dozens of miles north of Dengzhou after his death.

古文：张兄第三人，忽同时梦其父曰： 我葬墓某夜被劫，贼将衣物，今日入城来，停在席帽行。
现代文：一天夜晚，张某兄弟三人同时梦到父亲对他们说： 我的坟墓某天夜晚被劫，盗贼带着盗来的衣物今天进城，将在席帽行停留，你们应当急速前往捉拿他们。
English: One night, the three Zhang brothers dreamed of their father at the same time and said to them: My grave was robbed one night. Thieves with stolen clothes entered the city today and will stop at the hat line. You should go quickly to catch them.

古文：汝宜速往擒之，日出后，即不得矣。 张兄弟夜起，泣涕相告。
现代文：太阳出来以后，就抓不到他们了。 张某兄弟半夜起身，哭泣着相互通知这件事。
English: After the sun came out, they couldn't catch them.One of Zhang's brothers got up in the middle of the night, crying and informing each other of the incident.

古文：未明，扣州门，见泽，具白其事。
现代文：天还没亮，兄弟三人就去扣打州衙的大门。见到樊泽，把这事全诉说了一遍。
English: It was not yet dawn when the three brothers went to knock on the gate of Shuzhen. When they saw Heze, they told him the whole story.

古文：立召都虞候，令捕之。
现代文：樊泽立即召见都虞侯，让他带人去缉捕盗贼。
English: Heze immediately summoned the mayor of the capital and asked him to send someone to catch the thief.

古文：同党六人，并贼帅之妻皆获。
现代文：盗贼同党六个人，以及头目的妻子全被抓获。
English: Six of the thieves' accomplices, as well as the ringleader's wife, were all arrested.

古文：泽引入，面问之曰： 汝劫此墓有异耶？ 
现代文：樊泽命令将他们带进来，当面审问说： 你们去盗这个墓有没有什么异常现象？ 
English: He ordered that they be brought in and interrogated face-to-face, saying: "Did you do anything unusual to steal this tomb?

古文：贼曰： 某今日之事，亦无所隐，必是为神理所殛。
现代文：盗贼头目说： 现在这事，也没有什么可隐瞒的了，一定是神灵要诛杀我们。
English: The leader of the thieves said: Now there is nothing to hide about this, it must be the gods who want to kill us.

古文：某夫妻业劫冢已十余年，每劫，夫妻携酒爇火，诸徒党即开墓。
现代文：我们夫妻已经盗墓十多年了，每次去盗墓都带上酒和火把，其他的同党就开始挖墓。
English: My husband and I have been grave robbing for more than ten years. Every time we go to rob a grave, we bring wine and torches. Other members of our gang start digging graves.

古文：至棺盖，某夫妻与其亡人，递为斟酌。
现代文：打开棺盖的时候，我们夫妻要同死去的人共同喝酒。
English: When the coffin is opened, my husband and I will drink with the dead.

古文：某自饮一盏，曰： 客欲一盏，即以酒沥于亡人口中，云，主人饮一盏。
现代文：我自己先饮一杯，说： 客人先喝一杯。 再把酒洒到死者的口中，说： 主人也喝一杯。 
English: I myself will drink first, and say, Let the guest drink first; and I will pour the wine into the mouth of him that is dead, and say, Let the master also drink.

古文：又妻饮一盏遍，便云酒钱何处出？
现代文：接着，妻子喝完一杯，然后我说： 酒钱谁拿？ 
English: Then my wife finishes her drink and I say: Who's going to pay for the drinks?

古文：其妻应云，酒钱主人出。
现代文：妻子回答说： 酒钱主人拿 。
English: The wife replied: "The master takes the money for the wine."

古文：遂取夜物宝货等。
现代文：于是开始拿衣物宝物等。
English: Then they started to take clothes, valuables and so on.

古文：某昨开此墓，见棺中人紫衣玉带，其状如生。
现代文：昨天挖这座墓，看到棺中的人紫衣玉带，神色好象是活人一样。
English: I dug up this grave yesterday and saw the man in the coffin wearing a purple jade belt. He looked as if he was alive.

古文：某依法饮酒，及沥酒云，至主人一盏，言讫，亡人笑。
现代文：我依照老办法饮酒，到洒酒时说， 请主人喝一杯 。
English: I drank my wine the old-fashioned way, and when it was time to pour, I said, "Give my master a drink."

古文：某等惊甚，便扶起，唯枯骨耳。
现代文：说完死者笑了，我们都很惊慌，便把他扶起来，原来只是个枯骨。
English: After saying that, the dead man smiled, and we were all panicked, so we picked him up, and he turned out to be nothing more than a skeleton.

古文：遂解腰带，亡人呼曰，缓之，我腰痛。
现代文：便解他的腰带，死者大叫 慢点，我的腰痛 。
English: He unbuckled his belt and the dead man yelled, "Slow down, my back hurts."

古文：某辈皆惊惧，遂驰出。
现代文：我们这些人都很害怕，就急忙跑了出来。
English: All of us were scared and ran out in a hurry.

古文：自此神魂惝恍，即知必败。
现代文：从那以后精神恍忽，就知道一定会败露。 
English: After that, I lost my mind and knew I was going to lose.

古文：悉杀之。
现代文：樊泽将他们都杀了。
English: Shibusawa killed them all.

古文：数日，邓州方上其事。
现代文：过了几天以后，邓州才把这件事上报。
English: It took a few days for Dengzhou to report the incident.

古文：齐景公墓
现代文：齐景公墓
English: Qi Jing Cemetery

古文：贝邱县东北齐景公墓，近世有人开之。
现代文：贝邱县东北有齐景公的墓，近代曾有人发掘过。
English: In the northeast of Beiqiu County, there is the tomb of Qi Jinggong, which has been excavated in modern times.

古文：下入三丈，石函中得一鹅。鹅回转翅以拨石。
现代文：向下挖三丈，在一个石匣中得到一只鹅，这只鹅拍打着翅膀拨打石匣。
English: Dig down three feet, get a goose in a stone box, this goose beats its wings to dial the stone box.

古文：复下入一丈，便有青气上腾，望之如陶烟。
现代文：再往下挖一丈，便有青烟向上升腾，看上去好象是烧制陶器的窑中冒出的烟。
English: Further down, blue smoke billowed upward, looking like smoke from a pottery kiln.

古文：飞鸟过之，辄堕死。遂不敢入。
现代文：有飞鸟从上空飞过，立即坠地而死，于是再不敢进入。
English: A bird flew over, immediately fell to the ground and died, so he did not dare to enter again.

古文：郭谊
现代文：郭谊
English: Guo Jiali

古文：潞州军校郭谊，先为邯郸郡牧使。
现代文：潞州军校郭谊，当初做邯郸郡牧使。
English: Quzhou Military Academy, Guoxi, was originally a county magistrate of Quzhou County.

古文：因兄亡，遂入郓州，举其先，同营于磁州滏阳。
现代文：因为哥哥死了，就到郓州去安葬他的哥哥，墓地在磁州滏阳。
English: Because his brother died, he went to Bozhou to bury his brother, and the cemetery is in Bozhou, Shiyang.

古文：县接山，土中多石，有力者卒，共凿石为穴。
现代文：那地方同山相接，泥土中石头很多。有钱有势的人死去，凿石为穴墓。
English: The place is close to the mountain, and there are many stones in the dirt. Rich and powerful people died, and the stones were used as tombs.

古文：谊之所卜，亦凿焉。
现代文：郭谊所选择的墓穴也在那开凿。
English: The grave chosen by Guo Yiyi was also dug there.

古文：即日倍加，忽透一穴，穴中有石，长可四尺。形如守宫，支体首尾毕具。
现代文：每天加倍用力打凿，忽然凿透一个地穴，穴中有石，长大约四丈，形状像壁虎，肢体，头尾全都有。
English: Every day, he dug twice as hard, and suddenly he dug a hole. There was a stone in the hole, about four feet long, shaped like a gecko, with all its limbs, head and tail.

古文：役者误断焉，谊恶之。
现代文：做工的人失手把它打断了。
English: The workmen broke it by mistake.

古文：将别卜地，白于刘从谏，从谏不许，因葬焉。
现代文：郭谊厌恶这事，想要到别地方再找一处墓地，向刘从谏说了这个想法。刘从谏不同意，就葬在那里。
English: Guo Yiyi was disgusted by this, and wanted to find another cemetery elsewhere, and told Liu Conglu this idea. Liu Conglu did not agree, and was buried there.

古文：后月余，谊陷于厕，几死，骨肉奴婢相继死者二十余口。
现代文：一个月后，郭谊掉进茅厕中，几乎死去，家人和奴婢等死了二十多口。
English: A month later, Guo Yi fell into a thatched latrine and almost died. More than 20 members of his family and servants died.

古文：自是常恐悸，寤寐不安，因表请罢职。
现代文：从那以后，郭谊经常恐惧，心跳，坐卧不安，就写了辞官报告。
English: Since then, Guo Yiyi has often experienced fear, palpitations, and restlessness, and has written a report to the dictionary.

古文：从谏以都押衙焦长楚之务，与谊对换。
现代文：刘从谏用都押衙焦长楚的职务同郭谊对换。
English: Liu Zongyao and Jiao Changchu exchanged positions with each other.

古文：及刘稹阻兵，谊为共魁，军破枭首。
现代文：到刘稹起兵造反，郭谊为叛军首领之一，兵败被砍头。
English: When Liu Bei revolted, Guo Yi was one of the rebel leaders and was beheaded.

古文：其家无少长悉投死井中。
现代文：全家不论大小全都被投到井里淹死。
English: Entire families, large and small, were thrown into the well and drowned.

古文：盐州从事郑宾于言，石守宫见在磁州官库中。
现代文：盐州从事郑宾于说，石壁虎现在磁州的官库中。
English: Zheng Bin Yu, who is engaged in Yanzhou, said that the stone gecko is now in the official treasury of the magnetic state.

古文：寿安土棺
现代文：寿安土棺
English: Shouan earthenware coffin

古文：寿安之南有土峰甚峻，乾宁初，因雨而圯。
现代文：寿安的南面有座土峰非常险峻，乾宁初年，因天下大雨被冲塌。
English: In the south of Shou'an, there is a very steep hill. In the first year of Qianning, it was washed away due to heavy rain.

古文：半壁衔土棺，棺下有木，横亘之。
现代文：有一面土壁的中间衔着一个土棺。土棺的下边有一根木头，横在那里。
English: In the middle of one of the earthen walls there was a coffin, and underneath the coffin there was a log lying there.

古文：木见风成尘，而土形尚固。
现代文：木头见风后变成了尘土。而土棺的形状，还很坚固。
English: The wood turns to dust in the wind, but the shape of the earthen coffin is still very strong.

古文：邑令涤之，泥汩于水粉，腻而蜡黄。
现代文：邑官让用水浇它，泥块很快变成水粉，滑腻腻的呈蜡黄色。
English: The municipal official had it doused with water, and the mud quickly turned into powdered water, leaving it a greasy, waxy yellow.

古文：剖其腹，依稀骸骨。
现代文：剖开中间，好象是骸骨。
English: Cut it down the middle, it looks like a skeleton.

古文：因徵近代，无以土为周身之器者。
现代文：考察近代人的风俗，没有用土做棺材的。
English: Examining the customs of modern people, there is no such thing as a coffin made of soil.

古文：载记云，夏后氏堲周，盖其时也。
现代文：史书上记载：夏后氏烧土为砖做棺，大约这就是那时的墓葬。
English: It is recorded in history books that the Xia Guo clan fired clay to make bricks for coffins, and this is approximately how tombs were built at that time.

古文：李思恭
现代文：李思恭
English: Li Sikyong

古文：乾宁三年丙辰，蜀州刺史节度参谋李思恭埋弟于成都锦浦里北门内西回第一宅，西与李冰祠邻。
现代文：唐朝乾宁三年丙辰，蜀州刺史节度参谋李思恭把弟弟埋在成都锦浦里北门内西回第一宅，西面与李冰祠相邻。
English: In the third year of Qianning of the Tang Dynasty, the staff officer Li Sikyong buried his brother in the first house of the west gate of the north gate of Jinpuli in Chengdu, adjacent to the Li Bing Shrine in the west.

古文：距宅之北，地形渐高，冈走西南，与祠相接。
现代文：宅的北面地势渐渐高起来，高冈的走向是西南向，同李冰祠相连接。
English: To the north of the house, the terrain gradually rises, and the direction of the hill is southwest, connected to the Li Bing Shrine.

古文：于其堂北，凿地五六尺，得大冢，砖甓甚固。
现代文：在宅堂的北面，挖地五六尺深，见到一个大墓。
English: On the north side of the house, digging five or six feet deep, I saw a large grave.

古文：于砖外得金钱数十枚，各重十七八铢，径寸七八分，圆而无孔。
现代文：墓的砖壁非常坚固，在砖壁外得到数十枚金钱，每个重十七八铢，直径一寸七八分长，圆形中间没有眼。
English: The brick wall of the tomb is very strong. Outside the brick wall, there are dozens of coins, each weighing seventeen and a half ounces, with a diameter of one inch and seven-eighths long. There is no eye in the middle of the circle.

古文：去缘二分，有隐起规，规内两面，各有书二十一字。
现代文：离边缘二分，有凹槽，槽内两面各有二十一个字。
English: Two minutes from the edge, there is a groove, and there are twenty-one characters on both sides of the groove.

古文：其缘甚薄，有刃焉。
现代文：金钱的边缘非常薄，有刃。
English: Money has a very thin, sharp edge.

古文：督役者驰其二以白思恭，命使者入青城云溪山居以示道士杜光庭，云： 此钱得有石余。 
现代文：监工的急忙骑马送二个钱给李思恭报信。李思恭派人进青城云溪山居把两枚钱送给道士杜光庭看。杜光庭说： 这种钱大概要有一石多。 
English: The supervisor of the work hurriedly rode a horse to send two coins to Li Sikyong to report the letter. Li Sikyong sent someone into Yunxi Mountain Residence in Qingcheng to show the two coins to Taoist priest Du Guangting. Du Guangting said: This kind of money is probably more than one stone.

古文：思恭命并金钱复瘗之，但不知谁氏之墓也。
现代文：李思恭下命令把金钱放回墓中重新埋上，但是不知是谁的坟墓。
English: Li Sikyong ordered the money to be put back into the grave and reburied, but it is not known whose grave it is.

古文：其地北百步所，有石笋，知石笋即此墓之阙矣。
现代文：墓地北面一百步左右，有石笋，石笋就是这个墓的墓门。
English: About a hundred paces north of the cemetery, there is a cairn, and the cairn is the tomb door of this tomb.

古文：自此甚灵，人不敢犯。
现代文：从那以后，那里非常灵验，人们不敢侵犯。
English: Since then, it has been so effective that people do not dare to encroach.

古文：其后蜀主改置祠堂享之。
现代文：后来蜀主把那里改作祠堂用于祭祀。
English: Later, Lord Shu converted it into an ancestral hall for worship.

古文：武瑜
现代文：武瑜
English: Wu Yu

古文：安州城东二十余里，有大墓。
现代文：安州城东二十多里处有座大墓。
English: There is a large tomb more than twenty miles east of Anzhou.

古文：群贼发之，数日乃开。
现代文：群贼去盗墓，好多天才挖开。
English: A group of thieves went to rob a grave, and it took them several days to dig it up.

古文：得金钗百余枚，合重百斤。有石座，杂宝古腰带陈列甚多。
现代文：盗得一百多枚金钗，合起来有一百斤重，墓中石座上面陈列许多宝物腰带。
English: More than a hundred gold ingots were stolen, weighing a total of one hundred pounds. Many treasure belts are displayed on the stone pedestal in the tomb.

古文：取其一带，随手有水涌，俄顷满墓。所开之处，寻自闭塞。
现代文：盗贼拿起其中的一条，随手涌出许多水，不一会，墓室里面水就满了，挖掘开的地方也自己封闭了。
English: The thief picked up one of the sticks, and with his hands, a lot of water gushed out. Soon, the inside of the tomb was full of water, and the excavated area closed by itself.

古文：盗以二钗，子献刺史武瑜。夜梦一人古服，侍从极多，来谒云： 南蛮武相公也，为群盗坏我居处，以君宗姓，愿为修之。
现代文：盗贼把两个金钗献给刺史武瑜，武瑜夜晚做梦，梦见一个穿古代衣服的人，带着众多侍从来见他说： 我是南蛮武相公，群盗破坏了我的住处。因为你是我的同宗，所以我让你替我修好。
English: Thieves gave the two gold ingots to the thief Shi Wuyu. Wuyu had a dream in the night. She dreamed of a man wearing ancient clothes, with many attendants to see him and said: I am Nanban Wuxiang, a group of thieves destroyed my home. Because you are my same clan, so I let you fix it for me.

古文：盗当发狂，勿加擒捕。 
现代文：盗贼都会发狂，不必缉捕他们了。 
English: Thieves would go mad, there would be no need to catch them.

古文：即命修之，群盗三十余人，同时发狂，相次皆卒。
现代文：武瑜就让人去修大墓，那群盗贼三十多人，同时发狂，相继都死了。
English: Wu Yu sent someone to repair the tomb, and the group of more than thirty thieves simultaneously went mad and died one after another.

古文：曹王墓
现代文：曹王墓
English: Cao Wang Tomb

古文：永平乙亥岁，有说开封人发曹王皋墓，取其石人羊马砖石之属。
现代文：前蜀永平乙亥年间，传说开封人发掘曹王皋的坟墓，取走那里的石人，石羊、石马、砖石之类的东西。
English: During the reign of Shu Yongping, there is a legend that the people of Kaifeng excavated the tomb of Cao Wangtao and took away the stone man, stone sheep, stone horse, masonry and other things.

古文：见其棺宛然，而随手灰灭，无复形骨，但有金器数事。
现代文：看见棺椁仍完好，可是用手一碰就像灰尘似的飞散，一点尸骨也没有了，只有金器几件。
English: I saw that the coffin was still intact, but when I touched it with my hand, it scattered like dust. There was not a single skeleton left, only a few pieces of gold.

古文：棺前有铸银盆，广三尺，满盆贮水。中坐玉婴儿，高三尺，水无减耗。
现代文：棺椁前面有一个银盆，盆口三尺，贮满水，中间坐着一个玉石婴儿，高三尺，水一点也没有减少损耗。
English: In front of the coffin, there was a silver basin with a three-foot opening, full of water. In the middle, there was a jade baby, three feet high, and the water did not reduce the loss at all.

古文：则泓师所云。墓中贮玉，则草木温润；贮金多，则草木焦枯。
现代文：正如泓师所说的：墓中贮藏玉器，草木就温润新鲜；藏金多，草木就焦枯。
English: As Zou Shi said: if jade objects are stored in the tomb, the plants will be warm and fresh; if there is a lot of gold, the plants will be burnt.

古文：曹王自贞元之后，历二百岁矣，盆水不减，玉之润也。
现代文：曹王自从贞元埋葬之后，经历了二百年，盆中的水一点不减少，是玉滋润的结果。
English: Cao Wang has experienced two hundred years since the burial of Zhenyuan, and the water in the basin has not decreased at all, which is the result of jade moistening.

古文：韩建
现代文：韩建
English: Han Jian

古文：韩建丧母，卜葬地。
现代文：韩建的母亲去世了，请风水先生选择墓地。
English: Han Jian's mother passed away, so he asked Mr. Feng Shui to choose a cemetery.

古文：有术云： 只有一穴，可置大钱，而不久即散。若华州境内，莫如于此也。 
现代文：风水先生说： 只有一处较好的墓地，可以得到许多钱财，但不久还会失去，假如葬在华州境内，没有比这再好的地点了。 
English: Mr. Feng Shui said: There is only one good cemetery, you can get a lot of money, but you will soon lose it. If you are buried in Washington, there is no better place than this.

古文：建乃于此葬母。
现代文：韩建就在这个地方埋葬了他母亲。
English: Han Jian buried his mother in this place.

古文：明年，大驾来幸。四海之人，罔不臻凑。
现代文：第二年皇帝驾临，全国各地的人都往这里聚集。
English: When the emperor arrived the following year, people from all over the country gathered here.

古文：建乃广收商税，二载之后，有钱九百万贯。
现代文：韩建就趁机收取商税。二年之后，家里积蓄了九百万贯钱。
English: Han Jian took the opportunity to collect the sales tax. Two years later, the family had saved nine million yuan.

古文：复三年，为朱梁所有。
现代文：三年后，都归朱梁所有。
English: Three years later, it was all owned by Zhu Liang.

古文：海陵夏氏
现代文：海陵夏氏
English: Hailing from the Xia clan

古文：戊戌岁，城海陵县为郡，侵人冢墓。
现代文：戊戌年间，海陵建郡城，侵占了一些坟地。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, Hailing built a county seat and occupied a number of cemeteries.

古文：有市侩夏氏，其先尝为盐商，墓在城西，夏改葬其祖。
现代文：有一个买卖的中间介绍人姓夏，他的先辈曾经做过盐商，坟墓在城的西面。这个姓夏的在这种情况下，改葬了他的祖先。
English: A sales intermediary surnamed Xia, whose ancestors had been salt merchants and whose graves are in the west of the city, changed the burial place of his ancestors under these circumstances.

古文：百一十年矣，开棺，唯有白骨，而衣服器物，皆俨然如新，无所损污。
现代文：他的祖坟已经有一百一十年了，开棺时里面的尸体已成白骨，可是衣服器物，全都还像新的一样，一点没有损坏和玷污。
English: His ancestral grave is already one hundred and ten years old. When the coffin was opened, the bodies inside had turned into white bones, but the clothes and utensils were all like new, not damaged or stained at all.

古文：有红锦被，文彩尤异。
现代文：有床红锦被，花纹和色彩尤其鲜艳。
English: There is a bed of red brocade quilts, the patterns and colors are particularly bright.

古文：夏方贫，皆取卖之，人竞以善价买云。
现代文：姓夏的生活很贫困，便把从墓中取出来的东西全部拿去卖了。人们争着以很高的价钱买走。
English: Xia, who lived in poverty, took everything out of the tomb and sold it, with people competing to buy it at high prices.

古文：其余冢，虽历年未及，而皆腐败矣。
现代文：其余的坟墓，虽然经历的年头没有这么多，可全都腐朽了。
English: The rest of the tombs, although they haven't seen so many years, are all rotten.

古文：庐陵彭氏
现代文：庐陵彭氏
English: Fuling Peng Clan

古文：庐陵人彭氏，葬其父。
现代文：庐陵有个姓彭的人，要安葬他的父亲。
English: In Fuling, there was a man surnamed Peng who wanted to bury his father.

古文：有术士为卜地曰： 葬此，当世为藩牧郡守。 
现代文：有个阴阳术士为他选择墓地，告诉地说： 葬在这个地方，当代人就可做藩牧郡守。 
English: A yin and yang sorcerer chose a cemetery for him and told him, "If you are buried in this place, your contemporary can become the head of the clan and the county."

古文：彭从之。
现代文：彭氏听从了他的话。
English: Mr Peng took him at his word.

古文：又掘坎，术士曰： 深无过九尺。 
现代文：挖坑时，术士说： 深不要超过九尺 。
English: When digging a pit, the sorcerer said: Do not dig deeper than nine feet.

古文：久之，术士暂憩他所，役者遂掘丈余。
现代文：过了一段时间，术士暂时离开去休息，干活的人向下挖了一丈深。
English: After a while, the sorcerer left to rest, and the workmen dug deeper.

古文：欻有白鹤自地出，飞入云中，术士叹恨而去。
现代文：忽然有一只白鹤从地里飞出，一直飞到云中。术士悔恨叹息离去。
English: Suddenly, a white crane flew out of the ground and up into the clouds. The sorcerer left with regret and a sigh.

古文：今彭氏子孙，有为县令者。
现代文：现在这姓彭的子孙，有做县令的。
English: Now the descendants of this family name Peng have become county magistrates.

古文：武夷山
现代文：武夷山
English: Wuyishan Mountain

古文：建州武夷山，或风雨之夕，闻人马箫管之声。
现代文：建州武夷山上，有时在风雨夜，听到有人喊马叫，箫管吹奏的声音。
English: On the Wuyi Mountain in Jianzhou, sometimes on a stormy night, you can hear the sound of someone calling a horse and the sound of a gong.

古文：及明，则有棺椁在悬崖之上，中有胫骨一节，土人谓之仙人换骨函。
现代文：等到天亮时，看见一口棺椁悬放在悬崖中间，当中有一块小腿骨。当地人说那是仙人换骨匣。
English: At dawn, he saw a coffin hanging in the middle of the cliff, with a calf bone in it, which the locals said was a bone-changer.

古文：近代有人深入绝壑，俯见一函，其上题云：润州朝京门内染师张某第三女。
现代文：近代有人攀上绝壁，俯身看见一匣，上面题字： 润州朝京门内染师张某第三女。 
English: In modern times, someone climbed up the cliff, bent down and saw a box with the inscription: The third daughter of Zhang Mou, a dyer in the Renzhou imperial court.

古文：好事者记之。后至润州，果得张氏之居。
现代文：好事的人记住这件事，后来到润州，果然找到了张家染师。
English: People who do good things should remember this. Later, when I came to Rongzhou, I found a Zhang family dyer.

古文：云： 第三女未嫁而卒，已数岁。 
现代文：张家说： 第三个女未出嫁就死了。现在已经好几年了。 
English: Zhang Jia said: The third daughter died before she was married. It has been several years now.

古文：因发其墓，则空棺矣。林赞尧
现代文：打开她的棺木查看，里面已经空了。林赞尧
English: Open her coffin and look inside, it's already empty.

古文：丙午岁，漳州裨将林赞尧杀监军中使，据郡，及保山岩以为营。
现代文：丙午年间，漳州副将林赞尧，杀了监军中使，占据了郡城，凭借山岩做营地。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year

古文：掘地，得一古冢，棺椁皆腐。
现代文：在挖地的时候，遇到一座古墓，棺椁全都腐烂了。
English: While digging, they came across an ancient tomb. All the coffins were rotten.

古文：中有一女子，衣服容貌皆如生，举体尤有暖气。
现代文：棺中有一个女子，衣服容貌全都象是活人一样，身体还有温暖的气息。
English: In the coffin is a woman, dressed and looking as if she were still alive, with a warm scent on her body.

古文：军士取其金银钗环，而弃其尸。
现代文：军士们拿走了她的金银钗环等首饰，执弃了她的尸体。
English: The soldiers took away her gold and silver hoop earrings and other jewelry and disposed of her body.

古文：又发一冢，开棺，见一人被发复面，蹲于棺中。
现代文：又掘开一个坟墓，打开棺材时，看见有一个人披发遮面，蹲在棺材中。
English: He also excavated a grave, and when he opened the coffin, he saw a man wearing a hair mask and squatting in the coffin.

古文：军士骇惧，致死者数人。
现代文：军士们非常害怕，有几个人竟被吓死。
English: The sergeants were so scared that some of them were scared to death.

古文：赞尧竟伏诛。
现代文：林赞尧后来判罪被杀。
English: Lin Zanzang was later convicted and killed.

古文：张绍军卒
现代文：张绍军卒
English: Zhang Shao, military graduate

古文：丙午岁，江南之师围留安，军政不肃。
现代文：丙午年间，江南的军队包围留安，这支军队的纪律很坏。
English: During the Heian period, troops from the south of the Yangtze River surrounded and besieged Lian'an. The discipline of this army was very bad.

古文：军士发掘冢墓，以取财物，诸将莫禁。
现代文：军士们到处挖掘坟墓，来寻取财物，将官们也不禁止。
English: The officers do not forbid the sergeants from digging up graves and searching for valuables.

古文：监军使张匡绍所将卒二人，发城南一冢，得一椰实杯，以献匡绍。
现代文：监军使张匡绍所带的二个士兵，挖掘城南一座坟墓，得到一个椰子壳做的杯子，献给了张匡绍。
English: The two soldiers led by Zhang Kuangshao, the military inspector, dug a grave in the south of the city and obtained a cup made of coconut shell, which was dedicated to Zhang Kuangshao.

古文：因曰： 某发此冢，开棺，见绿衣人面如生，惧不敢犯。
现代文：并告诉他说： 我们挖掘这座坟墓，打开棺材时，看见一个绿衣人脸色好象活人一样，因恐惧没敢触动他。
English: And she said to him, "When we were digging this grave and opening the coffin, we saw a green-clothed man who looked like a living person, and we were afraid to touch him.

古文：墓中无他珍，唯得此杯耳。 
现代文：墓中没有什么别的珍宝，只得到这个杯子。 
English: There are no other treasures in the tomb, only this cup.

古文：既还营，而绿衣人已坐某房矣，一日数见，意甚恶之。
现代文：等到这两士兵回到营房时，绿衣人已经坐在营房里了，一天看见好几次，感到非常厌恶。
English: By the time the two soldiers returned to the barracks, the man in green was already sitting in the barracks, seeing several times a day and feeling very disgusted.

古文：居一二日，二卒皆战死。
现代文：过了一两天，两个士兵全都战死了。
English: A day or two later, both soldiers were dead.

古文：马黄谷冢
现代文：马黄谷冢
English: Ma Huangguo

古文：安州城南马黄谷冢左有大冢，棺椁已腐，唯一髑髅，长三尺。
现代文：安州城南马黄谷墓左面有座大墓，棺椁已经腐烂了，只有一个三尺长的骷髅。
English: There is a large tomb to the left of the Mahuang Valley Tomb in the southern part of Anzhou City. The coffin lid has rotted, and only a three-foot-long coffin lid remains.

古文：棺椁皆腐，得古钱破铜镜数枚。
现代文：陈地人左鹏，亲眼看见过。秦进崇
English: I have seen it with my own eyes. Qin Jintao

古文：复得一瓶，中更有一瓶，黄质黑文，成隶字云： 一双青乌子，飞来五两头。
现代文：后周显德乙卯年，伪连水军使秦进崇，领兵修城，挖开一座古墓。棺椁全都腐烂了，从墓中得到数枚古钱和几面破铜镜。还得到一个瓶，瓶中又有一个瓶。瓶是黄色的，上面有黑色的字。字用隶书写道： 一双青鸟子，飞来五两头。
English: In the second year of Zhou Xiande's reign, the pseudo-lian navy made Qin Jintong lead the troops to rebuild the city and excavate an ancient tomb. The coffin lids were all rotten, and several ancient coins and several broken bronze mirrors were obtained from the tomb. A bottle was also obtained, and there was another bottle in the bottle. The bottle was yellow, with black words on it. The words were written in script: A pair of blue birds, flying five and two heads.

古文：借问船轻重，寄信到扬州。 
现代文：借问船轻重，寄信到扬州。 
English: Ask the weight of the ship and send a letter to Yangzhou.

古文：其明年，周师伐吴，进崇死之。和文
现代文：到第二年，后周军队进攻吴国，秦进崇被打死。和文
English: In the following year, Hou Zhou's army attacked Wu, and Qin Jinsong was killed.

古文：蜀人王昭远，戊午岁为巡边制置使。
现代文：蜀郡人王昭远，戊午年任巡边制置使。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan, a resident of Shu County, was appointed as a border patrol envoy in the year of Wu Wu.

古文：及文州，遇军人喧聚，问之，言旧冢内有尸不坏，或以砖石投之，其声铿然。
现代文：一次他到文州，路遇军人吩吩闹闹地聚集在一块。他上前询问原因，有人告诉他说，有一个古墓内有具没腐烂的尸体，用砖石等扔进去，发出的声音很响亮。
English: Once, when he was in Wenzhou, a group of soldiers gathered in a rowdy manner. He came forward to inquire about the reason. Someone told him that there was an ancient tomb with an undecayed corpse, which was thrown into it with masonry, etc. The sound it made was very loud.

古文：昭远往，见其形质俨然，如新逝，冢中得石版云： 有唐故文州马步都虞侯和文，年五十八，大中五年辛未五月五日卒，葬于此。 
现代文：王昭远上前察看，看见那尸体好像是新近死去的人一样。他在墓中找到一块石板，上面刻着： 唐朝已故文州马步都虞侯和文。亨年五十八岁，大中五年辛未五月五日去世，葬于此地。 
English: Wang Zhao looked far ahead and saw that the body seemed to be that of someone who had recently died. He found a stone slab in the grave, on which was inscribed: "Wen, the late governor of Wenzhou, the capital of the Tang Dynasty, died on May 5th, at the ripe old age of 58. He was in his fifth year of middle school. He was buried here."

古文：昭远致祭，复令掩闭之，于墓侧刻石以铭之。
现代文：王昭远进行了祭奠，又命令士兵将墓穴重新埋好。又在墓的侧面，刻了一块石碑来记述这件事。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan held a memorial service, ordered the soldiers to re-bury the grave, and engraved a stone tablet on the side of the grave to record the event.

