古文：苗晋卿义宁坊狂人张俨奚乐山王居士俞叟衡岳道人李业石旻
现代文：苗晋卿义宁坊狂人张俨奚乐山王居士俞叟衡岳道人李业石旻
English: Miao Jinqing, Yining Fang, the madman, Zhang Qile, the mountain king, the layman, Xu Hengyue, the Taoist, Li Ye Shi, and so on

古文：管涔山隐者宋师儒会昌狂士唐庆卢钧
现代文：管涔山隐者宋师儒会昌狂士唐庆卢钧
English: Guan Lushan hermit Song Shifu Confucian Chang fanatic Tang Qing Lu Jun

古文：苗晋卿
现代文：苗晋卿
English: Miao Jinqing

古文：苗晋卿困于名场。一年似得，复落第。
现代文：苗晋卿在科举考试方面很不顺利，这一年眼看要考中了，结果还是落了榜。
English: Miao Jinqing did not do well in the entrance examination. This year, he was expected to pass the examination, but he still fell off the list.

古文：春景暄妍，策蹇卫出都门，贳酒一壶，籍草而坐，酣醉而寐。
现代文：时值阳光和煦春色明丽的好日子，他骑着瘦弱的毛驴走出京都大门，赊了一壶酒坐在草地上喝起来，喝得大醉便睡在那里。
English: It was a beautiful day with sunshine and bright spring colours. He rode out of the gates of Kyoto on an emaciated donkey, sat down on the grass with a jug of wine, drank it, got very drunk and slept there.

古文：久之既觉，有老父坐其傍。因揖叙，以余杯饮老父。
现代文：过了好长时间醒来一看，有个老大爷正坐在自己身旁，便拱手施礼邀他与自己叙谈叙谈，剩下的酒也送给老大爷喝了。
English: After a long time, he woke up and saw that an old man was sitting next to him. He bowed and invited him to talk to him. The rest of the wine was also given to the old man to drink.

古文：愧谢曰： 郎君萦悒耶？ 宁要知前事耶？ 
现代文：老大爷深表歉意和感谢。他说： 您心里很郁闷吧，想知道以后前程的事吗？ 
English: The old man expressed his deep apologies and thanks. He said, "You must be very depressed. Do you want to know about your future?

古文：晋卿曰： 某应举已久，有一第分乎？ 
现代文：晋卿说： 我参加科举考试已有好多年了，不知有没有考中一次的份儿。 
English: Jinqing said: I have been taking the entrance examination for many years, and I don't know if I have passed the examination once.

古文：曰： 大有事。
现代文：老大爷说： 大有其事，您还想知道什么？ 
English: The old man said, "It's a big deal. What else do you want to know?"

古文：但更问。 苗曰： 某困于穷，然爱一郡，宁可及乎？ 
现代文：晋卿说： 我很穷，然而很想作一郡之首，能办到吗？ 
English: Jinqing said: I am poor, but I really want to be the head of a county. Can I do it?

古文：曰： 更向上。 。廉察乎？ 
现代文：老人说： 比这还要高。  廉察使吗？ 
English: The old man said, "It's even higher than that.

古文：曰： 更向上。 
现代文： 比这还要高。 
English: The old man still said, "It's higher than that."

古文：苗公乘酒，猛问曰： 将相乎？ 
现代文：晋卿借着酒劲儿猛然问道： 作将相吗？ 
English: Jinqing suddenly asked through the strength of the wine: "Do you want to be a general?"

古文：曰： 更向上。 
现代文：老人仍然说： 比这还要高。 
English: The old man still said, "It's higher than that."

古文：苗公怒，全不信，因肆言曰： 将相更向上，作天子乎？ 
现代文：苗晋卿气坏了，根本不相信他的话是真的，便放肆地说： 你说我比将相还要高，难道能作天子不成！ 
English: Miao Jinqing was angry and did not believe that his words were true at all, so he said boldly: You said that I am even taller than the commander-in-chief. Is it possible to be the son of heaven?

古文：老父曰： 天子真者即不得，假者即得。 
现代文：老人说： 真的天子你作不成，假的，还是可以作几天的。 
English: The old man said, "You can't make a real sky god, but you can make a fake one for a few days.

古文：苗都以为怪诞，揖之而去。
现代文：苗晋卿以为这些话全是无稽之谈，便向老人拱拱手就走了。
English: Miao Jinqing thought that these words were all nonsense, so he bowed to the old man and left.

古文：后果为将相。
现代文：后来他果然为将为相。
English: Later, he did indeed become the face of the company.

古文：德宗升遐，摄冢宰三日。义宁坊狂人
现代文：德宗逝世后，曾经兼任过众官之首的冢宰。义宁坊狂人
English: After the death of Emperor Dezong, he also served as the head of all officials.

古文：元和初，上都义宁坊有妇人风狂，俗呼为五娘。
现代文：元和初年，上部义宁坊有个妇人疯疯癫癫的，大家都叫她 五娘 。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year, there was a woman in the upper part of Yiningfang who was crazy, everyone called her the fifth daughter.

古文：常止宿于永穆墙下。
现代文：她经常住宿在永穆墙下。
English: She often stays under the Yongmu Wall.

古文：时中使茹大夫使于金陵。金陵有狂者，众名之信夫。或歌或哭，往往验未来事。
现代文：当时中使茹大夫到金陵去巡察，金陵有个疯子，大家叫他 信夫 ，他每次唱歌或者哭泣往往预示着未来要发生什么事情。
English: At that time, Dr. Ru was sent to Jinling to make an inspection. There was a madman in Jinling, everyone called him Xinfu. Every time he sang or cried, he often foreshadowed what would happen in the future.

古文：盛暑拥絮，未尝沾汗；冱寒袒露，体无斁圻。
现代文：盛夏酷暑他盖着棉被也不出汗，严寒冰冻季节，他光着身子也不抽筋或者畏缩。
English: In the sweltering heat of midsummer he covers himself with a quilt and does not perspire, and in the bitter cold of the freezing season he does not cramp or flinch when he is naked.

古文：中使将返，信夫忽扣马曰： 我有妹五娘在城，今有少信，必为我达也。 
现代文：中使要返回京都时，信夫忽然拉住他的马说： 我有个妹妹叫五娘，住在京城，现在有件小小的信物，你一定要替我送给她呀！ 
English: When the envoy was about to return to Kyoto, Nobuo suddenly pulled up his horse and said, "I have a younger sister, my fifth daughter, who lives in Kyoto. I have a small token that I want you to give to her."

古文：中使素知其异，欣然许之。
现代文：中使一向知道他与正常人不同，欣然答应了他。
English: The envoy always knew that he was different from normal people, and readily agreed to him.

古文：乃探怀中一袱，纳中使靴中。仍曰： 谓语五娘，无事速归也。 
现代文：他便从怀里掏出一个包，塞进中使的靴子筒里，又说： 你跟五娘说，没事就快回来吧。 
English: He then took out a bag from his arms and stuffed it into the middle of his boots. He also said, "Tell your fifth daughter to come back as soon as possible.

古文：中使至长乐坡，五娘已至。拦马笑曰： 我兄有信，大夫可见还。 
现代文：中使走到长乐坡时，五娘已经来到这里，拦住他的马笑着说： 我哥哥托你捎的信，大夫可以交给我了。 
English: When the middle envoy walked to Changlepo, the fifth daughter had already come here, stopped his horse and said with a smile: My brother asked for your letter, the doctor can give it to me.

古文：中史遽取信授之。
现代文：中使立刻取出信交给了她。
English: The Chinese envoy immediately took out the letter and handed it to her.

古文：五娘因发袱，有衣三事，乃衣之而舞，大笑而归，复至墙下。
现代文：五娘打开包袱，有衣服三件，便穿在身上跳起舞来，大笑着回到了原来的墙下面。
English: The fifth daughter opened her luggage and found three pieces of clothing. She put them on and danced, laughing as she went back under the original wall.

古文：一夕而死，其坊率钱葬之。
现代文：过了一宿五娘就死了，街坊们纷纷出钱把她安葬了。
English: After one night, the fifth daughter died, and the neighbors paid to have her buried.

古文：经年，有人自江南来，言信夫与五娘同日死矣。
现代文：一年之后，有人从江南来到京都，说信夫与五娘是同一天死的。
English: A year later, someone from the south of the river came to Kyoto and said that Nobuo and his fifth daughter had died on the same day.

古文：张俨
现代文：张俨
English: Zhang Ye

古文：元和末，盐城脚力张俨递牒入京，至宋州，遇一人，因求为伴。
现代文：元和末年，盐城有个脚夫叫张俨，往京城传递文书。走到宋州遇到一个人，便求他与自己作伴儿。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a porter in Yancheng called Zhang Xuan, who delivered documents to Beijing. When he went to Songzhou and met a man, he asked him to be his companion.

古文：其人朝宿郑州，因谓张曰： 君受我料理，可倍行数百。 
现代文：那个人要到郑州去住宿，便对张俨说： 你听我安排，一天可以多走几百里路。 
English: That person wanted to go to Zhengzhou to stay, so he said to Zhang Ye: Listen to my arrangement, you can walk several hundred miles a day.

古文：乃掘二小坑，深五六寸，令张背立，垂踵坑口。针其两足，张初不知痛，又自膝下至骭，再三捋之，黑血满坑中。
现代文：于是挖了两个小坑，有五六寸深，叫张俨背向小坑站着，脚后跟悬在坑口，用针扎他的两只脚，张俨开始并不知道痛，那个人又从他膝盖下面顺着小腿再三地捋，直到黑色的血液淌满了土坑。
English: So they dug two small pits, five or six inches deep, and made Zhang Xuan stand with his back to the pits, his heel dangling over the mouth of the pit, and pricked his two feet with a needle. At first, Zhang Xuan did not know the pain, and the man repeatedly pricked his calf from under his knee until black blood flowed into the pits.

古文：张大觉举足轻捷，才午至汴。
现代文：张俨觉得两只脚特别轻快，走起路来轻捷如飞，天刚晌午他们便到了汴京。
English: Zhang Jun felt that his two feet were particularly light, and he walked as light as a feather. They arrived in Beijing just before noon.

古文：复要于陕州宿，张辞力不能。
现代文：那个人又说要到陕州去住宿，张俨说自己体力不行，赶不到陕州。
English: The man also said that he wanted to go to Shaanxi for accommodation. Zhang Ye said that his physical strength was not enough to catch up with Shaanxi.

古文：又曰： 君可暂卸膝盖骨，且无所苦，当行八百。 
现代文：那个人又说： 你可以暂时把膝盖骨卸下来，并没什么痛苦，这样就能日行八百里。 
English: The man also said, "You can temporarily take off your kneecap, and there is no pain, so you can walk eight hundred miles a day."

古文：张惧辞之。
现代文：张俨害怕，便拒绝了。
English: Zhang Ye was afraid and refused.

古文：其人办不强，乃曰： 我有事，须暮及陕。 
现代文：那人也不勉强他，便说： 我有事，必须在天黑之前赶到陕州。 
English: The man did not try to force his way out and said: I have something to do, I have to get to Shaanxi before dark.

古文：遂去。行如飞，顷刻不见。
现代文：说完便上路了，走得像飞一样快，顷刻之间就看不到了。
English: Having said that, I went on my way, walking as fast as I could fly, and in an instant I couldn't see.

古文：奚乐山
现代文：奚乐山
English: Mount Pleasant

古文：上都通化门长店，多是车工之所居也。广备其财，募人集车，轮辕辐毂，皆有定价。
现代文：上都通化门的长店，多数是车工活集中的地方，店主们准备了大量的资金，招募工匠制作各种车上的零件，车轮车辕车辐车毂等，每样都有一定的价钱。
English: Most of the long shops in Tonghua Gate, Shangdu, are places where car workers are concentrated. The shop owners have prepared a large amount of funds to recruit craftsmen to make various parts on the car, such as wheels, spokes, etc. Everything has a certain price.

古文：每治片辋，通凿三窍，悬钱百文。
现代文：制作一片车辋，在上面凿通三个孔，规定工钱一百文。
English: To make a piece of carriage, three holes are drilled on it, and the wage is set at one hundred mon.

古文：虽敏手健力器用利锐者，日止一二而已。
现代文：有力气的快手，工具又锋利，一天也只能做一两片。
English: With his strong hands and sharp tools, he can only make one or two pieces a day.

古文：有奚乐山也，携持斧凿，诣门自售。视操度绳墨颇精，徐谓主人： 幸分别辋材，某当并力。 
现代文：有个叫奚乐山的人，背着斧子凿子之类，登门来卖手工，他见这里划线用的绳墨标尺之类用具非常精良，便不慌不忙地对店主人说： 希望你把做辋的材料都挑出来，我要一气做完。 
English: There was a man called Yu Leshan, who came to the door with an axe, chisel and the like on his back to sell handicrafts. He saw that the tools such as the rope-and-ink ruler used to draw lines here were very sophisticated, and he said unhurriedly to the owner of the shop: I hope you will pick out all the materials for making the shovel. I want to finish it in one go.

古文：主人讶其贪功，笑指一室曰： 此有六百片，可任意施为。 
现代文：主人见他如此贪功非常惊讶，笑着指指一间房子说： 这里面有六百片辋的材料，你可以随意施展你的本领。 
English: The owner was very surprised to see him so greedy, smiled and pointed to a house and said, "There are six hundred pieces of materials in this house, you can use your skills at will."

古文：乐山曰： 或欲通宵，请具灯烛。 
现代文：乐山说： 可能要打通宵，请准备一下灯火蜡烛。 
English: Leshan said: It may take all night, please prepare some lights and candles.

古文：主人谓其连夜，当倍常功，固不能多办矣，所请皆依。
现代文：主人听说他连夜干活，一天就相当两天的工夫，不能按通常天数计算准备那么多的灯油蜡烛。
English: His master had heard that he worked all night, and that one day was equivalent to two days' work, and that he could not prepare so many oil candles according to the usual number of days.

古文：乐山乃闭户屏人，丁丁不辍，及晓，启主人曰： 并已毕矣，愿受六十缗而去也。 
现代文：就给他准备了一些照明用的蜡烛。乐山关上房门不让别人打扰，一个人在屋里叮叮当当不住手地干了起来，到天亮时，告诉主人说： 全部做完了，我愿意收你六十缗钱就走。 
English: Leshan closed the door of the room so as not to be disturbed by others, and one person worked tirelessly in the room. At dawn, he told the owner: "Everything is done, I am willing to charge you sixty baht to leave."

古文：主人洎邻里大奇之。
现代文：主人及邻里们大为惊奇。
English: The owners and neighbours were astonished.

古文：则视所为精妙，锱铢无失，众共惊骇。
现代文：检视一下他干的活，件件都那么精细，没有一点微小的差错，大家都惊呆了。
English: Take a look at the work he's done, it's so detailed, there's not a single tiny mistake, everyone is stunned.

古文：即付其钱，乐山谢辞而去。
现代文：主人立即付给了他钱，乐山辞谢而去。
English: The owner immediately paid him the money, and Leshan thanked him and left.

古文：主人密候所之。
现代文：主人偷偷观察他的去向。
English: His master secretly watches his whereabouts.

古文：其时严雪累日，都下薪米翔贵。乐山遂以所得。遍散于寒乞贫窭不能自振之徒，俄顷而尽。
现代文：当时天气严寒，连日下雪，京都之内烧柴和粮米价格飞涨，乐山便将自己刚刚得到的工钱，分送给那些在大冷天里沿街乞讨苦苦挣扎的穷苦人，六十缗钱很快就分光了。
English: At that time, the weather was very cold, it snowed every day, and the price of firewood and grain and rice soared in Kyoto. Leshan gave the money he had just earned to the poor people who were struggling to beg along the streets in the cold weather. The sixty baht was soon all gone.

古文：遂南出都城，不复得而见矣。
现代文：他从南门走出京都，再也看不到他了。
English: He walked out of Kyoto through the south gate and was never seen again.

古文：王居士
现代文：王居士
English: Reverend Wang

古文：有常乐王居士者，耄年鹤发，精彩不衰。
现代文：王居士是个无忧无虑乐观通达的人，七八十岁的高龄，满头白发，仍然神采奕奕。
English: Wang Kushi is a carefree, optimistic and open-minded person. He is seventy or eighty years old, with a full head of white hair, and is still full of energy.

古文：常持珠诵佛，施药里巷。
现代文：他经常手拿串珠口诵佛经，沿街串巷地施舍药物。
English: He often recites Buddhist sutras with beads in his hands and gives out medicine along the streets.

古文：家属十余口，丰俭适中。
现代文：家里有十余口人，不太富裕也不太贫穷，属于中等人家。
English: There are more than ten people in the family, not too rich and not too poor, belonging to the middle class.

古文：一日游终南山之灵应台，台有观音殿基。询其僧。则曰： 梁栋栾栌，悉已具矣，属山路险峻，辇负上下，大役工徒，非三百缗不可集事。 
现代文：一天，他到终南山游览灵应台，灵应台有一座观音殿的基础，他询问这里的僧人，僧人说是梁栋栾栌之类的材料都已备齐了，因为这里山路很险峻，推车挑担上上下下地很费人力，没有三百缗钱是建不起来的。
English: One day, he went to Zhunan Mountain to visit Lingyingdai. Lingyingdai has the foundation of a Guanyin Hall. He asked the monks here. The monks said that materials such as beams and rafters have been prepared, because the mountain road here is very steep. It takes a lot of manpower to push the cart up and down. It can't be built without 300 baht.

古文：居士许诺，期旬曰赍镪而至。
现代文：居士向他许下诺言，第十天就把钱串带来。
English: The householder promised him that he would bring the money on the tenth day.

古文：入京，乃托于人曰： 有富室危病，医药不救者，某能活之。
现代文：居士来到京城里，托付别人说： 如果有富贵人家得了严重疾病，医药救治不了的，我能把他治活。
English: The householder came to the capital and entrusted others with the task of saying: If a rich person has a serious illness that cannot be cured by medicine, I can cure him and keep him alive.

古文：得三百千，则成南山佛屋矣。 
现代文：他们给我三百缗钱，我就可以成全终南山的观音殿了。 
English: They gave me 300 baht so that I could complete the Nanshan Guanyin Temple.

古文：果有延寿坊鬻金银珠玉者，女岁十五，遘病甚危，众医拱手不能措，愿以其价疗之。
现代文：果然有家在延寿坊卖金银珠宝的，有个女儿十五岁，得上一种病十分危险，请来的医生都拱手告辞表示不能治，他愿意花三百缗的价钱让居士给女儿治疗。
English: Sure enough, there was a family selling gold, silver, and jewelry in YanShouFang. They had a 15-year-old daughter who had a very dangerous disease. The doctors they had invited all declined to treat her, saying that they could not cure her. He was willing to pay 300 baht for a layman to treat his daughter.

古文：居士则设盟于笺，期之必效。且曰： 滞工役已久，今留神丹，不足多虑，某先驰此镪付所主僧。
现代文：居士在纸笺上立下保证，说到期一定兑现，并且说： 观音殿工程已经停工多日了，我把神丹留在这里，你不要多虑。我先赶快把这些钱送给那里的主持僧人，这样可以两面都不耽误。 
English: The layman made a guarantee on a slip of paper, saying that the due date would definitely be met, and said: The Guanyin Hall project has been suspended for many days, I will leave the Shintan here, don't worry. First, I will quickly send this money to the presiding monk there, so that both sides will not be delayed.

古文：冀获双济。 
现代文：这位卖金银的也信奉佛教，便同意了。
English: The gold and silver seller, who is also a Buddhist, agreed.

古文：鬻金者亦奉释教，因许之。
现代文：居士把神丹留在小壶里，带上钱串就去了。
English: The householder left the shintan in a small pot, took the money string and went away.

古文：留丹于小壶中，赍缗而往。涉旬无耗，女则物化。
现代文：过了十天也没有居士的消息，那个生病的女儿却死了。
English: After ten days and no word from the householder, the sick daughter died.

古文：其家始营哀具，居士杖策而回。
现代文：她家里刚把丧事安顿好，居士拄着拐杖回来了。
English: Her family had just settled the funeral arrangements, when the householder returned on crutches.

古文：乃诟骂。因拘将送于邑。
现代文：主人见了厉声痛骂，要把他抓起来送到衙门。
English: When his master saw him shouting and cursing, he wanted to arrest him and take him to the court.

古文：居士曰： 某苟大妄，安敢复来？
现代文：居士说： 我要是欺骗你们，哪里还敢再回来？
English: The householder said: If I deceive you, how can I dare to come back again?

古文：请入户视之。 
现代文：请让我进门看看。 
English: Please let me look through the door.

古文：则僵绝久矣。
现代文：进屋一看，已经僵死好长时间了。
English: When I entered the house, I saw that he had been dead for a long time.

古文：乃命密一室，焚槐柳之润者，涌烟于其间，人不可迩。中平一榻，藉尸其上，褫药数粒，杂置于顶鼻中。
现代文：他便叫人封闭一间屋子，焚烧鲜润的槐树和柳树枝条，在屋里放烟，任何人都不要靠近，屋子中间放一张床，让死尸躺在上面，将福药数粒杂乱地放在死人头顶和鼻孔里，又用铜器装上温水放在心窝处。
English: He then ordered a room to be closed off, fresh birch and willow branches to be burned, smoke to be let off in the room, no one to approach, a bed to be placed in the middle of the room for the corpse to lie on, a few blessed pills to be placed haphazardly on the top of the dead man's head and in his nostrils, and a copper vessel filled with warm water to be placed in his heart socket.

古文：又以铜器贮温水，置于心上，则谨户屏众伺之。及晓烟尽，薰黔其室，居士染指于水曰： 尚可救。 
现代文：然后关紧门窗屏退众人，静静地守候着。到天亮时烟已没了，屋内被薰得黑黑的，居士摸了摸墙上的烟灰，又把手指伸到水里，说： 还可以救活。 
English: Then he closed the doors and windows, screened off the crowd, and quietly waited. By dawn, the smoke was gone, and the house was blackened. The householder touched the soot on the wall, and stuck his finger in the water, saying: "It's still possible to save lives."

古文：亟命取乳，碎丹数粒，滴于唇吻，俄顷流入口中。喜曰： 无忧矣。 
现代文：急忙命人取来乳汁，把几粒神丹弄碎放在里面，然后滴在死者嘴唇上。乳汁很快流进死者的嘴里，居士高兴地说： 不用担忧了。 
English: He hurriedly ordered someone to fetch milk, crushed a few grains of wolfberry and put them in it, and then dripped it on the lips of the deceased. The milk quickly flowed into the mouth of the deceased, and the householder said happily, "Don't worry.

古文：则以纤纩蒙其鼻，复以温水置于心。
现代文：又将细棉絮蒙在她的鼻子上，换了温水放在心窝处。
English: She also put cotton wool on her nose and warm water on her heart.

古文：及夜，又执烛以俟，铜壶下漏数刻，鼻纩微嘘。又数刻，心水微滟。
现代文：到晚上，又端着蜡烛守候着，钟漏滴过几刻后就见鼻子上的细棉絮被嘘气微微吹动，又过了几刻，心窝上放的水也发生了轻微的波动。
English: In the evening, I waited with a candle, and after a few moments of the clock dripping, I saw the fine cotton wool on my nose being slightly blown by the wind, and after a few moments, the water placed on the socket also experienced slight fluctuations.

古文：则以前药复滴于鼻，须臾忽嚏，黎明胎息续矣。
现代文：居士又将前面用的那种药滴在鼻子上。没多久，忽然见她打起喷嚏来。
English: The householder put drops of the medicine she had used before on her nose again. Not long after, she suddenly started sneezing.

古文：一家惊异。愧谢王生。生乃更留药而去，或许再来，竟不复至。
现代文：黎明时，心脏终于恢复了跳动，全家人无不又惊又喜，惭愧地向王居士表示衷心感谢。居士又给他们留了药物就走了，可能还答应过再来，但一直没有再来过。
English: At dawn, the heart finally resumed beating. The whole family was both surprised and happy, and with shame expressed their heartfelt thanks to Wang Jushi. Jushi left them the medicine and left. He may have promised to come again, but he never came back.

古文：后移家他适。不知所从。
现代文：后来他搬家到别处去了，也不知到底去了什么地方。
English: Later, he moved to another place, and I don't know where he went.

古文：女适人，育数子而卒。
现代文：这个活过来的女子嫁了人，生了几个儿子之后去世了。
English: The woman who came back to life married and had several sons before she died.

古文：俞叟
现代文：俞叟
English: 

古文：江陵尹王潜有吏才，所在致理，但薄于义。
现代文：江陵府尹王潜有当官的才能，所管辖的工作条条有理，但为人不重情义。
English: Yin Wangqian of Gangneung has the ability to be an official, and the work he is responsible for is reasonable, but he does not care about the circumstances.

古文：在江陵日，有京兆吕氏子，以饥寒远谒潜，潜不为礼。
现代文：他在江陵的时候，有个京兆地区吕某的儿子，因为迫于饥寒远道来见王潜，王潜没有以礼相待。
English: When he was in Gangneung, there was a son of a certain Lu in the Jingzhao region, who was forced by hunger and cold to travel a long way to see Wang Qian. Wang Qian did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：月余在逆旅，未果还。
现代文：吕生在旅店里住了一个多月，回不去了。
English: Lv Sheng stayed in the hotel for more than a month and couldn't go back.

古文：有市门监俞叟者，见吕生往来有不足色，召而问之。
现代文：有个看守城门的俞老头儿，看见吕生出来进去脸色蜡黄肌瘦，招呼到跟前询问他。
English: A haggard old man guarding the city gate saw Lv Sheng come out and go in, his face sallow and thin, and called him forward to interrogate him.

古文：吕曰： 我居渭北。贫苦未达，无以奉亲。
现代文：吕生说： 我家住在渭北，家里穷，又没有出路，无以奉养双亲。
English: Lv Sheng said: My family lives in the north of Fujian Province. They are poor and have no way out. They have no way to support their parents.

古文：府帅王公，中表丈也。
现代文：本府元帅王相公是我的中表叔伯。
English: This prefecture's marshal, Wang Sangong, is my middle uncle.

古文：以亲旧自远而来，虽入谒，未尝一问，亦命之所致耶。 
现代文：靠着这层旧关系我才远道而来，我虽然进府拜见他，但他从未过问过我。
English: It was through this old relationship that I came all this way. Although I went to see him, he never asked about me.

古文：叟曰： 我亦困者，无以周吾子之急，今夕可泊我宇下，展宿食之敬。
现代文：这也是我命运不好，才落到这个地步呵！ 老头儿说： 我也是个穷人，没什么东西来救济你的急难，今晚上你就住在我家，让我提供食宿以表达对你的敬意。 
English: The old man said, "I am also a poor man, and have nothing to relieve your distress. Tonight you will stay at my house, and I will show my respect by providing you with board and lodging."

古文：吕诺之。
现代文：吕生接受了他的请求。
English: Lv Sheng accepted his request.

古文：既延入，摧帘破牖，致席于地，坐语且久，所食陶器脱粟而已。
现代文：被领到他家后，看到的是残损的房檐和破旧的门窗，他们在地上摆席，对坐谈了很久，吃的是粗米饭，用的是泥盆泥碗。
English: After being led to his house, they saw the damaged eaves and dilapidated doors and windows. They sat on the floor and talked for a long time, eating coarse rice and using a mud bowl.

古文：叟曰： 吾尝学道于四明山，偶晦于此。
现代文：老头儿说： 我曾在四明山学过道，暂时在这里藏身。
English: The old man said, "I used to study in Shiming Mountain and hid here for a while.

古文：适闻王公忘旧，甚讶之。
现代文：刚才听说王相公不念旧情义，叫我很惊讶。 
English: Just now, I heard that Wang Xianggong does not remember the old situation, which surprised me.

古文：因覆一缶于地。俄顷，乃举以视之，有一紫衣人，长五寸许。
现代文：说完，便把一只缸扣在地上，不一会儿又把缸拿了起来，只见缸底下有一个穿着紫色衣服的人，身长五寸左右。
English: Having said this, he clamped a jar to the ground, and a moment later he picked it up again, only to see underneath the jar a man in purple clothing, about five inches tall.

古文：叟指之谓吕曰： 此王公也。
现代文：老头儿指着这个人对吕生说： 这就是王潜。 
English: The old man pointed to this man and said to Lv Sheng: This is Wang Qian.

古文：吕熟视，酷类焉。
现代文：吕生仔细看了看，果然特别相像。
English: Lv Sheng took a closer look, and the resemblance was striking.

古文：叟因戒曰： 吕生尔之中表侄也，以旨甘无朝夕之给，自辇下千里而至。
现代文：老头儿告诫这个人说： 吕生是你的中表侄儿，因为吃了上顿没下顿，才从京都不远千里来到这里，你应该供给他优厚的食宿，应该送给他钱财。
English: The old man admonished the man, saying: Lv Sheng is your middle cousin. He came here from Kyoto, thousands of miles away, because he had eaten a lot. You should provide him with good food and lodging, and give him money.

古文：尔宜厚其馆谷，当金帛为赠，何恃贵忘故之如是耶？ 紫衣者卑揖，若受教之状，遂不复见。
现代文：为什么仰仗着自己富贵就不念旧的情义呢！ 紫衣人谦卑地做揖致礼，就像接受了教训的样子，然后就不见了。
English: Why do they rely on their wealth and not think about old feelings? The man in purple bowed humbly, as if he had learned a lesson, and then disappeared.

古文：及旦，叟促吕归其逆旅。
现代文：第二天早上，老头儿督促吕生回到他的客店。
English: The next morning, the old man urged Lv Sheng to return to his inn.

古文：潜召吕馆之，宴语累日。
现代文：王潜召见吕生把他安置在客馆里，跟他宴筵说话，一连好多天。
English: Wang Qian summoned Lv Sheng, put him up in a guest house, and talked with him for many days.

古文：将戒途，助以仆马橐装甚厚。
现代文：吕生要登程回家，王潜送给他道上骑的马，侍候他的仆人，行李包也给装满贵重的东西。
English: Lv Sheng wanted to go home. Wang Qian gave him a horse to ride, servants to wait on him, and a suitcase full of valuables.

古文：衡岳道人
现代文：衡岳道人
English: Heng Yue Taoist

古文：衡岳西原，近朱陵洞，其山险绝，多大木猛兽。人到者率迷路，或遇巨蛇不得进。
现代文：衡山西面原野附近有个朱陵洞，这里山势险峻奇绝，有许多大树和猛兽，人到了这里都会迷路，或者遇上巨大的蟒蛇挡住道路而不能前进。
English: There is a Zhuling Cave near the plain on the west side of Hengshan Mountain. The mountain here is extremely steep, with many large trees and fierce beasts. Anyone who comes here will get lost, or encounter a huge python blocking the road and not be able to move forward.

古文：长庆中，有头陀悟空，常裹粮持锡，夜入山林，越尸侵虎，初无所惧。
现代文：长庆年间，有个僧人悟空，经常带着干粮拿着锡杖，在夜间进入山林。越过死人的尸体侵扰凶猛的老虎，开始时毫无惧怕。
English: During the Long Qing Dynasty, there was a monk named Goku, who often went into the mountain forest at night with a cane, carrying dried grain. He walked over the corpses of the dead to infest the ferocious tigers, and at first he had no fear.

古文：至朱陵原，游览累日，扪萝垂踵，无幽不迹。
现代文：到了朱陵原，游览了好几天，他攀援藤萝飞越沟壑，幽深僻静的地方都有他的足迹。
English: When he arrived at Zhulingyuan, he toured for several days. He climbed to help the wisteria fly over the ravine. His footprints can be found in the deep and secluded places.

古文：因是趼拆，憩于岩下，长吁曰： 饥渴如此，不遇主人。 
现代文：因为脚底生茧开裂，便在岩石下面休息。他长叹道： 如此又饿又渴，却见不到此地的主人！ 
English: He was resting under a rock because of a crack in the sole of his foot. He sighed, "I am so hungry and thirsty, but I can't see the owner of this place!"

古文：忽见前岩有道士坐绳床，僧诣之，不动。
现代文：忽见前面山崖上有个道士坐在绳子编织的床上，僧人悟空到了他跟前，他也不动一动。
English: Suddenly, he saw a Taoist monk sitting on a rope-woven bed on the cliff in front of him. When the monk Goku came up to him, he didn't move.

古文：遂责其无宾主意，复告以饥困。
现代文：僧人责备他未尽宾主之礼，又告诉他自己又饿又累。
English: The monk scolded him for not doing the host's bidding and told him that he was hungry and tired.

古文：道士欻起。指石地曰： 此有米及钁。 
现代文：道士忽然起身，指着地上的石头说： 这里有米和锅。 
English: The priest suddenly stood up, pointed to a stone on the ground and said, "Here is rice and a pot.

古文：劚石深数寸，令僧探之，得陈米斗余，即置于釜。
现代文：在石头上挖了几寸深，叫僧人伸进手去，拿到一斗多陈米，立即将米放在锅里，接了瀑布的水，敲石取火煮饭。
English: He dug a few inches deep into the stone and asked the monk to reach into his hand and get a bucket of stale rice. He immediately put the rice in the pot, took the water from the waterfall, and knocked on the stone to get the fire to cook rice.

古文：承瀑水，敲火煮饭，观僧食一口未尽。辞以未熟，道士笑曰： 君餐止此，可谓薄食，我当毕之。 
现代文：道士见僧人一口饭没全咽下去，就说饭没熟，不吃了，笑道： 你这顿饭就吃到这里为止，这叫少吃多得胃；我应当把其余的饭全吃了。 
English: Seeing that the monk hadn't swallowed his entire meal in one bite, the Taoist priest said that the meal wasn't cooked and he wouldn't eat it. He smiled and said, "You should have eaten this meal up to here. This is called eating less to have a full stomach. I should have eaten the rest of the meal."

古文：遂吃硬饭。
现代文：说完便去吃那硬梆梆的饭。
English: Having said that, I went to eat the hard-boiled rice.

古文：又曰： 我为客设戏。 
现代文：道士又说： 我为客人表演一个游戏。 
English: The Taoist also said: I am performing a game for the guests.

古文：乃处木袅枝，投盖危石，猿悬鸟跂，真捷闪目，有顷，又旋绕绳床，蓬转甚急，但睹衣色成规，倏忽失所。
现代文：说完，便坐到柔软的树枝上荡来荡去，就像从高处抛下来的石头，又像悬挂着的猿猴，跳来跳去的山鸟，灵巧轻捷，令人看了眼花缭乱。过了一会儿，又去旋转那个绳子床，像转篷一样急速地转动着，只看到很有规则地排列成各种衣服的花色，根本看不出就是原来那个绳子床。
English: Having said this, he sat down and swung around on the soft branches of the tree, like a stone thrown from a height, like a hanging monkey, a mountain bird jumping around, dexterous and light, dazzling. After a while, he went to rotate the rope bed again, spinning rapidly like a turntable, only to see the colors of various clothes arranged very regularly, and he could not see the original rope bed at all.

古文：僧寻路归寺，数月不复饥渴。
现代文：突然之间，什么也不见了。僧人寻找道路走出山林回到了寺庙，此后一连几个月不再感到饥饿和口渴。
English: All of a sudden, nothing was there. The monk found his way out of the forest and back to the temple, and for the next few months he no longer felt hungry or thirsty.

古文：李业
现代文：李业
English: Lee Yeung

古文：李业举进士，因下第，过陕虢山路，值暴雷雨，投村舍避之。
现代文：李业参加选拔进士的考试，没有考中，往回走的时候路过陕虢一带的山路，正赶上暴风雷雨，便到附近的村舍去躲避。
English: Li Ye took part in the examination for the selection of candidates, but did not pass the middle school entrance examination. When he was walking back, he passed through the mountain roads around Shaanxi and Fujian. When he was catching up with the storm and thunderstorms, he went to a nearby village to take shelter.

古文：邻里甚远，村家只有一小童看舍，业牵驴拴于檐下。
现代文：这里的人家相互离得很远，这家只有一个小孩在家看门，李业把驴拴在了房檐下。
English: People here live far away from each other. There is only one child at home to watch the door, and Li Ye has tied his donkey under the eaves of the house.

古文：左军李生与行官杨镇亦投舍中，李有一马。
现代文：左军李生与行官杨镇也为避雨来到这一家，李有一匹马。
English: Li Sheng of the Left Army and Yang Zhen, a magistrate, also came to this house to avoid the rain. Li had a horse.

古文：相与入止舍内。及稍霁，已暮矣。
现代文：三人一块儿进屋休息，等到天气稍微转晴时，已经黑天了。
English: The three of them went into the house together to rest, and by the time the weather had cleared up a little, it was already dark.

古文：小童曰： 阿翁即欲归，不喜见宾客，可去矣。 
现代文：小孩说： 爷爷马上就要回家了，他不喜欢接待客人，你们还是走吧！ 
English: The child said: Grandpa will be home soon, he doesn't like to receive guests, you should go!

古文：业谓曰： 此去人家极远，日势已晚，固不可前去也。 
现代文：李业对他说： 天色已经很晚，所以不能往前走了。 
English: Li Ye said to him: It's getting late, so I can't go any further.

古文：臾老翁归，见客欣然。异礼延接。留止宿。
现代文：过了一会儿老爷爷回来了，见到客人很高兴，以特殊的礼节接待他们，留他们在家住宿。
English: After a while, the grandfather returned, delighted to see his guests, received them with special courtesy, and let them stay at home.

古文：既晓恳留。欲备馔。
现代文：第二天早上，又诚恳地挽留他们，还要准备饭。
English: The next morning, he earnestly detained them again and had to prepare a meal.

古文：业愧谢再三。因言曰： 孙子云阿翁不爱宾客，某又疑夜前去不得，甚忧怪及。
现代文：李业再三表示歉意和感谢，便说： 你孙子说爷爷不喜欢客人，我又担心夜晚不能再往前走。
English: After repeatedly apologizing and thanking him, Li Ye said, "Your grandson said that grandpa doesn't like guests. I'm worried that I won't be able to go any further tonight."

古文：不意过礼周旋，何以当此？ 
现代文：留下后，很怕您怪罪，不料您竟以这么重的礼节为我们忙碌，我们有什么资格担得起这样？ 
English: After I left, I was afraid that you would blame me, but you were so busy for us with such a heavy etiquette. What qualifications do we have to be able to afford this?

古文：翁曰： 某家贫，无以伫宾，惭于接客，非不好客也。
现代文：爷爷说： 我家贫穷，没有条件接纳客人。我是不好意思接待客人，并非不喜欢客人。
English: Grandpa said: My family is poor, and we don't have the conditions to receive guests. I'm embarrassed to receive guests, but I don't dislike them.

古文：然三人皆节度使，何敢不祗奉耶？ 
现代文：但是你们三位都是节度使，我哪敢不恭恭敬敬地侍奉呢？ 
English: But all three of you are ceremonial envoys. How dare I not serve you with dignity and respect?

古文：业曰： 三人之中，一人行官耳，言之过矣。 
现代文：李业说： 我们三人之中，只且一个人是个行官而已，您说错了！ 
English: Li Ye said: Of the three of us, only one is an official. You are wrong!

古文：翁曰： 行官领节钺在兵马使之前，秀才节制在兵马使之后。然秀才五节钺，勉自爱也。 
现代文：老爷爷说： 行官管领节镇在兵马使之职以前，秀才你当节度使管领节镇则在兵马使之职以后，但你能统辖五个节镇，你要自勉自爱呀！ 
English: The old grandpa said, "The officer in charge of the festival town was in charge before the soldiers and horses took over, while the scholar in charge of the festival town was in charge after the soldiers and horses took over, but you can control five festival towns. You should be proud of yourself!"

古文：既数年不第，业从戎幕矣。
现代文：李业既然多年应举没有考中，便从戎作了幕僚。
English: Since Li Ye did not take the middle school entrance examination for many years, he became a staff member from the army.

古文：明年，杨镇为仇士良开府擢用，累职至军使，除泾州节度使。李与镇同时为军使，领邠州节度。
现代文：第二年，杨镇被仇士良开府提拔使用，逐级提拔直到军使，授为泾州节度使；李业与杨镇同时为军使，管领邠州的节度。
English: In the second year, Yang Zhen was promoted and used by Qiu Shiliang Kaifu, promoted step by step until he was promoted to the military envoy and awarded as the festival envoy of Zhangzhou; Li Ye and Yang Zhen were both military envoys, in charge of the festival of Zhangzhou.

古文：业以党顼功除振武邠泾，凡五镇旌钺。
现代文：李业后来因党顼之功被任命为邠泾振武节度使，管辖五个重镇的军务。
English: Later, Li Ye was appointed as the military attaché to the Zhenwu Festival for his distinguished service to the Party. He was responsible for the military affairs of five major towns.

古文：一如老翁之言。
现代文：这些都跟当年那位老头子所说的一致。
English: All of this is consistent with what the old man said back then.

古文：石旻
现代文：石旻
English: Stonehenge

古文：会昌中，有石旻者，蕴至术。
现代文：唐代会昌年间，有个叫石旻的人，身怀绝技。
English: During the Heichang period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Shijun who had a special ability.

古文：尝游宛陵，宿雷氏林亭。
现代文：他曾经到宛陵去旅游，住在雷林亭家里。
English: He once traveled to Wanling and stayed at Lei Lin Ting's home.

古文：时雷之家僮网获一巨鱼，以雷宴客醉卧，未及启之。
现代文：当时雷的家僮用网捕获一条大鱼，因为雷宴请客人喝醉后睡着了，所以没有来得及收拾。
English: At that time, Lei's family egret caught a big fish with a net, because the guests of Lei's banquet were drunk and fell asleep, so they did not have time to clean up.

古文：值天方蒸暑，及明日，其鱼已败，将弃去。旻曰： 吾有药，可令活，何弃之有？ 
现代文：正赶上是炎热的暑季，第二天那条鱼就腐败了。要拿出去扔掉时，石旻说： 我有药可以使它活过来，为什么要扔掉呢？ 
English: Just in time for the hot summer season, the next day the fish was rotten. When it was time to take it out and throw it away, Shi Yan said: I have medicine to bring it back to life, why throw it away?

古文：雷大奇之，因拜请延年之饵。旻曰： 吾之药。
现代文：雷便请他处置。石旻将一粒药丸放进鱼嘴里，不一会儿就见鱼鳞和鱼尾都在活动，那条鱼变得跟原来一样新鲜滋润。雷大为惊奇，便向石旻请求延年益寿的药物。
English: Lei asked him to deal with it. Shi Hao put a pill into the fish's mouth, and soon saw that the fish's scales and tail were moving, and the fish became as fresh and moist as before. Lei was very surprised and asked Shi Hao for a drug to prolong life.

古文：至清至洁。尔曹嗜欲无节，脏腑之内，诸秽委集。若遽食之，若水火相攻，安能全其人乎？
现代文：石旻说： 我的药是极为清洁干净的，你们的嗜好欲望毫无节制，五脏六腑之内什么污秽东西都有，如果骤然间吃下我的药，就像水与火互相攻克一样，哪能保全人的身体呢？
English: Shi Hao said, "My medicine is extremely pure and clean. Your hobbies and desires are unrestrained. There are all kinds of filthy things in your internal organs. If you suddenly take my medicine, it will be like water and fire fighting each other. How can you protect your body?

古文：但神仙可学，人自多累。如笼禽槛猿，徒有骞翔腾跃之志，安可致焉！ 
现代文：求仙长寿虽然可以学，但是人的自身有太多的累赘；正像樊笼里面的鸟和猴子一样，空有飞翔腾跃的愿望，可又怎么能实现呢！ 
English: Although it is possible to learn to ask the immortals for a long life, there are too many burdens for human beings themselves; just like the birds and monkeys in the cocoon, there is a desire to fly in the sky, but how can it be realized!

古文：管涔山隐者
现代文：管涔山隐者
English: Guan Lushan hermit

古文：李德裕尝云：三遇异人，非卜祝之流，皆遁世者也。
现代文：李德裕曾经说过：他三次遇到异人，这三个异人并非卜卦算命的，都是遁世的隐士。
English: Li Deyu once said that he had three encounters with aliens. These three aliens were not fortune-tellers, but hermits from another world.

古文：初掌记北门，有管涔山隐者，谓德裕曰： 君明年当在人君左右为文翰之职，然须值少主，德裕闻之愕眙，洒然变色。
现代文：他当初掌管北门时，有个管涔山的隐士对他说： 你明年要在君主身边担任文秘职务，但是必须为少主服务。 德裕听了惊得目瞪口呆，顿时改变了脸色。
English: When he was in charge of the North Gate, a hermit in charge of Lushan told him: "You will serve as a secretary next year around the monarch, but you must serve the young master." Deyu was stunned and changed his face.

古文：隐者似悔失言，避席求去。
现代文：隐士好像后悔自己刚才失言，离开座位要走。
English: The hermit seemed to regret his slip of the tongue, and left his seat to go.

古文：德裕问曰： 何为而事少主？ 。
现代文：德裕问道： 为什么必须侍奉少主？ 
English: Deyu asked: Why do you have to serve the young master?

古文：对曰： 君与少主已有累世因缘，是以言之。 
现代文：答道： 你与少主已有几代因缘，所以我这么说。 
English: He replied: You have been related to the young master for several generations, so that's why I said that.

古文：德裕其年秋登朝。至明年正月，穆宗篡绪，召入禁苑。
现代文：德裕在那年秋季被召入朝廷，到第二年正月，穆宗篡夺皇位，召他入皇宫。
English: In the autumn of that year, Deyu was summoned to the imperial court, and in the first month of the following year, Muzong usurped the imperial throne and summoned him to the imperial palace.

古文：及为中丞。有闽中隐者叩门请见。
现代文：到他任中丞时，有一位闽中的隐士叩门求见，德裕下床相见，隐士对他说： 眼前的局面不会长久。
English: When he was appointed as chujo, a hermit knocked on his door and asked to see him. Deyu got out of bed to meet him, and the hermit said to him: The current situation will not last long.

古文：德裕下榻与语曰： 时事非久，公不早去，冬必作相，祸将至矣。
现代文：你如果不尽早离开这里，冬季必定作宰相，但要有灾祸降临呀！
English: If you don't get out of here as soon as possible, you'll be prime minister by winter, but it will be a disaster!

古文：若亟请居外，代公者受患。
现代文：如果赶紧请求去外地任职，代替你的人就会受害。
English: If you rush to apply for a post abroad, the person who replaces you will suffer.

古文：公后十年，终当作相，自西而入。 
现代文：十年之后，你会当上宰相的，而且是从西面进京入宫的。 
English: Ten years from now, you will be the prime minister, and you will enter the palace from the west.

古文：是秋出镇吴门，经岁入觐，寻又杖钺南燕。
现代文：这一年秋季德裕出京镇守吴门，过了一年入朝拜见皇上，接着又被派到南燕镇守。
English: In the autumn of that year, Deyu went to Beijing to guard Wumen, and a year later he went to the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor, after which he was sent to guard Nanyan.

古文：秋暮，有邑子于生引邺郡道士而至，才升宾阶，未及命席，谓德裕曰： 公当授西南节制，孟冬望舒前，符节至矣。 
现代文：秋末，县邑里有个于生领着一位邺郡的道士来见德裕，才走上宾客的位置，没等到让座就对德裕说： 你要被任命为西南节制。十月十五日之前，西南边关的符节就能送到。 
English: At the end of autumn, a man from the county town brought a Taoist priest from Jixian County to see Deyu. He took the guest's seat and said to Deyu without waiting for him to give up his seat: "You will be appointed as the southwestern temperance. Before October 15th, the rune festival of the southwestern border can be delivered."

古文：三者皆与言协，不差岁月。
现代文：以上三个异人说的事情历来都与他们的预言相吻合，连时间都没有出入。
English: The things said by the above three strangers have always coincided with their prophecies, even the time has not deviated.

古文：自宪闱竟十年居相，由西蜀而入。
现代文：自从宪宗在宫闱被禁，过了十年德裕官居相位，而且是由西蜀入京入宫的。
English: Since the Jianzong was banned in the palace, it has been ten years since the Deyu has been in power, and it was from the West Shu that he entered Beijing and entered the palace.

古文：代德裕执宪者，俄亦窜逐。
现代文：代替德裕执政的人，很快就被放逐了。
English: The man who replaced Deyu in power was soon exiled.

古文：唯再调南服，未尝有前知之士，为德裕言之。
现代文：只有后来德裕又调出朝廷到了南边，未曾有先知道的人对他预先说过。
English: It was only later that Deyu transferred the imperial court to the south, and no one who knew about it beforehand told him about it.

古文：岂祸患不可前告，神道所秘，莫得预闻乎？
现代文：莫非属于灾祸患难的事情不可提前告诉本人，这是神灵道家的秘密，不能预先知闻吗？
English: Isn't it true that things that are disasters and tribulations should not be told to oneself in advance? This is the secret of God's spiritual family, can't it be known in advance?

古文：宋师儒
现代文：宋师儒
English: Song Shiru

古文：宋师儒者，累为盐铁小职，预知吉凶之事。
现代文：宋师儒多年担任盐铁事务方面的小职务，能够预知吉凶之类的事情。
English: For many years, Song Shiru served as a minor official in salt and iron affairs, and was able to predict things such as good and bad luck.

古文：淮南王太尉璠甚重之。
现代文：淮南王璠非常器重他。
English: The king of Huainan attaches great importance to him.

古文：时淮南有僧常监者，言事亦有中。
现代文：当时淮南有个和尚叫常监，谈论未来的事情也能说中。
English: At that time, there was a monk in Huainan called Changjun, who could also speak about the future.

古文：常监在从事院话道，师儒续入，常监甚轻之，微不为礼。
现代文：常监在从事院讲道，师儒是后去的，常监很看不起他，对他有点不大礼貌。
English: The standing supervisor was engaged in a lecture at the academy. Shiru was the last to leave. The standing supervisor looked down on him and was a bit rude to him.

古文：师儒不乐曰： 和尚有重厄，厄在岁尽。
现代文：师儒不高兴，说： 和尚有重大灾难，灾难就在年末。 
English: The master was not happy and said, "Monk, there will be a major disaster, and the disaster will occur at the end of the year.

古文：常监瞋目曰： 有何事？ 
现代文：常监瞪大两眼说： 有啥事？
English: The supervisor always stared wide-eyed and said: What's going on?

古文：莫相恐吓，某还自辨东西，师儒曰： 和尚厄且至，但记取去岁数日莫出城，莫骑骏马子。 
现代文：不要恐吓我，我还能够自己辨认东西南北！ 师儒说： 你肯定有灾难，而且快要降临了。你只要记住春节前的几天不要出城，不要骑骏马。 
English: Don't intimidate me, I can still identify the north, south, east and west by myself! Shiru said, "You are sure to have a disaster, and it's about to happen. Just remember not to go out of town for a few days before the Spring Festival, and don't ride a horse."

古文：常监勃然而去。
现代文：常监气冲冲地走了。
English: The inspector-general left in a huff.

古文：后数月，从事郑侍御新买一骏马，甚豪骏，将迎常监。
现代文：过了几个月，从事郑侍御新买了一匹骏马，非常剽悍暴烈；要用这匹马迎接常监。
English: A few months later, Emperor Zhengzang bought a horse, which was very fierce; he wanted to use it to greet the chief inspector.

古文：常监曰： 此非宋师儒之言骏马子，且要骑来。 
现代文：常监说： 这不是宋师儒所说的那骏马吧，我偏要骑。 
English: The standing supervisor said, "This is not the good horse that Song Shiru said, I want to ride it."

古文：未行数里，下桥，会有负巨竹束者，掷之于地，正当马前，惊走入隘巷中。
现代文：没走上几里路便要下桥，恰巧有人背着一大捆竹子走过来，突然把竹子扔在地上，正好就扔在马的跟前。
English: After walking for a few miles, they were about to get off the bridge when someone carrying a large bundle of bamboo came along and suddenly threw the bamboo on the ground, right in front of the horse.

古文：常监身曳于地，足悬于镫，行数里，人方救得。
现代文：马受惊后跑进一条狭窄的胡同，常监的身子拖在地上，一脚挂在马镫里，拖出几里远才被救下来。
English: After the horse was frightened, it ran into a narrow alley. The body of the prison guard was dragged on the ground, with one foot in the stirrup, and dragged several miles before being rescued.

古文：脑破，血流被体，食顷不知人事，床舁归寺。
现代文：脑袋破了血流了遍身，不一会儿又不省人事了，被用床抬回了寺庙。
English: His head was broken and blood flowed all over his body. Soon he lost consciousness and was carried back to the temple on a bed.

古文：太尉及从事召宋君曰： 此可免乎？ 
现代文：太尉与从事召见宋师儒，说： 这回他的灾难可以免除了吧。 
English: The captain summoned Song Shiru and said, "This time, his disaster can be avoided.

古文：曰： 彼院竹林中，有物未去，须慎空隙之所。 
现代文：师儒说： 在他们寺院的竹林里，有个什么东西没有除去，他必须小心留神空隙的地方。 
English: The master said: In the bamboo grove of their temple, there is a place where something has not been removed, and he must be careful to look out for the gap.

古文：常监饮药酒，服地黄太多，因腹疾，夜起如厕。
现代文：常监饮用药酒，服用的地黄太多了，所以肚子坏了。
English: The inspector drank medicinal liquor and took too much ground ambergris, which made his stomach upset.

古文：弟子不知，被一黑物推之，陷于厕中。叫呼良久，弟子方来。
现代文：夜间起来上厕所，弟子不知道，被一个黑乎乎的东西推进大便坑里，他呼叫了半天，弟子才去把他救上来。
English: He got up in the night to go to the toilet, and unbeknownst to his disciple, he was pushed into the cesspit by a dark-coloured object. He cried for half a day before his disciple went to rescue him.

古文：自颈已下，悉被沾污，时正寒，淋洗冻凛，又少顷不知人事。
现代文：从脖子往下全被弄脏了，当时正是寒冷季节，淋洗的时候冻坏了，又有一阵子不省人事。
English: He was dirty from the neck down, it was the cold season, he froze during the shower, and he was unconscious for a while.

古文：王太尉与从事速召宋君，大是奇事。 今复得免否？ 
现代文：王太尉与从事急忙召见宋师儒，对他料事如神深表佩服和惊奇，又问道： 今天又出了这桩事，他的灾难能不能免除？ 
English: Wang Taifeng hurriedly summoned Song Shiru and expressed deep admiration and surprise for his miraculous deeds. He also asked: "This thing happened again today. Can his disaster be avoided?"

古文：曰： 须得邻近有僧暴卒者，方可。 
现代文：师儒说： 必须得有个邻近的和尚突然死去了，他的灾难才能免除。 
English: The master said, "A nearby monk must have died suddenly for his misfortune to be spared."

古文：王公专令人伺之。
现代文：王太尉专门令人注意这件事。
English: Second Lieutenant Wang made a point of drawing attention to this.

古文：其西屋老僧疾困而毙。王公曰： 此免矣。
现代文：常监西屋的一个老和尚病重而死，王太尉说： 这回常监的灾难可以免除了！ 
English: One of the old monks of the permanent prison Westinghouse fell seriously ill and died. Lieutenant Wang said: This time the disaster of the permanent prison can be avoided!

古文：曰。须得强壮无疾者，此不得免。 
现代文：师儒说： 必须是身体强壮没有疾病的。这一个不算数。 
English: The master said, "He must be physically strong and free from disease. This one doesn't count."

古文：数日，有少僧剃头，伤刀中风，一疾而卒。
现代文：过了几天，有一个年轻的和尚在剃头时，被刀割伤中了风，一下子死去了。
English: A few days later, a young monk was shaving his head when he was slashed with a knife, suffered a stroke, and died suddenly.

古文：宋君曰： 此则无事也。 
现代文：宋师儒说： 这一回就没有事了。 
English: Song Shiru said: This time, there is no problem.

古文：王公益待以厚礼，常监因与宋君亲善。
现代文：从此，王太尉更加以厚礼相待于宋师儒，常监也因此跟他亲近友好了。
English: From then on, Wang Taifu treated Song Shiru with more courtesy, and the chief inspector became close friends with him as a result.

古文：会昌狂士
现代文：会昌狂士
English: Hoichang Madman

古文：会昌开成中，含元殿换一柱，敕右军采造，选其材合尺度者。军司下周至山场，弥年未构，悬重赏。
现代文：在唐朝的会昌与开成年间，含元殿要更换一根主柱，皇上命令右军负责采伐和制作，要选择合乎尺寸的木材，军司们下到周至一带的山场，整整一年也没采伐到这样的树，便悬重赏广泛征求。
English: During the Huichang and Kaifeng Dynasties of the Tang Dynasty, the main pillar of the Hanyuan Hall had to be replaced. The emperor ordered the right army to be responsible for logging and production, and to choose the wood that matched the size. The army officers went down to the mountain fields around Zhou and did not harvest such a tree for a whole year, and then the reward was widely solicited.

古文：有工人贪赏，穷幽扪险，人迹不到，猛兽成群。遇一巨材，径将袤丈，其长百余尺，正中其选。
现代文：有个人贪图重赏。不惜探幽历险，在人迹不到猛兽成群的地方遇到了一棵大树，有将近一丈粗，长有一百余尺，正符合要求。
English: One person was greedy for a reward. He did not hesitate to explore the adventure, and in a place where there were no traces of people or hordes of wild beasts, he encountered a large tree. It was nearly a meter thick and more than a hundred feet long, which met the requirements.

古文：伐之倒，以俟三伏潦水涧流，方及谷口，千百夫运曳，始及砥平之处。
现代文：先把它砍倒，等到三伏天山洪爆发时才被水冲到山谷出口处，又由成百上千个人牵拉到河床平坦的地方。
English: They cut it down first, and when the mountain torrents broke out on the third day of the second lunar month, it was washed to the exit of the valley and pulled by hundreds and thousands of people to a flat place on the riverbed.

古文：两军相贺奏闻矣。
现代文：两岸的军人为终于成功地找到并运下这棵大树而欢呼庆贺，并且奏禀皇上。
English: The soldiers on both sides of the strait cheered and celebrated for finally successfully finding and transporting this big tree, and played the Emperor's bugle.

古文：净材以俟有司选日之际，欻有一狂士，状若术人，绕材太息惋咨，唧唧声甚厉。守卫者叱责，欲縻之。其人略无所惧。
现代文：在锯掉桠杈加工成材以备主管人员挑选的时候，突然来了一个狂士，状貌好像个懂得法术的人，他绕着大树叹息感慨，嘟嘟哝哝地没完没了，守卫人员厉声呵叱并想用绳子绑他，他却一点儿也不惧怕，过了一会儿，这里的头头儿便把他抓起来，报告了皇上。
English: While he was sawing the birch and preparing it for selection by the superintendent, there suddenly came a madman, who looked like a man who knew magic. He was sighing and moaning around the tree. The guards scolded him and wanted to tie him with a rope, but he was not afraid at all. After a while, the boss here caught him and reported to the emperor.

古文：俄顷，主者执之，闻于君主，中外异之。听其所说： 须当中锯解，至二尺见验矣。
现代文：朝廷内外的人无不感到惊异。据他所说，这棵树必须从中间锯开，锯到二尺深时他的话就会应验。
English: Everyone inside and outside the court was astonished. According to him, the tree had to be sawn down the middle, and when it was two feet deep, his words would come true.

古文：解一尺八寸，但讶霏色红殷，至二寸血流矣。
现代文：当锯到一尺八寸深时，令人惊讶地发现，飞出来的木屑竟是深红色的。再往下锯二寸，便见流出来的全是血了。
English: When he sawed to a depth of one foot eight inches, he was surprised to find that the wood chips that flew out were deep red. When he sawed two inches further down, all that came out was blood.

古文：急命千百人推曳渭流听下。
现代文：于是，急忙命令千百个人推到渭水里面，任它顺水漂去。
English: As a result, he hastily ordered thousands of people to push the towboat into the swampy water and let it float away.

古文：其人云： 深山大泽。实生龙蛇。此材中是巨蟒，更十年，当出树杪而去。未闻长养于中，若为殿柱，十年后，必载此殿而之他国。
现代文：那个狂人说： 在深山大泽里面确实生长着龙和蛇，这棵树是生长着的一条巨蟒，再过十年它就会从树梢飞出去，没听说长久养活在这里面的；如果拿它来作殿堂的柱子。十年之后，它必定会驮载着这座殿堂飞到别的地方去。
English: The madman said: "In the depths of the mountains and lakes, dragons and snakes do indeed grow. This tree is a giant dragonfly that is growing. In another ten years, it will fly out of the treetops. I have never heard of it being kept alive for a long time. If it were to be used as a pillar for a temple, after ten years, it would surely fly away, carrying the temple with it.

古文：吁可畏也。 
现代文：好家伙！多么可怕呀！ 
English: Good grief! How awful!

古文：言讫，失人所在。
现代文：说完，此人就闪身不见了。
English: After saying this, the man disappeared.

古文：唐庆
现代文：唐庆
English: Tang Qing

古文：寿州唐庆中丞栖泊京都，偶雇得月作人，颇极专谨，常不言钱。冬首暴处雪中。
现代文：寿州的唐庆中丞住在京都，偶而雇佣到一个打短工的人，十分勤劳用心，从来不提钱的事，冬天把脑袋露在风雪之中也不怕冷。
English: Shoushu's Tang Qing Zhongzheng lives in Kyoto. He occasionally hires a part-time worker, who is very diligent and never mentions money. In winter, he is not afraid to bare his head in the snow.

古文：亲从外至，见卧雪中，呼起，雪厚数寸，都无寒色，与唐君话。
现代文：唐庆有一次从外面回来，亲眼看见他躺在积雪之中，便招呼他起来，地下的雪有几寸厚，他却一点儿也看不出冷的样子，照常与唐君说话。
English: Tang Qing once came back from outside and saw him lying in the snow with his own eyes. He called him to get up. The snow under the ground was a few inches thick, but he could not see the cold at all. He talked to Tang Jun as usual.

古文：深异之。
现代文：唐庆对此深感惊异。
English: Tang Qing was deeply surprised by this.

古文：唐后为摧盐使，过河中，乃别归。
现代文：唐庆后来当了摧盐使，要经过河中，此人便要告辞回家。
English: Tang Qing later became a salt crusher, and if he had to pass through the river, he would have to say goodbye and go home.

古文：唐曰： 汝极勤劳，吾方请厚俸，得以报尔。 
现代文：唐说： 你一向很勤劳，我正要给你优厚的报酬，借以报答你。 
English: Tang said, "You have always been very diligent, and I was about to reward you with a generous reward.

古文：又恳请，唐固留不许。
现代文：此人又向唐庆恳求，唐则坚决挽留，没有允许。
English: This person also pleaded with Tang Qing, but Tang resolutely held back and did not allow it.

古文：行至蒲津，酒醉，与人相殴，节帅令严，决脊二十。
现代文：走到蒲津时，此人喝醉了酒与别人打架，督办盐运的节帅律令极为严格，决定打他二十大板。
English: When he got to Putuo, he got drunk and got into a fight with someone else. The festival marshal, who oversees the salt transport, was very strict and decided to beat him with twenty large boards.

古文：唐君救免不得，无绪便发，厚恤酒肉。
现代文：唐君干着急，却不能救他免于遭打。再没有发生什么事情便出发了，唐庆给了他很多的酒和肉，以表示安慰和抚恤。
English: Tang Jun was in a hurry, but he couldn't save him from being beaten. Nothing else happened, so he set off. Tang Qing gave him a lot of wine and meat to express his consolation and support.

古文：才出城乃至，唐曰： 汝争得来？ 
现代文：刚出城门他又来见唐君，唐君说： 你怎么又来了？ 
English: Just after leaving the city gate, he came to see Tang Jun again. Tang Jun said, "Why did you come again?

古文：曰： 来别中丞。 
现代文：他说： 我来跟您辞别。 
English: He said: "I'm here to say goodbye.

古文：唐令袒背视之。
现代文：唐君让他露出后背仔细一看。
English: Tang Jun asked him to show his back for a closer look.

古文：并无伤处，惊甚。
现代文：并无任何伤痕。非常惊讶。
English: There weren't any bruises. I was very surprised.

古文：因语雪卧之事。遂下马与语曰： 某所不欲经河中过者，为有此报。
现代文：于是又说起那次躺在雪里的事，此人便下马告诉唐君说： 我之所以不愿意经过河中，就是因为我知道你要报答我。
English: Then he talked about the time he was lying in the snow. The man dismounted and told Tang Jun, "The reason I didn't want to go through the river was because I knew you were going to reward me."

古文：今已偿了，别中丞去。
现代文：如今你已经偿还给我了，现在可以允许我走了吧。 
English: Now that you've paid me back, you can let me go.

古文：与钱绢皆不受，置于地，再拜而逝。
现代文：唐君送给他钱和丝绢他都不要，把这些东西放在地上，频频施礼而去。
English: Tang Jun gave him money and silk scarves, but he didn't want them. He put these things on the ground, bowed frequently and left.

古文：卢钧
现代文：卢钧
English: Lu Wei

古文：卢相国钧初及第，颇窘于牵费。
现代文：相国卢钧当年刚刚及第的时候，对繁琐的交际活动很不会应酬。
English: When her partner, Lu Wei, had just reached his 30th birthday, he was very reluctant to engage in tedious social activities.

古文：俄有一仆，愿为月佣，服饰鲜洁，谨干不与常等。
现代文：没过多久，有一个人愿意给他当佣工，服饰之鲜艳整洁与勤劳干练都与一般仆人不同。
English: It didn't take long before someone offered to be his helper. The bright and clean clothes and hard-working skills of the maids were different from those of ordinary servants.

古文：睹钧之乏，往往有所资。时俯及关宴，钧未办醵卒，挠形于色。于是仆辄请罪，钧具以实告。
现代文：他见卢钧应酬无方，常常对他给以帮助，一到了设大宴时，都因忙碌、草率，无法筹办，急得抓耳挠腮，仆人见状便向他请罪，并问何事如此犯难。
English: When he saw that Lu Yao had no way of entertaining, he often helped him. When it came to setting up a grand banquet, he was so busy and hasty that he couldn't organize it. He was so anxious that he scratched his ears and scratched his head. When the servant saw the letter, he pleaded guilty and asked what was so difficult.

古文：对曰： 极细事耳。
现代文：卢钧把实际情况都跟他说了，他说： 这是件很容易的小事情。
English: Lu Wei told him the actual situation, he said: This is a very easy thing to do.

古文：几郎可以处分，最先合勾当何事？ 
现代文：你可以担当办理此事，最先应该做什么事务？ 
English: You can be in charge of handling this, what should you do first?

古文：钧初疑其妄，既而将觇之，绐而命之曰： 尔若有技，吾当主宴。
现代文：卢钧开始怀疑他说大话，后来则想考验、观察一下再说，便骗他道： 你若有办法，我就当主宴。
English: Lu Xun began to suspect that he was talking nonsense, but later he wanted to test and observe before speaking, so he lied to him and said, "If you have the means, I will be the host of the banquet."

古文：第一要一大第，为备宴之地。
现代文：首先要有一处大的房舍，作为置备酒宴的场所。
English: First of all, there must be a large building as a place to prepare the banquet.

古文：次即徐图。 
现代文：其他事情都在其次，可以慢慢想办法。 
English: Everything else is secondary. We can slowly find a solution.

古文：其仆唯然而去，顷刻乃回。白钧曰： 已税得宅矣，请几郎检校。
现代文：仆人应诺之后就走了，过了不长时间他就回来了，跟卢钧说： 房子已经借到了，请郎官去检阅一下。 
English: The servant complied and then left. After a short while, he returned and said to Lu Yao, "The house has been borrowed. Please ask the steward to check it over."

古文：翌日，钧强为观之，既而朱门甲第，拟于宫禁。
现代文：第二天，卢钧勉强地去看房子，到那里一看，竟是一所朱漆大门的华贵宅第，可与宫苑比拟。
English: The next day, Lu Wei reluctantly went to see the house. When he got there, he saw that it was actually a sumptuous mansion with a vermilion-lacquered gate, comparable to a palace.

古文：钧不觉忻然。又曰： 会宴处即大如法，此尤不易张陈。 
现代文：卢钧非常高兴，又说： 宴会的处所这样符合标准，这就更加不容易布置。 
English: Lu Wei was very happy and said, "The banquet venue is so up to standard, which makes it even more difficult to arrange.

古文：对曰： 第请选日启闻，待郎张陈，某请专掌。 
现代文：仆人说： 请把选好的开宴日期告诉我，我可以帮助你布置，我也可以请求由我专门掌管这件事。 
English: The servant said, "Please let me know the date you have chosen for the banquet, I can help you arrange it, and I can also ask to be in charge of this matter.

古文：钧始虑其为非，反覆诘问，但微笑不对。或意其非常人，亦不固于猜疑。
现代文：卢钧开始怀疑他说的不是真话，反复盘问，他只微笑并不回答；卢钧心想他一定不是个寻常人，也就不再猜疑了。
English: Lu Yao began to suspect that what he said was not the truth. After repeated questioning, he only smiled and did not answer; Lu Yao thought to himself that he must not be an ordinary person, so he no longer suspected.

古文：暨宴除之日，钧止于是，俄睹幕帟茵毯，华焕无比，此外松竹花卉皆称是。钧之醵率毕至，由是公卿间靡不洿诧。
现代文：到了宴会前的那天，卢钧就住在这所房子里，一会儿便看到窗帘帷幕座垫地毯之类一应俱全，华丽无比；此外，松竹花卉等装点物品，也都摆放布置得各得其所，开宴那天，卢钧邀请的宾客全都到了，因此，在公卿大臣们中间，无不夸说这次宴会操办得成功，场面布置得华丽、考究，并对这些表示惊诧。
English: On the day before the banquet, Lu Xun stayed in this house. In a short time, he saw that the curtains, curtains, cushions, carpets, etc. were all available and gorgeous. In addition, decorative items such as pine, bamboo, flowers, etc. were also arranged and arranged in their own way. On the day of the banquet, all the guests invited by Lu Xun arrived. Therefore, among the noblemen and ministers, they all boasted that the banquet was a success, the scene was gorgeous and elegant, and expressed their surprise.

古文：诘朝，其仆请假给还诸色假借什物，因之一去不返。
现代文：宴会的第二天早晨，仆人向卢钧请假，去退还所借的各种用具物品，借机一去不回。
English: On the morning of the second day of the banquet, the servant asked Lu Yao for leave to return various borrowed equipment and items. He took the opportunity to leave and never returned.

古文：始去旬日，钧异其事，驰往旧游访之。
现代文：到了第十天，卢钓对此事感到奇怪，急忙到举办宴会的旧地方去访问那个仆人。
English: On the tenth day, Lu Ying felt strange about this matter and hurried to the old place where the banquet was held to visit the servant.

古文：则向之花竹，一无所有，但颓垣坏栋而已。
现代文：但是原先的花竹已经一无所有，只有一堆残破的墙壁和断折的房梁而已。
English: But there is nothing left of the original Hanatake, just a pile of ruined walls and broken beams.

古文：议者以钧之仁感通神明，故为曲赞一春之盛，而成终身之美也。
现代文：议论这件事的人以为是卢钧的仁厚感动了神明，是神明在暗地里帮助他成全了这次盛会，而这件事便成就了他终生的美名！
English: The people who discussed this matter thought that it was Lu Xun's benevolence that moved the gods, that the gods secretly helped him to complete this grand event, and that this event made his lifelong reputation!

