古文：淮水出南阳平氏县胎替山，东北过桐柏山，《山海经》曰：淮出余山，在朝阳东，义乡西。
现代文：淮水发源于南阳郡平氏县胎警山，往东北流过桐柏山，《山海经》说：淮水发源于余山，在朝阳东、义乡西。
English: The Huai Shui originates from Mount Taiguang in Pingshi County, Nanyang County, and flows to the northeast through Mount Tongbai. "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: The Huai Shui originates from Mount Yushan, in the east of Chaoyang and the west of Yixiang.

古文：《尚书》：导淮自桐柏。
现代文：《尚书》提到在桐柏山疏导淮水。
English: "Shangshu" mentioned that there was a water channel in Tongbai Mountain.

古文：《地理志》曰，南阳平氏县，王莽之平善也。
现代文：《地理志》说：南阳平氏县，就是王莽的平善。
English: "Geography" said: Nanyang Pingshi County is Wang Mang's Pingzhen.

古文：《风俗通》曰：南阳平氏县桐柏大复山在东南，淮水所出也。
现代文：《风俗通》说：南阳平氏县的桐柏山，大复山在它的东南，是淮水的发源地。
English: "Folklore" says: Tongbashi Mountain in Nanyang Pingshi County, with Dafu Mountain to its southeast, is the birthplace of Huai Shui.

古文：淮，均也。
现代文：淮，是均衡的意思。
English: Huai means balance.

古文：《春秋说题辞》曰：淮者，均其势也。
现代文：《春秋说题辞》说：淮，就是使水势保持均衡。
English: "Spring and Autumn Inscription" says: Huai, is to keep the water potential in balance.

古文：《释名》曰：淮，韦也。韦绕扬州北界，东至于海也。
现代文：《释名》说：淮，意思是围，就是说围绕扬州北界，往东直达大海。
English: "Explanation of the name" said: Huai, meaning around, means around the northern border of Yangzhou, eastward to the sea.

古文：《尔雅》曰：淮为浒。
现代文：《尔雅》说：淮，就是水滨。
English: "Lya" said: Huai, is the waterfront.

古文：然淮水与醴水同源俱导，西流为醴，东流为淮。
现代文：但淮水和酸水都从同一个源头流出，西流就是酸水，东流就是淮水。
English: However, brackish water and acid water both flow from the same source. The west stream is acid water, and the east stream is brackish water.

古文：潜流地下，三十许里，东出桐柏之大复山南，谓之阳口。水南即复阳县也。
现代文：水在地卞潜流了三十余里，从桐柏山的大复山南麓东流而出，山口就叫阳口，水南就是复阳县。
English: The water has flowed underground for more than 30 miles in the earth's mantle. It flows eastward from the southern foot of the Dafu Mountain of Tongbai Mountain. The mountain pass is called Yangkou, and the south of the water is Foyang County.

古文：阚駰言复阳县，胡阳之乐乡也。元帝元延二年置，在桐柏大复山之阳，故曰复阳也。
现代文：阐胭说：复阳县就是胡阳的乐乡，宣帝元康元年设县，因位于桐柏山、大复山之南，所以称为复阳。
English: Elucidation said: Foyang County is Huyang's music town. It was established in the first year of Xuan Di Yuan Kang. Because it is located in the south of Tongba Mountain and Dafu Mountain, it is called Foyang.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：朱祐少孤，归外家复阳刘氏。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：朱佑少时是孤儿，被送回复阳刘氏外公家抚养。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: Zhu You was an orphan when he was young, and was sent back to Yang Liu's maternal grandfather's home for upbringing.

古文：山南有淮源庙，庙前有碑，是南阳郭苞立。又二碑，并是汉延熹中守、令所造，文辞鄙拙，殆不可观。
现代文：山南有淮源庙，庙前有石碑，是南阳郭苞所立；此处还有两块碑，都是汉延熹年间的太守和县令所造，文辞粗鄙拙劣，几乎令人不能卒读。
English: In Shannan, there is Huaiyuan Temple. There is a stone monument in front of the temple, which was erected by Nanyang Guoqi. There are also two monuments here, both of which were made by the governor and the county magistrate during the Han Dynasty. The wording is crude and poor, and it is almost impossible to read.

古文：故《经》云东北过桐柏也。
现代文：《水经》说：往东北流过桐柏山。
English: "Water Sutra" says: It flows to the northeast through Mount Tongbashi.

古文：淮水又东径义阳县，县南对固成山。
现代文：淮水又往东流经义阳县。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward through Yiyang County.

古文：山有水，注流数丈，洪涛灌山，遂成巨井，谓之石泉水，北流注于淮。
现代文：县城南对固成山，山上有水，奔泻直下数丈，波涛滚滚，倾注于山坞间，形成一口巨井，称为石泉水，北流注入淮水。
English: The south of the county's city faces Gucheng Mountain. There is water on the mountain, rushing down several meters, the waves are rolling, pouring into the dock, forming a huge well, called stone spring water, and the north stream is injected into the water.

古文：淮水又径义阳县故城南，义阳郡治也，世谓之白茅城，其城圆而不方。
现代文：淮水又流经义阳县老城南边，这是义阳郡的治所，世人称为白茅城，城呈圆形而不方正。
English: Huai Shui also flows through the southern part of the old city of Yiyang County, which is the seat of Yiyang County, known to the world as Bai Mao City. The city is round and not square.

古文：阚駰言晋太始中，割南阳东鄙之安昌、平林、平氏、义阳四县，置义阳郡于安昌城。
现代文：阐胭说：晋泰始年间，划出南阳郡东部边邑安昌、平林、平氏、义阳四县设置义阳郡，郡治在安昌城。
English: Elucidation said: During the first year of Jintai, the eastern border towns of Nanyang County, Anchang, Pinglin, Pingshi, and Yiyang were divided into four counties, and Yiyang County was set up, with the county seat in Anchang City.

古文：又《太康记》、《晋书地道记》，并有义阳郡，以南阳属县为名。
现代文：《太康记》、《晋书•地道记》也都有义阳郡，就以南阳属县义阳为郡名。
English: "Tai Kang Ji" and "Jinshu•Jindu Ji" also have Yiyang County, so Yiyang, a county belonging to Nanyang, is the county name.

古文：汉武帝无狩四年，封北地都尉卫山为侯国也。
现代文：汉武帝元狩四年前，把这地方封给北地都尉卫山，立为侯国，有九渡水注入。
English: Four years before Emperor Wenzong of the Han Dynasty, this place was given to the northern governor Weishan and established as a vassal state, with nine rivers flowing into it.

古文：有九渡水注之，水出鸡翅山，溪涧潆委，沿溯九渡矣。
现代文：九渡水发源于鸡翅山，溪涧弯弯曲曲，沿溪有九个渡口。
English: The nine ferries originate from the Chicken Wing Mountain, the creek meanders, and there are nine ferries along the creek.

古文：其犹零阳之为九渡水，故亦谓之为九渡焉。
现代文：很像零阳的九渡水，所以也叫九渡。
English: It is very similar to the Jiu Duan water of Ziyang, so it is also called Jiu Duan.

古文：于溪之东山有一水，发自山椒下数丈，素湍直注，颓波委壑，可数百丈，望之若霏幅练矣，下注九渡水，九渡水又北流注于淮。
现代文：溪东山上有一条水，从山顶下流出，宽约数丈的急流，从几百丈的高崖一泻而下，注入深渊，远望像是飞动的白绢。涧水往下注入九渡水；九渡水又往北流，注入淮水。
English: On the hill to the east of the creek, there is a stream of water that flows out from under the top of the mountain. It is a rapid that is a few meters wide. It cascades down from a high cliff several hundred meters high and pours into the abyss, looking like a flying egret in the distance. The rushing water pours down into the Jiutou River; the Jiutou River flows north and pours into the Huai River.

古文：东过江夏平春县北，淮水又东，油水注之。
现代文：往东流过江夏郡平春县北边，淮水继续往东流，汇合了油水。
English: Flowing eastward through the north of Pingchun County, Jiangxia County, Huai Shui continued to flow eastward, merging oil and water.

古文：晋太始初，以封安平献王罕长子望，本治在石城山上，因梁希侵逼，徙洽此城。
现代文：油水发源于县境西南的油溪，往东北流经平春县老城南边。汉章帝建初四年始初年，把它封给安平献王司马孚的长子司马望。原治所在石城山上，因为梁害怕外敌侵逼才迁到这里。
English: The oil and water originated from the Yuxi River in the southwest of the county, and flowed to the northeast through the south of the old city of Pingchun County. In the first year of the fourth year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, it was given to Sima Wang, the eldest son of Wang Sima Fu, in Anping. The original location was on Shicheng Mountain, and Liang moved here because he was afraid of foreign invasion.

古文：梁司州刺史马仙琕不守，魏置郢州也。
现代文：梁司州刺史马仙碑没有守住，被魏夺取，置为郑州。
English: Liangshizhou Jinshi Ma Xianbei did not hold, was captured by Wei, and was placed in Zhengzhou.

古文：昔常珍奇自悬瓠遣三千骑援义阳行事庞定光，屯于溮水者也。
现代文：从前常珍奇从悬瓤派了三千兵马来援救义阳行事庞定光，屯兵于狮水。
English: In the past, Chang Zhenqi sent three thousand soldiers and horses to rescue Yiyang from the overhanging raft.

古文：溮水东南流，历金山北，山无树木，峻峭层峙。
现代文：狮水往东南流经金山北边；金山上树木不生，峰峦层沓峻峭。
English: The lion's water flows southeast through the north side of the mountain; trees do not grow on the mountain, and the peaks are steep.

古文：溮水又东径义阳故城北，城在山上，因倚陵岭，周回三里，是郡昔所旧治城。
现代文：狮水继续往东流，经过义阳老城北边，城在山上，凭倚山岭而建，周围三里，是该郡昔时的治所。
English: The lion's water continued to flow eastward, passing the northern edge of Yiyang Old Town. The city is built on a hill, leaning against the mountains, and is surrounded by three miles. It was the county's former seat.

古文：城南十五步，对门有天井，周百余步，深一丈。
现代文：城南十五步，城门对面有一乱天然井泉，周围百余步，深一丈。
English: Fifteen paces south of the city, opposite the city gate, there is a natural spring, more than a hundred paces around, one step deep.

古文：东径钟武县故城南，本江夏之属县也。主莽之当利县矣。
现代文：狮水往东流经钟武县老城南边，这原是江夏的属县，就是王莽的当利县。
English: The lion's water flows eastward through the south of the old city of Zhongwu County, which was originally a county of Jiangxia, that is, Wang Mang's Dangli County.

古文：又东径石城山北，山甚高峻。
现代文：又往东流经石城山北边，山极高峻。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of Shicheng Mountain, which is extremely high.

古文：《史记》曰：魏攻冥阨。《音义》曰：冥阨或育在县葙山也。案《吕氏春秋》九塞，其一也。
现代文：《史记》说：魏进攻冥阪；《音义》说：冥随，有人说在郧县箱山；按《吕氏春秋》，冥阪是九塞之一。
English: "Histories" said: Wei attacked Hedaoshan; "Onyi" said: Hedaoshu, some people said it was in Hakozan, Handan County; according to "Lu's Spring and Autumn," Hedaoshan was one of the nine fortresses.

古文：溮水径县故城南，建武中，世祖封邓邯为侯。
现代文：狮水流经哪县老城南边。建武年间一，世祖封邓邯为郧侯。
English: The lion's water flows through the southern side of the old town of Ne County. In the first year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor Fong Dengyu was the mayor.

古文：案苏林曰：音盲。
现代文：按苏林说：龟肠，音盲。
English: According to Surin: turtle guts, tone deaf.

古文：狮水又东径七井冈南，又东北注于淮。
现代文：濒水又往东流经七井冈南边，又往东北注入淮水。
English: The nearshore water flows eastward through the southern side of Shichiioka, and is injected into the northeast by the Huai Shui.

古文：淮水又东至谷口。
现代文：淮水又往东流，到了谷口。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward, to Taniguchi.

古文：谷水甫出鲜金山，北流，瑟水注之。
现代文：谷水发源于南方的鲜金山，往北流，有瑟水注入。
English: The valley water originates from the fresh gold mines in the south and flows northward, infused with fresh water.

古文：水出西南具山，东北径光淹城东，而北径青山东，罗山西，俗谓之仙居水，东北流注于谷水。
现代文：瑟水发源于西南方的具山，往北流经光淹城东边，然后往北流经青山以东、罗山以西―民间叫仙居水―往东北流，注入谷水。
English: The Sur water originates from the southwest of Mount Gu, flows northward through the east of the light-flooded city, and then flows northward through the east of Aoyama and west of Luoshan - folk called Xianju water - to the northeast, injecting valley water.

古文：谷水东北人于淮。
现代文：谷水往东北流，注入淮水。
English: The valley water flows to the northeast and is injected into the Huai River.

古文：又东过新息县南，淮水东径故息城南。
现代文：又往东流过新息县南边，淮水往东流，经过旧时的息城南边。
English: It also flows eastward past the southern edge of Xinxi County, and Huai Shui flows eastward past the southern edge of the old Xicheng.

古文：魏太和中，蛮田益宗效诚，立东豫州，以益宗为刺史。
现代文：《春秋左传》：隐公十一年把这块地方封给马援，立为侯国。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo Chuan": In the eleventh year of King Yin's reign, this area was given to Ma Yuan and established as a vassal state.

古文：淮水又东合慎水。水出慎阳县西，而东径慎阳县故城南，县取名焉。
现代文：外城北门内，有新息长贾彪庙，庙前有石碑：朝南还有魏汝南太守程晓碑。
English: In the north gate of the outer city, there is a temple of Jia Biao, the new regent, and there is a stone monument in front of the temple: Chaonan and Wei Runan Taishou Chengxiao monument.

古文：汉高帝十一年，封栾说为侯国。
现代文：魏太和年间将慎阳封给栗说，立为侯国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu of the Wei Dynasty, Shenyang was given to the Kurils and established as a vassal state.

古文：颍阴刘陶为县长，政化大行，道不拾遗，以病去官。
现代文：颖阴刘陶当县长时，大力推行政事和教化，因而道不拾遗。
English: When Yingyin Liu Tao was the county governor, he vigorously promoted administrative affairs and enlightenment, and thus did not pick up the traces.

古文：童谣歌曰：悒然不乐，思我刘君，何时复来，安此下民？
现代文：后来刘陶因病辞官，童谣唱道：心里郁郁不乐，怀念我们的刘君。他什么时候再来呵？使我们百姓安宁！
English: Later, Liu Tao became a dictionary because of his illness, and the nursery rhyme sang: My heart is sad, I miss our Liu Jun. When will he come again? Let our people have peace!

古文：见思如此。
现代文：他是如此受到人民的怀念。
English: He is so fondly remembered by the people.

古文：应劭曰：慎水所出，东北入淮。
现代文：应肋说：慎水发源于此，往东北注入淮水。
English: Ying Li said: The prudent water originates from here, injecting water to the northeast.

古文：慎水又东流，积为慎陂。陂水又东南流为上慎陂，又东为中慎陂，又东南为下慎陂，皆与鸿部陂水散流。
现代文：淮水又往东流，汇聚成憔破；阪水又往东南流，就是上慎破；又往东流是中慎破；又往东南流是下慎破，都同鸿却破的水一起散流。
English: The Huai River flows to the east and converges to form the Jiao River; the Han River flows to the southeast, which is the Upper Jiao River; the East River is the Middle Jiao River; and the Southeastern River is the Lower Jiao River, all of which flow together with the water of the Hong Jiao River.

古文：其破首受淮川，左结鸿陂。
现代文：这片破塘上口引入淮水，左边连结鸿破。
English: The upper part of the broken pond is connected to Huai Shui, and the left side is connected to Hongba.

古文：汉成帝时，翟方进奏毁之。
现代文：汉成帝时，翟方进上奏朝廷毁去此破。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Shing, Shifang went to appeal to the imperial court to destroy this castle.

古文：建武中，汝南太守邓晨欲修复之，知许伟君晓知水脉，召与议之。
现代文：建武年间一，汝南太守邓晨立意修复，知道许伟君熟悉水脉，就请他来商议。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Emperor of Southern Han Dynasty, Deng Chen, decided to restore it. Knowing that Xu Wei Jun was familiar with the water vein, he invited him to discuss.

古文：伟君言：成帝用方进言毁之，寻而梦上天，天帝怒曰：何敢败我濯龙渊？
现代文：许伟君说：成帝采纳翟方进建议毁堤后，不久就梦见自己上了天，天帝发怒道：你怎敢毁坏我洗龙的深潭！
English: Xu Weijun said, "Shortly after Emperor Chengdi accepted the suggestion of Gong Fangjin to destroy the embankment, he dreamed that he had ascended to heaven. The heavenly emperor was angry and said, "How dare you destroy the deep pool where I washed the dragon!"

古文：是后民失其利，时有童谣曰：败我陂，翟子威，反乎覆，陂当复。
现代文：从此老百姓就得不到水利的好处了。当时童谣说：有个翟子威，毁坏我塘堤。一反又一覆，塘堤该修复。
English: Since then, the common people have not been able to enjoy the benefits of water conservancy. At that time, the nursery rhyme said: "There is a dragonfly, destroying my pond levee." One after another, the pond levee should be repaired.

古文：明府兴复废业，童谣之言，将有征矣。
现代文：贤明的知府兴工修复废弃的破塘，童谣里的话就要应验了。
English: The wise prefectural government has begun work to repair the abandoned broken pond. The words in the nursery rhyme are about to come true.

古文：遂署都水掾，起塘四百余里，百姓得其利。
现代文：于是指派了都水椽筑塘四百余里，百姓都受到水利之益。
English: As a result, more than 400 li of water was diverted from the capital to Chukchi-tang, and the people all benefited from the water conservancy.

古文：肢水散流，下合慎水，而东南径息城北，又东南入淮。谓之慎口。
现代文：塘水散流，往下与慎水汇合，然后往东南流经息城北边，又往东南注入淮水，汇流处叫慎口。
English: The pond water disperses, flows down to meet the Sheng water, and then flows to the southeast through the north of Xicheng, and injects the Huai water to the southeast, and the confluence is called the Sheng mouth.

古文：淮水又东，与申陂水合。
现代文：淮水继续往东流，与申破水汇合。
English: The Huai River continued to flow eastward, merging with the Shenba River.

古文：水上承申陂于新息县北，东南流，分为二水。一水径深丘西，又屈径其南，南派为莲湖，水南流注于淮。
现代文：此水上口在新息县承接申阪，往东南流，分成两条：一条流经深丘西边，然后转弯流经丘南；南支即莲湖水，往南流注入淮水。
English: This upstream water outlet in Xinxi County takes on the Shenhan, flows southeastward, and divides into two: one flows through the west side of the deep hill, and then turns to flow through the south of the hill; the southern branch is the Lianhu water, and the southward flow is injected into the Huai water.

古文：淮水又左迤流结两湖，谓之东、西莲湖矣。
现代文：淮水又向左岸分支流出，把两口湖连结起来，称为东莲湖和西莲湖。
English: Huai Shui also flows out to the left bank branch, linking the two lakes, known as East Lian Lake and West Lian Lake.

古文：淮水又东，右合壑水。
现代文：淮水又往东流，在右边汇合了壑水。
English: The Huai River also flows eastward, and merges with the Xin River on the right.

古文：水出白沙山，东北径柴亭西，俗谓之柴水。又东北流，与潭溪水合。
现代文：壑水发源于台沙山，往东北流过柴亭西边，俗称柴水；又往东北流，与潭溪水汇合。
English: The Lishui River originates from the Taisha Mountain and flows northeast through the west side of Chaiting, commonly known as the Lishui River. It also flows northeast and merges with the Tangxi River.

古文：水发潭谷，东北流，右会柴水。
现代文：潭溪水发源于潭谷，往东北流，在右边与柴水汇合。
English: The water of the lake stream originates from the lake valley, flows to the northeast, and merges with the wood water on the right.

古文：柴水又东径黄城西，故弋阳县也。
现代文：柴水又往东流经黄城西边，就是旧时的弋阳县。
English: The firewood and water flowed eastward through the west side of Huangcheng, which was the old Poyang County.

古文：城内有二城，西即黄城也。
现代文：城内又有二城，西边就是黄城。
English: There are also two castles in the city, the west of which is Huangcheng.

古文：柴水又东北入于淮。谓之柴口也。
现代文：柴水又往东北流，注入淮水，汇流处叫柴口。
English: The firewood water flows to the northeast and is injected into the Huai River. The confluence is called the firewood mouth.

古文：淮水又东北，申陂枝水注之。
现代文：淮水又往东北流，有申破的支流注入。
English: The Huai River also flows to the northeast, and is fed by a tributary of the Shenhua River.

古文：水首受陂水于深丘北，东径钓台南。台在水曲之中，台北有琴台。
现代文：这条支流上口在深丘以北引入破水，往东流经钓台南边，钓台就在水湾中间，北面是琴台。
English: The upper mouth of this tributary introduces a breakwater north of the deep hill, and flows eastward through the south side of the fishing platform. The fishing platform is in the middle of the bay, and the north side is the piano platform.

古文：又东径阳亭南，东南合淮。
现代文：又往东流经阳亭南边，往东南与淮水汇合。
English: It also flows eastward through the south side of Yangting, and converges with Huai Shui to the southeast.

古文：淮水又东径淮阴亭北，又东径白城南，楚白公胜之邑也。东北去白亭十里。
现代文：淮水又往东流过淮阴亭北边；又往东流经白城南边，这里原是楚国白胜公的食邑，东北离白亭十里。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward through the north side of Huaiyin Pavilion; it also flows eastward through the south side of Baicheng, which was originally the food town of Baishenggong of Chu, ten miles northeast of Baiting.

古文：淮水又东径长陵戍南，又东，青陂水注之。
现代文：淮水又往东流经长陵戍南边，又往东流，有青破水注入。
English: The Huai Shui also flows eastward through the south side of the Changling Pass, and flows eastward again, with the injection of the Qingbai Shui.

古文：分青陂东渎，东南径白亭西，又南于长陵戍东，东南入于淮，淮水又东北合黄水，水出黄武山，东北流，本陵关水注之。水导源木陵山，西北流注于黄水。
现代文：阪水分出青破东读，往东南流经白亭西边，又往南流，在长陵戍东边往东南注入淮水。淮水又往东北流，汇合了黄水。黄水发源于黄武山，往东北流，有木陵关水注入；木陵关水发源于木陵山，往西北流，注入黄水。
English: The Han River flows from Qingdao to the east, flows to the southeast through the west of Baiting, flows to the south, and injects the Huai River to the southeast on the east side of the Changling Pass. The Huai River flows to the northeast, merging with the Yellow River. The Yellow River originates from Huangwu Mountain, flows to the northeast, and is injected by the Muling Pass; the Muling Pass originates from the Muling Mountain, flows to the northwest, and is injected by the Yellow River.

古文：黄水又东径晋西阳城南，又东径光城南，光城左郡治。
现代文：黄水又往东流经晋西阳城南边，又往东流经光城南边，这是光城左郡的治所。
English: The Yellow Water also flows eastward through the southern edge of Jin Xiyang City, and eastward through the southern edge of Guangcheng, which is the county seat of Guangcheng Zuo County.

古文：又东北径高城南，故弦国也。
现代文：又往东北流经高城南边，这里是昔时的弦国。
English: Further to the northeast, it flows through the southern side of Gaocheng, here is the old Zhengguo.

古文：又东北径弋阳郡，东有虞丘郭，南有子肯庙。
现代文：又往东北流经弋阳郡东边，这里有虞丘，城南有子青庙。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the east side of Fenyang County. There are yuqiu here, and there is Zixing Temple in the south of the city.

古文：黄水又东北入于淮，谓之黄口。
现代文：黄水又往东北注入淮水，汇流处叫黄口。
English: The Yellow River also flows into the Huai River to the northeast, and the confluence is called Huangkou.

古文：淮水又东北径褒信县故城南，而东流注也。
现代文：淮水又往东北流，经过褒信县旧城南边，往东方流去。
English: Huai Shui also flows to the northeast, passing through the south of the old city of Baoxin County and flowing to the east.

古文：又东过期思县北，县故蒋国周公之后也。
现代文：又往东流过期思县北边，期思县就是旧时的蒋国，是周公后裔的居地。
English: It also flows eastward to the north of Shixian County. Shixian County is the old Jiang Guo, and is the residence of Zhou Gong's descendants.

古文：《春秋》文公十年，楚王田于孟诸，期思公复遂为右司马，楚灭之以为县。
现代文：《春秋》：文公十年前，楚王在孟诸打猎，期思公复遂当右司马。楚国并吞了蒋国，设置为县。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Ten years ago, King Wengong of Chu was hunting in Mengzhu, and when he thought about it, he became the right-hand man. Chu State annexed Jiang State and was set up as a county.

古文：汉高帝十二年，以封贲赫为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝十二年前，把这地方封给责赫，立为侯国。
English: Twelve years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Zhenhe and established it as a principality.

古文：城之西北隅，有楚相孙叔敖庙，庙前有碑。
现代文：城内西北角，有楚国宰相孙叔敖庙，庙前有碑。
English: In the northwest corner of the city, there is the temple of Sun Shuxuan, the prime minister of Chu, and there is a monument in front of the temple.

古文：淮水又东北，淠水注之。水出戈阳县南垂山，西北流历阴山关，径二城间。
现代文：淮水又往东北流，有得水注入，溟水发源于弋阳县南垂山，往西北流经阴山关，流过二城中间。
English: The Huai River flows to the northeast, with fresh water being injected. The Xing River originates from Nantui Mountain in Fenyang County, and flows to the northwest through the Yinshan Pass, passing through the middle of the two cities.

古文：旧有贼难，军所顿防。
现代文：从前因盗匪为患，有军队在这里驻防。
English: In the past, the area was plagued by banditry, and the army was stationed here.

古文：西北出山，又东北流，径新城戍东。又东北得诏虞水口，西北去弋阳虞丘郭二十五里。
现代文：溪涧往西北流出山间，然后转向东北，流经新城戍东边；又往东北流，有诏虞水口，水口西北距弋阳虞丘郭二十五里。
English: The creek flows out of the mountains to the northwest, then turns to the northeast, flowing through the east side of Xincheng; it also flows to the northeast, and there is a water outlet of Yanyangyu, and the northwest of the water outlet is 25 miles from the hills of Yanyangyu.

古文：水出南山，东北流。径诏虞亭东，而北入淠水。
现代文：诏虞水发源于南山，往东北流经诏虞亭东边，往北注入溟水。
English: The Zhaoyu River originates from the Nanshan Mountain, flows to the northeast through the eastern side of Zhaoyu Pavilion, and then flows north into the Ershui River.

古文：又东北注淮，俗曰白鹭水。
现代文：又往东北流，注入淮水，俗称白鹭水。
English: It also flows to the northeast, injecting water from the Huai River, commonly known as chalk water.

古文：又东过原鹿县南，汝水从西北来注之。
现代文：又往东流过原鹿县南边，汝水从西北流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Yuanlu County, and the water from the northwest flows into the people.

古文：县即《春秋》之鹿上也。
现代文：原鹿县就是《春秋》所说的鹿上。
English: The original Deer County is the Deer Upper mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：《左传》情公二十一年，宋人为鹿上之盟，以求诸侯于楚。
现代文：《左传》：僖公二十一年前，宋人召集鹿上之盟，要求楚国同意诸侯参加。
English: "Zhuan": Twenty-one years before the Ying Gong, the Song people convened the League of Deer, demanding that the state of Chu agree to the participation of the princes.

古文：建武十五年，世祖更封侍中、执金吾、阴乡侯阴识为侯国者也。
现代文：建武十五年，世祖将该县改封给侍中、执金吾阴乡侯阴识，立为侯国。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor changed the county's name to "Hou Yin Zhi" (Hou Yin Zhi) in the village of Jinwu, and established it as a "Hou Guo."

古文：又东过庐江安丰县东北，决水从北来注之。
现代文：又往东流过庐江郡安丰县东北，决水从北方流来注入。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northeast of Lijiang County, Anfeng County, and the breakwater flowed in from the north.

古文：庐江，故淮南也。
现代文：庐江，就是旧时的淮南。
English: Minjiang is the old Huainan.

古文：汉文帝十六年，别以为国。
现代文：汉文帝十六年前，分立为国。
English: Sixteen years ago, the Han Dynasty was divided into two countries.

古文：应劭曰：故庐子国也。
现代文：应肋说：就是旧时的庐子国。
English: Ying Li said, "It is the old Shanzi country."

古文：决水自舒寥北注，不于北来也。
现代文：决水是从舒萝往北流注，而不是从北方流来的。
English: The breakwater flows north from Shuro, not north from Shuro.

古文：安丰东北注淮者，穷水矣，又非决水，皆误耳。
现代文：在安丰往东北注入淮水的是穷水，也不是决水，《水经》都弄错了。
English: In Anfeng, the water injected into the northeast is poor water, not breaking water. Shui Jing is mistaken.

古文：淮水又东，谷水入焉。
现代文：淮水又往东流，谷水注入。
English: The Huai River also flows eastward, and the valley water is injected.

古文：水上承富水，东南流，世谓之谷水也。
现代文：谷水上流承接富水，往东南流，世人称为谷水。
English: The upstream valley water is connected to the affluent water and flows to the southeast, known to the world as the valley water.

古文：东径原鹿县故城北，城侧水南。
现代文：往东流经原鹿县老城北边，城在南岸水滨。
English: It flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Yuanlu County, and the city ends at the south bank waterfront.

古文：谷水又东径富肢县故城北，俗谓之成闾亭，非也。
现代文：谷水又往东流，经过富破县老城北边，俗称成间亭，是搞错了的。
English: The valley water flows eastward again, passing through the north side of the old town of Fuba County, commonly known as Chengma Pavilion, is a mistake.

古文：《地理志》：汝南郡有富肢县。建武二年，世祖改封平乡侯，王霸为富陂侯。
现代文：按《地理志》，汝南郡有富肢县，建武二年，世祖改封平乡侯王霸为富破侯。
English: According to the "Geography," Runan County has Fuli County. In the second year of Jianwu, the founder changed the title of Pingxiang Marquis Wangba to Fuba Marquis.

古文：《十三州志》曰：汉和帝永元九年，分汝阴置，多陂塘以溉稻，故曰富陂县也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：汉和帝永元九年，分汝阴而置，因为破塘很多，可以灌溉水稻，所以称为富肢县。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Prefectures" says: The Han Dynasty began in the ninth year of the Yongyuan Dynasty. Because there are many broken ponds, rice can be irrigated, so it is called Fuli County.

古文：谷水又东，于汝阴城东南注淮。
现代文：谷水又往东流，在汝阴城东南注入淮水。
English: The valley water also flows eastward, injecting Huai Shui in the southeast of Ruyin City.

古文：淮水又东北，左会润水，水首受富陂，东南流为高塘陂，又东，积而为陂水，东注焦陵陂。
现代文：淮水义往东北流，在左边汇合了润水。润水上口引入富破的水，往东南流就是高塘破，又往东流，积聚成破塘。水流往东注入焦陵破，破水北出就是酮破。
English: The Huai Shui River flows to the northeast, and the runoff converges on the left side. The upstream of the runoff introduces rich water, the southeastern flow is the Gaotang break, and the eastward flow accumulates into the broken pond. The water flow is injected into the Jiaoling break to the east, and the water breaking north is the ketone break.

古文：陂水北出为慎陂，肢水潭涨，引读北注汝阴，四周隍堑，下注颍水。
现代文：破水上涨时，循水渠往北流向汝阴，流经四周的护城河，然后注入颖水。
English: When the water rises, it flows north along the canal to Ruyin, flows through the surrounding moat, and then flows into Yingshui.

古文：焦湖东注，谓之润水。径汝阴县东，径荆亭北，而东入淮。
现代文：焦湖往东流，称为润水，流经汝阴县东边，流过荆亭北边，往东注入淮水。
English: The eastward flow of Jiao Lake, known as wetted water, flows through the east side of Ruyin County, flows through the north side of Jing Ting, and injects Huai Shui to the east.

古文：淮水又东北，穷水入焉。
现代文：淮水又往东北流，有穷水注入。
English: Hoaishui also flows to the northeast, with poor water injection.

古文：水出六安国安风县穷谷。
现代文：穷水发源于六安国安风县的穷谷。
English: Poor water originated in the poor valley of Anfeng County, Lu'an Province.

古文：《春秋左传》楚救灊，司马沈尹戍与吴师遇于穷者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》；楚国援救潜，司马沈尹戍与吴军在穷相遇。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn"; Sima Shen Yinqian and Wu Jun met in poor conditions while rescuing a submarine in Chu.

古文：川流泄注于决水之右，北灌安风之左，世谓之安风水，亦曰穷水。
现代文：川流泄注于决水的右岸，往北灌溉安风县左边，世人称为安风水，又叫穷水。
English: The river flows into the right bank of the breakwater, and irrigates the left side of Anfeng County to the north. The world is known as Anfeng water, also known as poor water.

古文：音戎，并声相近，字随读转。
现代文：穷，音戎，读音相近，于是字也随读音而转了。
English: Poor, tone-deaf, the pronunciation is similar, so the characters also changed with the pronunciation.

古文：流结为陂，谓之穷陂。
现代文：水流积聚成破塘，称为穷破。
English: The flow of water accumulates into a broken pond, known as poor broken.

古文：塘堰虽沦，犹用不辍，陂水四分，农事用康。
现代文：堤塘虽然湮没了，但水仍在发挥作用。破水四方分用，耕作农田带来丰收。
English: Although the dike is no longer there, the water still plays a role. The water is used in all directions, and farming brings a good harvest.

古文：北流注于淮。
现代文：塘水往北流，注入淮水。
English: The pond water flows northward and is injected into the Huai River.

古文：京相璠曰：今安风有穷水，北入淮。
现代文：京相瑶说：现在安风有穷水，往北流入淮水。
English: Beijing's Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs said, "Nowadays, the favorable wind has poor water, and it flows northward into the Huai River.

古文：淮水又东为安风津。
现代文：淮水又往东流，就是安风津。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward, that is, Anfengjin.

古文：水南有城，故安风都尉治。
现代文：水南有城，是旧时安风都尉的治所，后来建立了霍丘戍。
English: There is a city in the south of the country, which used to be the place where Lieutenant Anfeng was imprisoned. Later, Huoqiu Fortress was built.

古文：后立霍丘戍，淮中有洲，俗号关洲，盖津关所在，故斯洲纳称焉。
现代文：淮水中央有个沙洲，俗称关洲，因为设有水路关口，洲也因而得名。
English: There is a sandbar in the middle of Huai Shui, commonly known as Guanzhou, because it has a waterway pass, hence the name.

古文：《魏书》、《国志》有曰：司马景王征田丘俭，使镇东将军、豫州刺史诸葛诞从安风津先至寿春。
现代文：《魏书•国志》有一段话说：司马景王征讨母丘俭，派遣镇东将军、豫州刺史诸葛诞从安风津先到寿春。
English: "Weishu • Guozhi" has a passage saying: Sima Jing Wang sent Zhendong General, Yuzhou Sashi Zhuge Birth from Anfeng and Tientsin to Shuchun.

古文：俭败，与小弟秀藏水草中。
现代文：母丘俭战败，和小弟秀躲藏在水草里。
English: His mother, Qiu Jian, was defeated, and he and his younger brother, Xiu, hid in the weeds.

古文：安风津都尉部民张属斩之，传首京都。
现代文：安风津都尉管区平民张属杀了他，把首级传送到京城。
English: Zhang Rong, a civilian from the Anfeng District of Tianjin, killed him and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：即斯津也。
现代文：这件事就发生在这个渡口。
English: It happened right here at the ferry.

古文：又东北至九江寿春县西，沘水、泄水合北注之，又东，颍水从西北来流注之。
现代文：又往东北到九江郡寿春县西边，此水、泄水汇合后往北注人。又往东流，颖水从西北方流来注人。
English: It also went to the northeast to the west of Shuchun County, Jiujiang County. After the confluence of this water and the discharge, it flowed to the north. It also flowed to the east, and the Ying water flowed from the northwest to the people.

古文：淮水又东，左合批口。又东径中阳亭北，为中阳渡，水流浅碛，可以厉也。
现代文：淮水继续往东流，左岸在批口汇合了批水；又往东流经中阳亭北边，就是中阳渡，石滩水浅，可以涉水过河。
English: The Huai Water continued to flow eastward, and the left bank was joined by the Huai Water at the junction; it also flowed eastward through the north side of Zhongyang Pavilion, that is, Zhongyang Wadu. The rocky beach was shallow, and it was possible to wade across the river.

古文：淮水又东流与颍口会。东南径苍陵城北，又东北流径寿春县故城西，县即楚考烈王自陈徙此。
现代文：淮水又往东流，汇合于颖口，往东南流经苍陵城北边，又往东北流经寿春县老城西边。楚考烈王就是从陈迁到这里的。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward, converging at Yingkou, flowing southeast to the north of the city of Changling, and flowing northeast to the west of the old city of Shuchun County. King Chukao moved here from Chen.

古文：秦始皇立九江郡，治此，兼得庐江、豫章之地，故以九江名郡。
现代文：秦始皇设置九江郡，治所就在寿春县，因为还有庐江、豫章等地划入该郡，因而以九江为郡名。
English: Qin Shihuang set up Jiujiang County, and the administrative center was in Shuchun County, because there were also Lijiang River, Yuzhang and other places in the county, so Jiujiang was the name of the county.

古文：汉高帝四年为淮南国，孝武元狩六年复为九江焉。
现代文：汉高帝四年前，这里是淮南国；孝武帝元狩六年前，又恢复为九江。
English: Four years before Emperor Han Gao, this was Huainan Province; six years before Emperor Xiaowu's Yuan Dynasty, it was restored to Jiujiang Province.

古文：文颖曰：《史记。货殖传》曰：淮以北，沛、陈、汝南、南郡为西楚，彭城以东，东海、吴、广陵为东楚。衡山、九江、江南、豫章、长沙为南楚。
现代文：文颖说：《史记·货殖列传》说：淮水以北，沛、陈、汝南、南郡是西楚；彭城以东，东海、吴、广陵是东楚；衡山、九江、江南、豫章、长沙是南楚；这就是三楚。
English: Wen Ying said: "Historical Records, Commodity Columns" said: North of Huai Shui, Pei, Chen, Runan, and Nan County are West Chu; East of Pengcheng, Donghai, Wu, and Guangling are East Chu; Hengshan, Jiujiang, Jiangnan, Yuzhang, and Changsha are South Chu; this is the three Chu.

古文：是为三楚者也。
现代文：淮水又往北流，在左边汇合了椒水。
English: The Huai River flows to the north and joins the Xiaoshui River on the left.

古文：淮水又北，左合椒水。水上承淮水，东北流径她城南，又历其城东，亦谓之清水，东北流注于淮水，谓之清水口者，是此水焉。
现代文：椒水上流承接淮水，往东北流经她城南边，又流过城东，也叫清水，然后往东北流去，注入淮水。清水口一名，就是因此而来的。
English: The upper stream of the pepper water connects to the Huai River, flows northeast through the southern edge of the city, and flows through the east of the city, also called clear water, and then flows to the northeast, injecting into the Huai River.

古文：又东过寿春县北，肥水从县东北流注之。
现代文：又往东流过寿春县北边，肥水从该县东北流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Shuchun County. Fertile water comes from the northeastern part of the county.

古文：淮水于寿阳县西北，肥水从城西而北入于淮，谓之肥口。
现代文：淮水流到寿阳县西北，肥水从城西而来，往北注入淮水，汇流处叫肥口。
English: Huai Shui flows to the northwest of Shouyang County. Fertile water comes from the west of the city and is injected into Huai Shui to the north. The confluence is called Huikou.

古文：淮水又北，夏肥水注之。
现代文：淮水又往北流，夏肥水注入。
English: The Huai River also flows northward, and the summer fertilizer water is injected.

古文：然则濮水即沙水之兼称，得夏肥之通目矣。
现代文：夏肥水上流从城父县承接沙水，向右边流出，往东南流经城父县老城南边。
English: The upstream of the summer fertilizing water receives sand and water from Chengdu County, flows out to the right, and flows southeast through the south of the old city of Chengdu County.

古文：汉桓帝永寿元年，封大将军梁冀孙桃为侯国也。
现代文：城父就是王莽的思善。城父县从前是焦夷的地区。《春秋左传》：昭公九年将城父封给大将军梁冀的孙子梁桃，立为侯国。
English: The city father is Wang Mang's wisdom. The city father county was once the area of Jiao Yi. "Spring and Autumn Left Biography": Zhaogong nine years later gave the city father to the grandson of General Liang Ji, Liang Tao, and established it as a principality.

古文：夏肥水自县，又东径思善县之故城南，汉章帝章和三年分城父立。
现代文：夏肥水又从城父县往东流，经过思善县老城南边，思善县是汉章帝章和三年从城父分出设县的。
English: Summer Fertile Water also flows eastward from Chengdu County, passing the southern edge of the old city of Shishan County. Shishan County was established by Emperor Zhang of Han Dynasty and separated from Chengdu County three years ago.

古文：夏肥水又东为高陂，又东为大慎陂。水出分为二流，南为夏肥水，北为鸡陂。
现代文：夏肥水又往东流是高破，又往东流是大涤破，出破后水流分为两条：南流是夏肥水，北流是鸡破。
English: The eastward flow of the summer fertilizer water is Gaobao, and the eastward flow is Dadaobao. After the break, the water flow is divided into two: the south flow is the summer fertilizer water, and the north flow is the chicken break.

古文：夏肥水东流，左合鸡水，水出鸡陂，东流为黄陂，又东南流，积为茅陂，又东为鸡水。
现代文：夏肥水往东流，在左边汇合了鸡水。鸡水出自鸡破，往东流就是黄破，又往东南流，积聚成为茅破，又往东流就是鸡水。
English: The summer fertilizing water flows eastward and meets the chicken water on the left. The chicken water comes from the chicken pond, and the eastward flow is the yellow pond, and it flows to the southeast, accumulating into the thatched pond, and the eastward flow is the chicken water.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：宋人有取道者，其马不进，投之鸡水是也。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：宋人有个过路的，所乘的马不肯前进，就把它投入鸡水。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" says: The Song people had a passer-by. The horse he was riding did not want to go forward, so he threw it into the brook.

古文：鸡水右会夏肥水而乱流东注，俱入于淮。
现代文：鸡水在右边与夏肥水汇合，乱流往东奔泻，都注入淮水。
English: On the right, the chicken water and the summer fertilizer water converge, and the turbulent flow rushes to the east, all of which are injected into the Huai Shu.

古文：淮水又北径山硖中，谓之硖石。
现代文：淮水继续往北流，穿过山峡，称为砍石。
English: The Huai River continues to flow northward, passing through a mountain gorge known as the Stone Cutting Gorge.

古文：对岸山上，结二城，以防津要。
现代文：两边对岸山上，筑了两座城来防守这航道上的要地。
English: On the mountains on either side of the opposite shore, two cities were built to defend the important places on this waterway.

古文：西岸山上有马迹，世传淮南王乘马升仙所在也。
现代文：西岸山上有马脚印，民间传说这是淮南王乘马升仙的地方。
English: There are horse footprints on the West Bank Mountain. According to folklore, this is the place where King Huainan ascended to heaven on a horse.

古文：今山之东南石上，有大小马迹十余所，仍今存焉。
现代文：如今山岭东南岩上，有大大小小的马脚印十多处仍然存在。
English: Today, there are still more than ten large and small horse footprints on the southeast rock of the mountains.

古文：淮水又北径下蔡县故城东，本州来之城也。
现代文：淮水又往北流，经过下蔡县老城东边，这本是州来的城。
English: Huai Shui also flows northward, passing the east side of the old city of Lower Cai County, which is originally a city from the state.

古文：吴季札始封延陵，后邑州来，故曰延州来矣。
现代文：吴季札初封于延陵，以后又封于州来，所以叫延州来。
English: Wu Jizata was first sealed in Yanling, and later sealed in Zhou, so he was called to come to Yanzhou.

古文：《春秋》哀公二年，蔡昭侯自新蔡迁于州来，谓之下蔡也。
现代文：《春秋》哀公二年前，蔡昭侯自新蔡迁到州来，于是又叫下蔡。
English: Two years before the public mourning of "Spring and Autumn," Cai Zhaohou moved from Xin Cai to the state, so he was also called Lower Cai.

古文：淮之东岸，又有一城，即下蔡新城也。
现代文：淮水东岸还有一座城，就是下蔡新城。
English: There is another city on the east coast of Huai Shui, which is the Lower Caixin City.

古文：二城对据。
现代文：这两座城互相对峙，各据于淮水的两岸。
English: The two cities face each other, each located on opposite banks of the Huai River.

古文：翼带淮濆。淮水东径八公山北，山上有老子庙。淮水历潘城南。置潘溪戍。
现代文：淮水往东流经八公山北边，山上有老子庙。淮水流经潘城南边，设有潘城戍。
English: The Huai River flows eastward through the north side of Mount Hapu, where there is a Laozi Temple. The Huai River flows through the south side of Pancheng, where the Pancheng Tower is located.

古文：戍东侧潘溪，吐川纳淮，更相引注。
现代文：这个边防城堡东濒潘溪，潘溪下注淮水，淮水升涨则倒灌，顺逆往来交互相通。
English: This border defense castle is on the eastern edge of Panxi. When Panxi is down, it is flooded with water, and when it is up, it is flooded again.

古文：又东径梁城，临侧淮川，川左有湄城。淮水左迤为湄湖。
现代文：又往东流经梁城，城在淮水旁，水左有泥城；淮水向左分支流出就是循湖。
English: It also flows eastward through Liangcheng. The city is next to Huai Shui, and there is a mud city to the left of the water. The outflow of Huai Shui to the left branch is along the lake.

古文：淮水又右纳洛川于西曲阳县北，水分阎溪，北绝横塘。又北径萧亭东，又北，鹊甫溪水人焉。
现代文：到西曲阳县北，淮水又在右边接纳了洛川。川流分出一条叫阎溪，北流穿过横塘，又往北流经萧亭东面，又往北流，有鹊甫溪水注入。
English: To the north of West Quyang County, the Huai Water also receives the Luo River on the right. The river flows out of a branch called Yan Creek. The north stream passes through the side pond, and flows northward through the east side of Xiaoting, and flows northward, with the water of Shufu Creek being injected.

古文：水山东鹊甫谷，西北流径鹊甫亭南，西北流注于洛水。
现代文：鹊甫溪水发源于东鹊甫谷，往西北流经鹊甫亭南边，往西北流，注入洛水。
English: The water of Shufu Creek originates in East Shufu Valley, flows northwest through the south side of Shufu Pavilion, flows northwest, and is injected into Luoshui.

古文：北径西曲阳县故城东，王莽之延平亭也。
现代文：洛水往北流经西曲阳县老城东边，就是王莽的延平亭。
English: Luoshui flows northward through the east side of the old city of West Quyang County, which is Wang Mang's Yanping Pavilion.

古文：应劭曰：具在淮曲之阳，下邳有曲阳，故是加西也。
现代文：应肋说：西曲阳县是在淮曲之阳；因为下邢也有曲阳，所以称为西曲阳。
English: Ying Li said: Xiquyang County is in Huaiquziyang; because there is also a Quyang in Jiaozuo, it is called West Quyang.

古文：洛涧北历秦墟，下注淮，谓之洛口。
现代文：洛涧往北流经秦墟，往下注入淮水，汇流处叫洛口。
English: The Luojun River flows northward through Qinhuai and discharges into the Huai River. The confluence is called the Luokou River.

古文：《经》所谓淮水径寿春县北，肥水从县东北注者也，盖《经》之谬矣。
现代文：《水经》说淮水流经寿春县北边，肥水从县城东北注入，却弄错了。
English: "Water Sutra" said that the Huai River flows through the north of Shuchun County, and the fertilized water is injected from the northeast of the county seat, but it was mistaken.

古文：考川定土，即实为非，是曰洛涧，非肥水也。
现代文：核查河流及其所经的地域，与实地相对照并非如此―这是洛涧，不是肥水。
English: Checking the river and the area it flows through, this is not the case in comparison with the field - this is Luo Wei, not fertilized water.

古文：淮水又北径莫邪山西，山南有阴陵县故城。
现代文：淮水又往北流经莫邪山西边，山南有阴陵县老城。
English: Huai Shui also flows northward through the west side of Mozhaishan Mountain, and the old city of Yiling County in Shannan is located there.

古文：汉高祖五年，项羽自该下，从数百骑，夜驰渡淮，至阴陵，迷失道左，陷大泽，汉令骑将灌婴以五千骑追及之于斯县者也。
现代文：汉高祖五年前，项羽从该下带了几百人马连夜奔驰渡淮，到阴陵迷了路，往左行陷入大泽。汉将灌婴带了五千人马直追到该县方才追上。
English: Five years ago, Han Gao Zu, Xiang Yu took several hundred people and horses from the lower part of the county to the Huai overnight, lost his way to Yinling, and fell into Osawa on the left. Han brought five thousand people and horses straight to the county to catch up.

古文：案《地理志》，王莽之阴陆也。后汉九江郡治。
现代文：按《地理志》，这就是王莽的阴陆，也是后汉九江郡的治所。
English: According to the "Geography," this is Wang Mang's Yinlu, and also the post-Han Jiujiang County.

古文：时多虎灾，百姓苦之，南阳宗均为守，退贪残，进忠良，虎悉东渡江。
现代文：当时多虎灾，百姓深以为苦。南阳宗均当太守，赶走贪官暴吏，任用忠良之士，于是老虎全都渡江东去。
English: At that time, there were many tiger plagues, and the people were deeply distressed. Nanyangzong was appointed as the governor, drove away corrupt officials, and appointed loyal people, so the tigers all went to the east of the river.

古文：又东过当涂县北，水从西北来注之。
现代文：又往东流过当涂县北边，泗水从西北流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Dangtu County, and the Surabaya River flows from the northwest.

古文：淮水自莫邪山，东北径马头城北，魏马头郡治也，故当涂县之故城也。
现代文：淮水从莫邪山往东北流经马头城北，这是魏马头郡的治所，也是旧时当涂的老城。
English: Huai Shui flows from the Mozhaishan Mountains to the northeast through the north of Matou Town, which is the administrative center of Wei Matou County, and also the old town of Dangtuo.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：禹娶涂山氏女，不以私害公，自辛至甲四日，复往治水。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：禹娶涂山氏的女儿，不以私事妨碍公事，自辛至甲，一连四日为治水而往来奔走。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: Yu married the daughter of the Tu Shan clan, and did not interfere with public affairs with private affairs. From Xin to A, he ran back and forth for four days in a row for flood control.

古文：故江淮之俗，以辛壬癸甲为嫁娶日也。
现代文：所以江淮一带的风俗，以辛、壬、癸、甲这四日作为嫁女娶亲的日子。
English: Therefore, the customs of the Jianghuai area use the four days of Xin, Ren, Zou and Jia as the days for the bride and groom to get married.

古文：禹墟在山西南，县即其地也。
现代文：禹墟在山的西南面，当涂县就在那地方。
English: Yuxu is in the southwest of the mountain, and Dangtu County is in that place.

古文：《地理志》曰：当涂，侯国也。魏不害以图守尉，捕淮阳反者公孙勇等，汉以封之。王莽更名山聚也。
现代文：《地理志》说：当涂是侯国，魏不害在困当守尉，追捕淮阳谋反的公孙勇等人，汉就把这地方封给他；王莽改名为山聚。
English: "Geography" said: when Tu is a vassal state, Wei is in trouble when he is a guard lieutenant, chasing Gongsun Yong and others who conspire against Huaiyang, Han will give this place to him; Wang Mangcun changed his name to Shanju.

古文：淮水又东北，濠水注之，水出莫邪山东北溪。溪水西北引渎，径禹墟北，又西流注于淮。
现代文：淮水又往东北流，有壕水注入，壕水发源于莫邪山东北的溪涧，溪水往西北引入沟水，流经禹墟北面，又往西流，注入淮水。
English: Huai Shui also flows to the northeast, with trench water being injected. The trench water originates from the creek in the northeast of Mozhaishan. The creek water is introduced into the ditch to the northwest, flows through the north of Yuhu, and flows to the west, injecting Huai Shui.

古文：淮水又北，沙水注之，《经》所谓蒗渠也。
现代文：淮水继续往北流，有沙水注入，就是《水经》所说的菠蔼渠。
English: The Huai River continues to flow northward, with sand and water being injected, which is what the "Water Sutra" calls the Pineapple Canal.

古文：淮之西有平阿县故城，王莽之平宁也。
现代文：淮水西有平阿县老城，就是王莽的平宁。
English: To the west of Huai Shui is the old town of Ping'a County, that is, Wang Mang's Ping'ning.

古文：建武十三年，世祖更封耿阜为侯国。
现代文：建武十三年，世祖把这地方改封给耿阜，立为侯国。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor changed this place to Genfu and established it as a vassal state.

古文：《郡国志》曰：平阿县有涂山。淮出于荆山之左，当涂之右，奔流二山之间而扬涛北注也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：平阿县有涂山，淮水从荆山左边、当涂右边流出，在两山之间奔流，激起滚滚波涛往北流去。
English: "County History" said: Ping'a County has Tu Mountain, Huai Water flows out from the left side of Jing Mountain and the right side of Dang Tu Mountain, rushing between the two mountains, stirring up the rolling waves to flow northward.

古文：《春秋左传》哀公十年，大夫对孟孙曰：禹会诸侯于涂山，执王帛者万国。
现代文：《春秋左传》：哀公十年前,大夫对孟孙说：禹在涂山大会诸侯，手执玉帛的与会者多达万国。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Ten years before Aigong, the doctor said to Meng Sun: Yu is in the Tuishan Assembly of Princes, and the participants holding the jade scepter are as many as ten countries.

古文：杜预曰：涂山在寿春东北。
现代文：杜预说：涂山在寿春东北。
English: Du Yu said: Tu Mountain is in the northeast of Shuchun.

古文：非也。
现代文：他弄错了。
English: At midnight, it started to rain.

古文：余按《国语》曰：吴伐楚，堕会稽，获骨焉，节专车。
现代文：我按《国语》说：吴攻楚，掘毁会稽，获得大骨，骨节可以装一辆车子。
English: According to the "National Language," I said: Wu attacked Chu, excavated and destroyed the association, obtained a large bone, and the bone section can be loaded with a car.

古文：吴子使来聘，且问之。客执骨而问曰：敢问骨何为大？
现代文：吴子的使者前来修好和问候，客人握着骨头间道：请问哪种骨头最大？
English: Wu Zi's emissary came to make amends and greetings. The guest, holding a bone, asked: Which bone is the largest?

古文：仲尼曰：丘闻之：昔禹致群神于会稽之山，防风氏后至，禹杀之，其骨专车，此为大也。
现代文：仲尼说：我听说古时禹在会稽山召集群神，防风氏迟到，禹把他杀了，他的骨头可以装满一辆车子，这骨头算是很大了。
English: Zhong Ni said, "I heard that in ancient times, Yu summoned the gods to the mountain for a meeting. Mr. Feng was late, and Yu killed him. His bones can fill a car. These bones are quite large."

古文：盖丘明亲承圣旨，录为实证矣。
现代文：左丘明亲耳听到圣人的话，他的记载是确凿的证据。
English: Zuo Quming heard the saint's words with his own ears, and his record is conclusive evidence.

古文：又案刘向《说苑。辨物》，王肃之叙孔子什二世孙孔猛所出先人书《家语》，并出此事，故涂山有会稽之名。
现代文：又按刘向《说苑•辨物》，王肃叙述孔子廿二世孙孔猛出示祖先的《家语》，也提到这件事。所以涂山也有会稽这名字，但考证各种典籍及地方上的土名，又怀疑并非此地。
English: According to Liu Xiang's "Saying Garden • Distinguishing Objects," Wang Suen also mentioned this matter when he described Confucius's twenty-second grandson, Confucius, presenting his ancestor's "Home Language." Therefore, Tu Mountain also has this name, but after checking various classics and local names, it is suspected that it is not here.

古文：考校群韦及方土之目，疑非此矣，盖周穆之所会矣，淮水于荆山北，水东南注之，又东北径沛郡义城县东。
现代文：这可能是周穆王会战的地方。淮水流到荆山北面，泄水往东南注入淮水。又往东北流，经过沛郡义城县东边。
English: This may be the place where Zhou Mu Wang would fight. Huai Shui flows to the north of Jing Mountain, and the discharge water is injected into Huai Shui to the southeast. It also flows to the northeast, passing through the east of Yicheng County, Pei County.

古文：司马彪曰：后隶九江也。
现代文：司马彪说：义城县以后隶属九江郡。
English: Sima Biao said: After Yicheng County, it will belong to Jiujiang County.

古文：又东过钟离县北，《世本》曰：钟离，赢姓也。
现代文：又往东流过钟离县北边，《世本》说：钟离，姓赢。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Zhongli County. "World Book" said: Zhongli, surnamed Win.

古文：应劭曰：县故钟离子国也，楚灭之以为县。
现代文：应肋说：钟离县是旧时钟离子国，楚把它灭了，设置为县。
English: Ying Li said: Zhongli County is an old clock ion country. Chu extinguished it and set it up as a county.

古文：《春秋左传》所谓吴公子光伐楚，拔钟离者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》就说到吴公子光伐楚，攻下钟离。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend of the Left" mentioned that Wu Gongzi was a brilliant fighter and defeated Zhong Li.

古文：王莽之蚕富也。
现代文：钟离也就是王莽的蚕富。
English: Zhong Li is also Wang Mang's wealth.

古文：豪水出阴陵县之阳亭北，小屈，有石穴，不测所穷。言穴出钟乳，所未详也。
现代文：豪水发源于阴陵县的阳亭北边，小弯处有个石洞，深不可测，听说洞中有钟乳，详情不清楚。
English: The torrential water originated from the north side of Yangting in Yinling County. There is a rock cave at a small bend, which is unfathomable. It is said that there is a bell in the cave, but the details are unclear.

古文：豪水东北流，径其县西，又屈而南，转东，径其城南，又北历其城东，径小城而北流，注于淮。
现代文：豪水往东北流经钟离县西边，又转向南方，往东流经城南，又往北流经城东，经过小城，北流注入淮水。
English: The heavy water flows to the northeast through the west of Zhongli County, turns to the south, flows to the east through the south of the city, flows to the north through the east of the city, passes through the small city, and the north stream is injected into Huai Shui.

古文：淮水又东，径夏丘县南，又东，涣水入焉。水首受蒗渠于开封县。
现代文：淮水继续往东流，经过夏丘县南边；又往东流，有涣水注入，涣水上流在开封县承接菠蔼渠。
English: The Huai Water continued to flow eastward, passing through the southern edge of Xiaqiu County; it also flowed eastward, with the injection of brackish water, and the upstream of the brackish water undertook the Ping'an Canal in Kaifeng County.

古文：《史记》韩釐王二十一年，使暴救魏，为秦所败，走开封者也。
现代文：《史记》：韩厘王二十一年前，派遣暴戴去援魏，被秦打败，暴载逃向开封。
English: "History": Twenty-one years ago, Han Li Wang sent Wu Dai to aid Wei, was defeated by Qin, and fled to Kaifeng.

古文：东南流径陈留北，又东南，西入九里注之。
现代文：涣水往东南流经陈留北边，又往东南流，又有一条支流注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the north of Chenliu, and then flows to the southeast, and another tributary is injected.

古文：涣水又东南流，径雍丘县故城南，又东径承匡城，又东径襄邑县故城南，故宋之承匡襄牛之地，宋襄公之所葬，故号襄陵矣。
现代文：涣水又往东南流，经过雍丘县老城南边，又往东流经承匡城，又往东流经襄邑县老城南边。从前这是宋承匡、襄牛一带地方，宋襄公就葬在这里，所以叫襄陵。
English: Surabaya also flows to the southeast, passing through the south side of the old city of Yongqiu County, flowing to the east through Chengkang City, and flowing to the east through the south side of the old city of Xiangyi County. In the past, this was a place around Song Chengkang and Xiangyu. Song Xianggong was buried here, so it was called Xiangling.

古文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王十七年，宋景鄯卫公孙仓会齐师，围我襄陵。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王十七年前，宋景截、卫公孙仓联合齐军包围我国襄陵。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Seventeen years before the reign of King Liang Huicheng, Song Jingcheng and Wei Gong Suncang united their armies to encircle our country's Xiangling.

古文：十八年，惠成王以韩师败诸侯师于襄陵。齐侯使楚景舍来求成，即于此也。
现代文：十八年前，惠成王因韩军在襄陵打败诸侯军，齐侯派遣楚景舍来求和，就是这地方。
English: Eighteen years ago, King Huicheng sent Chu Jingshe to ask for peace because the Korean army defeated the vassal army in Xiangling. This is the place.

古文：西有承匡城，《春秋》会于承匡者也。
现代文：西边有承匡城，就是《春秋》所说的在承匡会合。
English: To the west, there is Cheng Kuang City, which is the "Spring and Autumn" mentioned in Cheng Kuang Meeting.

古文：秦始皇以承匡卑湿，徙县于襄陵，更为襄邑。
现代文：秦始皇因承匡地势低洼潮湿，把县治迁到襄陵，改名为襄邑。
English: Qin Shihuang Emperor moved the county seat to Xiangling and renamed it Xiangyun due to the low-lying and humid terrain of Chengguang.

古文：王莽以为襄平也。
现代文：王莽时称为襄平。
English: Wang Mangshi is known as Xiangping.

古文：汉桓帝建和元年，封梁冀子胡狗为侯国。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年，把襄陵封给梁冀的儿子胡狗，立为侯国。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Huan gave the title of Xiangling to Liang Jie's son, Hugu, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：《陈留风俗传》曰：县南有涣水，故《传》曰：睢、涣之间出文章，天子郊庙御服出焉，《尚书》所谓厥篚织文者也。
现代文：《陈留风俗传》说；县南有涣水。所以该书又说：睢水、涣水之间是创制礼乐法度的地方，皇帝的郊坛、宗庙、御服都是在这里制定出来的。就是《尚书》里所说的：竹篮里装的绩绵编织成花纹入贡。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" says that there is a Yanshui in the south of the county. Therefore, the book also says: Yanshui and Yanshui are the places where the ritual music law is created, and the emperor's suburb, ancestral temple, and imperial clothing are all made here. That is what is said in the "Shang Shu": The bamboo basket is woven into a pattern for tribute.

古文：涣水又东南径已吾县故城南，又东径鄫城北。
现代文：涣水又往东南流，经过巳吾县老城南边，又往东流过都城北边。
English: Surabaya also flows southeast, passing the southern edge of the old city of Miu County, and flowing east past the northern edge of the capital city.

古文：《春秋》襄公元年，《经》书，晋韩厥帅师伐郑，鲁仲孙蔑会齐、曹、邾、杞，次于鄫。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公元年前《经》文里记载，晋国韩厥率兵征讨郑国，鲁国仲孙蔑与齐、曹、邻、祀诸侯军相会合，就在都歇宿。
English: "Spring and Autumn": It is recorded in the "Ching" text that before the year of Xiang, Han Jue of Jin led an army to recruit Zheng, and Zhong Sun Zi of Lu met with Qi, Cao, Neighbors, and worshiped the armies of the princes, and stayed in Du.

古文：杜预曰：陈留囊邑县东南有鄫城。
现代文：杜预说：陈留襄邑县东南有部城。
English: Du Yu said: There is a city in the southeast of Chenluo County.

古文：涣水又东南径邵城北，新城南，又东南，左合明沟，沟水自蓬洪陂东南流，谓之明沟，下入涣水。
现代文：涣水又往东南流过郡城北边、新城南边，又往东南流，在左边汇合明沟―沟水从蓬洪破往东南流，称为明沟―往下注入涣水。
English: Surabaya water also flows southeast through the northern edge of the county seat, the southern edge of the new city, and flows southeast again. On the left, it joins the Minggou - the ditch water breaks from Penghong to the southeast, called the Minggou - and injects Surabaya water.

古文：又径毫城北。
现代文：又流经毫城北边。
English: It also flows through the northern side of the city.

古文：《帝王世记》曰：谷熟为南毫，即汤都也。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：毁熟即南毫，是商汤的国都。
English: "The Century of Emperors" said: Ru Ru Rui, that is, Nanhao, is the capital of Shang Tang.

古文：《十三州志》曰：汉武帝分谷熟置。
现代文：南毫，《十三州志》说：汉武帝分毁熟而设置。
English: In addition, "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: Hanwu Emperor was set up to destroy and mature.

古文：《春秋》庄公十二年，宋公子御说奔毫者也。涣水东径谷熟城南。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公十二年前，宋公子御说逃奔到毫，涣水往东流经毁熟城南。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Zhuang Gong twelve years ago, Song Gongzi said that he fled to the miller, and the water flowed eastward through the ruined south of the city.

古文：汉光武建武二年，封更始子歆为侯国。
现代文：汉光武帝建武二年，把毁熟封给更始帝之子欲，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu gave the fief of Zhujiao to the son of Emperor Qian Shi, establishing it as a principality.

古文：又东径杨亭北。
现代文：又往东流过杨亭北边。
English: It also flows eastward past the northern side of Yangting.

古文：《春秋左氏传》襄公十二年，楚子囊、秦庶长无地，伐宋师于杨梁，以报晋之取郑也。
现代文：《春秋左氏传》：襄公十二年前,楚子囊、秦庶长无地伐宋，进军杨梁，以报复晋国攻郑国。
English: "The Spring and Autumn Legend of the Zuo Family": Twelve years ago, the Duke of Xiang, Chu Zizang, the second-in-command of the Qin Dynasty, invaded Yang Liang in retaliation for Jin's invasion of Zheng.

古文：京相璠曰：宋地矣。
现代文：京相潘说：这是宋的地方。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: This is Song's place.

古文：今睢阳东南三十里，有故杨梁城，今曰阳亭也，俗名之曰缘城，非矣。
现代文：现在唯阳东南三十里还有杨梁旧城，今名阳亭。俗称缘城是不对的。
English: Now, there is also Yang Liang Old Town, now known as Yangting, 30 miles southeast of Yuyang. It is not right to call it a border town.

古文：西北去梁国八十里。
现代文：此城西北距梁国八十里。
English: This city is eighty miles northwest of Liang Province.

古文：涣水又东径沛郡之建平县故城南，汉武帝元凤元年，封杜延年为侯国，王莽之田平也。
现代文：涣水又往东流，经过沛郡建平县老城南边。汉昭帝元凤元年前，把建平封给杜延年，立为侯国，就是王莽的田平。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward, passing through the southern part of the old city of Jianping County, Pei County. Han Zhao Emperor Yuanfeng Yuan years ago, Jianping was given to Du Yan and established as a vassal state, that is, Wang Mang's Tianping.

古文：又东径酂县故城南。
现代文：又往东流过娜县老城南边。
English: It also flows eastward past the south side of the old town of Na County.

古文：《春秋》襄公十年，公会诸侯及齐世子光于。今其地聚是也，玉莽之酇治矣。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十年前，襄公在都会见诸侯和齐世子光，那地方就是今天的都聚，也就是王莽的娜治。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Ten years ago, Prince Xiang met with princes and emperors in the capital, that place is today's gathering, that is, Wang Mang's Naji.

古文：涣水又东南径费亭南。
现代文：涣水又往东南流经费亭南。
English: Surabaya's water also flows south-eastwards.

古文：汉建和元年，封中常侍沛国曹腾为侯国。
现代文：汉建和元年，把这地方封给中常侍沛国曹腾，立为侯国。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, this place was given to the Vice-regent Pei Guo Cao Teng and established as a vassal state.

古文：腾，字季兴，谯人也。
现代文：曹腾字季兴，谁人。
English: Cao Teng's character Ji Xing, who is he?

古文：永初中，定桓帝策，封亭侯，此城即其所食之邑也。
现代文：永初年间，确定桓帝的政策，封亭侯，此城就是他的食邑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, Emperor Huan's policy was determined, and this city was his food village.

古文：涣水又东径銍县故城南。
现代文：涣水又往东流经锉县老城南边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the southern side of the old city of Surabaya.

古文：昔吴广之起兵也，使葛婴下之。
现代文：从前吴广起兵，派遣葛婴攻下此城。
English: Once upon a time, Wu Guang raised an army and sent Ge Ying to conquer this city.

古文：涣水又东，苞水注之。
现代文：涣水又往东流，有苞水注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, and surabaya water is injected.

古文：水出谯城北白汀陂。陂水东流径酇县南，又东，径郸县故城南。
现代文：苞水发源于谁城北面的白汀破，破水往东流经嘟县南边，又往东流经郸县老城南边。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Baiting Canal on the north side of Who's City. The broken water flows eastward through the south side of Surabaya County, and eastward through the south side of the old city of Surabaya County.

古文：汉景帝中元年，封周应为侯国。王莽更之曰单城也。音多。
现代文：汉景帝中元元年前，将这地方封给周应，立为侯国，王莽改名为单城―单，读作多。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty and before the first year of the Han Dynasty, this place was given to Zhou Ying and established as a principality. Wang Mang changed its name to Shancheng - Shan, read as many.

古文：又东径嵇山北，秘氏故居。
现代文：又往东流经稽山北边，这是稽氏的故居。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of Jishan Mountain, which is the former residence of Jishi.

古文：嵇康本姓奚，会稽人也。
现代文：秘康本姓奚，会稽人。
English: Hikang, whose real surname is Hao, is the auditor of the association.

古文：先人自会稽迁于谯之酇县，改为嵇氏。取嵇字之上以为姓，盖志本也。
现代文：稽氏祖先从会稽迁徙到谁郡的锉县，改姓为稽，以稽字上部作为姓氏，以表示其原籍。
English: Ancestors of the Keishi clan migrated from the Keishi community to Shixian in Chi County, and changed their surname to Keishi, using the upper part of the keishi as their surname to indicate their origin.

古文：《嵇氏谱》曰：谯有嵇山，家于其侧，遂以为氏。
现代文：《稽氏谱》说：谁有秘山，在山边定居下来，就以山为姓氏。
English: "Hui's Genealogy" says: Whoever has a secret mountain and settles down on the edge of the mountain will take the mountain as his surname.

古文：县，魏黄初中，文帝以酇城父、山桑、銍置谯郡，故隶谯焉。
现代文：魏黄初年间，文帝以榔、城父、山桑、锤设置谁郡，所以锤县隶属于谁。
English: During the first years of the Wei and Huang Dynasties, Emperor Wen set up counties with the names of Jie, Chengdu, Shanshan and Hammer. Therefore, Hammer County belongs to whom?

古文：苞水东流入涣，涣水又东南径蕲县故城南。
现代文：苞水往东流注入涣水后，涣水继续往东南流，经过薪县老城的南边。
English: After the eastward flow of Surabaya water injected into Surabaya, Surabaya water continued to flow to the southeast, passing through the southern edge of the old city of Qi County.

古文：《地理志》曰：故甀乡也。
现代文：薪县，《地理志》说：就是旧时的甄乡。
English: Tsui County, "Geography" said: it is the old Zhenxiang.

古文：汉高帝破黥布于此县，旧都尉治，王莽之蕲城也。
现代文：汉高帝在这里打败了默布。薪县从前是都尉治所，就是王莽的薪城。
English: Emperor Han Gao defeated Mibu here. Tsui County was once a governor's residence, that is, Wang Mang's Tsui City.

古文：水上有古石梁处，遗基尚存。
现代文：古时水上有石桥，遗址还在。
English: In ancient times, there was a stone bridge over the water, and the ruins are still there.

古文：涣水又东径谷阳县，左会八丈故渎。渎上承洨水，南流注于涣。
现代文：涣水又往东流经毁阳县，在左边汇合了八丈故读，此渠上承佼水，往南注入涣水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through Zuoyang County, merging with Hachijo Old Reading on the left. This canal receives Kyo water and injects Surabaya water to the south.

古文：涣水又东径谷阳戍南，又东南径谷阳故城东北，右与解水会。
现代文：涣水又往东流经毁阳戍南，又往东南流经毁阳老城东北，在右边与解水汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the south of Ziyang, and flows southeastward through the northeast of Ziyang old city, and merges with the dissolved water on the right.

古文：水上承县西南解塘，东北流径谷阳城南，即谷水也。
现代文：解水上流承接毁阳县西南的解塘，往东北流经毁阳城南边，就是谷水。
English: The upstream flow of the dissolved water takes over the dissolved pond in the southwest of Zhoyang County, and flows to the northeast through the south of Zhoyang City, which is the valley water.

古文：应肋曰：城在谷水之阳，又东北流注于涣。
现代文：应劫说：城在谷水之阳。又往东北流，注入涣水。
English: It is said: the city is in the sun of the valley water. It flows to the northeast, and it is infused with brackish water.

古文：涣水又东南径白石戍南，又径虹城南，洨水注之。
现代文：涣水又往东南流经白石戍南边，又流经虹城南边，汇合了佼水。
English: Surabaya water also flows southeast through the southern edge of Shiroishi, and flows through the southern edge of Hongcheng, merging with Kyo-sui.

古文：水首受蕲水于蕲县，东南流径谷阳县，八丈故渎出焉。
现代文：佼水上流在薪县承接薪水，往东南流经毁阳县。八丈故读就从这里分支流出。
English: The upper reaches of the Kyo-sui River flow into Tsui County to receive salaries, and flow southeast through Zouyang County. The Hachijo Old Reading River branches out from here.

古文：又东合长直故沟。
现代文：又往东流，汇合了长直故沟。
English: It also flows eastward, merging with the Changzhi Ancient Ditch.

古文：沟上承蕲水，南会于洨。
现代文：故沟上承薪水，南流与佼水汇合。
English: As a result, the upper reaches of the ditch were flooded, and the southern stream merged with the upper reaches of the river.

古文：位水又东南流，径洨县故城北。
现代文：佼水又往东南流过佼县老城北边。
English: The Kyo-sui water also flows southeast through the northern side of the old town of Kyo-prefecture.

古文：洨水又东南，与涣水乱流而入于淮，故应劭曰：洨水南入淮。
现代文：县内有该下聚，就是汉高祖大败项羽的地方。王莽改县名为肴城。应劭说；这是佼水的发源地。佼，音绞，把经纱绞合的绞。佼水再往东南流，与涣水一同乱流注入淮水。所以应劭说：佼水南流注入淮水。
English: Wang Mang changed the name of the county to Cuisine City. It is said that this is the birthplace of qiaoshui. Qiaoshui, Yingzhu, the warp yarn twisting. Qiaoshui then flows to the southeast, and together with the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of the turbulent flow of

古文：淮水又东至巉石山，潼水注之。
现代文：淮水又往东流到蠕石山，有撞水注入。
English: The Huai River also flows eastward to Mount Cree, where it is injected with impinging water.

古文：水首受潼县西南潼陂。
现代文：渔水上口承接渔县西南的撞破。
English: The upper mouth of Yuishui is connected to the southwestern part of Yu County.

古文：县故临淮郡之属县，王莽改曰成信矣。
现代文：撞县旧时是临淮郡的属县，王莽改名为成信。
English: In the old days, Qian County belonged to Linhuai County. Wang Mang changed his name to Chengxin.

古文：南径沛国夏丘县，绝蕲水，又南径夏丘县故城西，王莽改曰归思也。
现代文：南流经沛国的夏丘县，横穿过薪水，又南流经夏丘县老城西边，王莽改名为归思。
English: The south stream flows through Xiaqiu County of Pei Province, passing through the salary, and the south stream flows through the west of the old city of Xiaqiu County. Wang Mang changed his name to Guisi.

古文：又东南流，径临潼戍西，又东南至巉石，西南入淮。
现代文：又往东南流经临撞戍西边；又往东南流到蠕石西边，然后南流注入淮水。
English: It also flows southeastward through the west side of Linchuan; it also flows southeastward to the west side of Creepstone, and then the south stream is injected into Huai Shui.

古文：淮水又东径浮山。
现代文：淮水又往东流过浮山。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward through Fushan.

古文：山北对巉石山，梁氏天监中，立堰于二山之间，逆天地之心，乖民神之望，自然水溃坏矣。
现代文：浮山北对峰石山。梁氏天监年间一，在两山间筑堰，违逆了天地的心意，背离了人神的愿望，当然要被洪水冲垮了。
English: During the first year of Liang's celestial supervision, he built a weir between the two mountains, defying the will of heaven and earth, and deviating from the wishes of gods and mortals. Of course, he would be swept away by the flood.

古文：淮水又东径徐县南，历涧水注之。
现代文：淮水又往东流经徐县南边，有历涧水注入。
English: Huai Water also flows eastward through the southern part of Xu County, and has been injected with Lishui Water.

古文：导徐城西北徐陂，陂水南流，绝蕲水。径历涧戍西，东南流注于淮。
现代文：历涧水自徐城西北的徐破引出，南流横穿过薪水，经历涧戍西，往东南注入淮水。
English: The Lishui water is drawn from the northwest of Xucheng, and the south stream crosses the salary, passes through the west of Shaanxi, and injects the Huai water to the southeast.

古文：淮水又东，池水注之。
现代文：淮水又往东流，有池水注入。
English: Huai Shui also flows to the east, with pond water being injected.

古文：水出东城县，东北流，径东城县故城南。
现代文：池水发源于东城县，往东北流经东城县老城南边。
English: The water of the pond originates in Dongcheng County and flows to the northeast through the south of the old town of Dongcheng County.

古文：汉以数干骑追羽，羽帅二十八骑引东城因四聩山，斩将而去，即此处也。
现代文：汉军以骑兵数千追击项羽，项羽率领二十八名骑兵去东城，利用四馈山地势杀了几名汉将突围而去，就是这地方。
English: The Han army chased Xiang Yu with thousands of cavalrymen. Xiang Yu led 28 cavalrymen to Dongcheng and used the Four Feeding Mountains to kill several Han generals to break out of the encirclement. This is the place.

古文：《史记》：孝文帝八年，封淮南厉王子刘良为侯国。
现代文：《史记》孝文帝八年前，将它封给淮南厉王的儿子刘良，立为侯国。
English: "Histories" Emperor Xiaowen eight years ago, it was given to Liu Liang, the son of Huainan Li Wang, and established as a principality.

古文：《地理志》：王莽更名之曰武城也。
现代文：《地理志》：王莽将它改名为武城。
English: "Geography": Wang Mang changed its name to Wucheng.

古文：池水又东北，流历二山间，东北入于淮，谓之池河口也。
现代文：池水往东北流经二山间，往东北注入淮水，汇流处叫池河口。
English: The pond water flows to the northeast through the two mountains, and is injected into the northeast by the Huai River. The confluence is called the pond estuary.

古文：淮水又东，薪水注之。
现代文：淮水继续往东流，有薪水注入。
English: Huai Shui continues to flow eastward, with salary injection.

古文：水首受睢水于谷熟城东北，东径建城县故城北。
现代文：薪水在毁熟城东北上承睢水，往东流经建城县老城北边。
English: Salaries in the northeast of the ruined city of Jiancheng flow eastward through the north of the old city of Jiancheng County.

古文：汉武帝元朔四年，封长沙定王子刘拾为侯国。王莽之多聚也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔四年前，将这地方封给长沙定王的儿子刘拾，立为侯国，就是王莽的多聚。
English: Four years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo granted this place to Liu Zhi, the son of the King of Changsha Ding Wang, and established it as a principality, which is Wang Mang's polygamy.

古文：蕲水又东南，径蕲县。县有大泽乡，陈涉起兵于此，篝火为狐鸣处也。
现代文：薪水又往东南流经薪县，县内有大泽乡，陈涉在这里起兵，就是簧火发出狐鸣的地方。
English: Salaries also flow south-eastwards through Zhuxian County, which includes Dazawa Township, where Chen Zhuo raised an army, and is the place where the reed fire emits fox song.

古文：南则江水出焉。
现代文：南面是佼水所出处。
English: To the south is the source of the Kyo-mizu.

古文：薪水又东南，北八丈故读出焉。
现代文：薪水又往东南流，北八丈故读从这里流出。
English: Salaries also flow to the southeast, and the North Hachijo old reading flowed out from here.

古文：又东流，长直故沟出焉。又东入夏丘县，东绝潼水，径夏丘县故城北，又东南径潼县南，又东流入徐县，东绝历涧，又东径大徐县故城南，又东注于淮。
现代文：又往东流，长直故沟从这里流出；又往东流入夏丘县，往东穿过渔水，流过夏丘老城北边，又转向东南流经渔县南边，又往东流进入徐县，东穿历涧，然后往东流经大徐县老城南边，往东注入淮水。
English: It also flows eastward, and the Changzhi Old Ditch flows out from here; it also flows eastward into Xiaqiu County, eastward through Yuishui, flows through the north side of the old town of Xiaqiu, and turns to the southeast flow through the south side of Yuishui County, and flows eastward into Xuxian County, east through Licheng, and then flows eastward through the south side of the old town of Dashu County, and eastward into Huai Shui.

古文：淮水又东历客山，径盱胎县故城南。
现代文：淮水又往东流经客山，流过盯胎县老城南边。
English: Huai Shui also flows eastward through Hakka Mountain, flowing through the southern part of the old city of Dengtao County.

古文：《地理志》曰：都尉治。
现代文：《地理志》说：盯胎是都尉治所。
English: "Geography" said: Fetal monitoring is the responsibility of the prefectural governor.

古文：汉武帝元朔元年，封江都易王子刘蒙之为侯国。王莽更名之曰匡武。
现代文：汉武帝元朔元年前，封给江都易王的儿子刘蒙之，立为侯国，王莽改名为匡武。
English: Before the first year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Liu Mengzhi, the son of King Jiangduyi, was given the title of prince and Wang Mang changed his name to Kuangwu.

古文：淮水又东径广陵淮阳城南，城北临泗水，阻于二水之间。
现代文：淮水又往东流，经过广陵淮阳城南边。此城北频泗水，被阻隔于二水之间。
English: The Huai Water also flows eastward, passing the southern edge of Guangling Huaiyang City, which is separated from the two waters by the north-flowing Huai Water.

古文：《述征记》淮阳太守治，自后置戍，县亦有时废兴也。
现代文：《述征记》说：这是淮阳太守治所，以后设置边防城堡，县也时立时废。
English: "Records of the Conquest" said: This is the Huaiyang Tai Shoujisho, later set up a border castle, the county is also wasted.

古文：又东北至下邳淮阴县西，泗水从西北来流往之。
现代文：又往东北流，到下邱郡淮阴县西边，泗水从西北流来注人。
English: It also flowed to the northeast, to the west of Huaiyin County, Lower Qiu County, and the floodwaters poured in from the northwest.

古文：淮、泗之会，即角城也。
现代文：淮水与泗水汇合的地方有城，就是角城。
English: The place where Huai Water and Surabaya Water converge has a city, that is, Jiaocheng.

古文：左右两川，翼夹二水，决入之所，所谓泗口也。
现代文：川流在角城左右两侧流过，城被夹在两水中间；泗水入淮的地方，就是所谓泅口。
English: The river flows past the city on both sides, and the city is sandwiched between the two waters. The place where the brackish water enters the Huai River is the so-called mouth of the river.

古文：又东过淮阴县北，中渎水出白马湖，东北注之。
现代文：又往东流过淮阴县北边，中读水出自白马湖，往东北注人淮水。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Huaiyin County. The middle reading water comes from Lake Baima, and the middle reading water is injected into the northeast.

古文：淮水右岸，即淮阴也。城西二里有公路浦。
现代文：淮阴坐落在淮水右岸，城西二里有公路浦。
English: Huaiyin is located on the right bank of Huai Shui, and there is a highway station in the west of the city.

古文：《地理志》所谓渠水也，西北至未口入淮。
现代文：从前袁术去九江，即将往东投奔袁谭，途经此浦，因而得名。又往东流经淮阴县老城北边，此城北濒淮水。
English: Formerly, Yuan Shou went to Jiujiang, and was about to go east to Yuan Tan, passing through this ur, hence the name. It also flowed eastward through the north of the old city of Huaiyin County, this north of the city on the edge of Huai Shui.

古文：自永和中，江都水断：其水上承欧阳埭，引江入埭，六十里至广陵城。
现代文：汉高帝六年以后，江都水断流了。此水上流承接欧阳棣，把江水引入堰中，由此去广陵城六十里。
English: Six years after Emperor Han Gao, the upstream flow of the Yangtze River was cut off. This upstream flow undertook the Ouyang Canal, bringing the river water into the weir, from which it traveled sixty miles to Guangling City.

古文：楚、汉之间为东阳郡，高祖六年力荆国，十一年为吴城，即吴王濞所筑也。
现代文：广陵在楚、汉对峙时是东阳郡，高祖六年是荆国，十一年是吴城，城是吴王滇所筑。
English: Guangling was Dongyang County at the time of the confrontation between Chu and Han, Gaozu was Jing Province for six years, Wucheng for eleven years, and the city was built by King Wu.

古文：景帝四年，更名江都。武帝元狩三年，更曰广陵。王莽更名郡曰江平，县曰定安。
现代文：景帝四年改名江都，武帝元狩三年又改为广陵，王莽再次改名，郡称江平，县名定安。
English: Emperor Jing changed the name of Jiangdu in four years, Emperor Wudi changed it to Guangling in three years, Wang Mang changed his name again, the county was called Jiangping, and the county name was Ding'an.

古文：至永和中，患湖道多风，陈敏因穿樊梁湖北口，下注津湖径渡，渡十二哩，方达北口，直至夹邪。
现代文：城东水上有桥，叫洛桥。中读水从广陵北面的武广湖东边、陆阳湖西边流过，两湖东西相距五里，水就从两湖中间流出，下注樊梁湖。旧水道向东北伸展，到博芝、射阳二湖，往西北从夹邪直通到山阳。
English: There is a bridge over the water to the east of the city, called Luo Bridge. The middle reading water flows from the east of Wuguang Lake on the north side of Guangling and the west side of Luyang Lake. The two lakes are five miles apart from east to west, and the water flows out from the middle of the two lakes and pours into Qilian Lake. The old waterway extends to the northeast, to Boqi and Sheyang Two Lakes, and to the northwest from Jiayang to Shanyang.

古文：兴宁中，复以津湖多风，又自湖之南口，沿东岸二十里，穿渠入北口，自后行者不复由湖。
现代文：到了永和年间又因津湖多风，又从湖的南口沿东岸二十里凿渠通北口，自此以后，行旅就不再从湖里走了。
English: In the year of Yonghe, because of the windy weather of Lake Jin, a 20-mile canal was dug from the south mouth of the lake along the east coast to the north mouth. Since then, travelers no longer walk from the lake.

古文：故蒋济《三州论》曰，淮湖纡远，水陆异路，山阳不通，陈敏穿沟，更凿马濑，百里渡湖者也。
现代文：所以蒋济《三州论》说：淮水离津湖曲折而遥远，水行陆行道路不同，不能到达山阳，陈敏因而开凿运河，又凿马獭，百里渡湖。
English: Therefore, Jiang Zi's "Three Provinces" said: Huai Shui is far away from Lake Tsu with its twists and turns. The waterway and land route are different, and it is impossible to reach the mountains. Therefore, Chen Min dug a canal and a pontoon to cross the lake for a hundred miles.

古文：自广陵出山阳白马湖，径山阳城西，即射阳县之故城也。
现代文：从广陵取道山阳白马湖，经过山阳城西边，就是射阳县老城。
English: Taking the road from Guangling to Sanyang Baima Lake, passing the west side of Sanyang City, is the old city of Sheyang County.

古文：应劭曰：在射水之阳。
现代文：应劫说：城在射水北边。
English: The robber said, "The city is on the north side of the waterfall."

古文：汉高祖六年，封楚左令尹项缠为侯国也。
现代文：汉高祖元年前，将该县封给楚左令尹项缠，立为侯国。
English: Before the first year of the Hangao Emperor, the county was given to the Chuzo Emperor Yin Xiangwang and established as a vassal state.

古文：王莽更之曰监淮亭。
现代文：王莽改名为监淮亭。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Jianhueiting.

古文：世租建武十五年，封子荆为山阳公，治此，十七年为王国。
现代文：世祖建武十五年，封他的儿子刘荆为山阳公，治所就在这里，十七年升格为王国。
English: In the fifteenth year of King Jianwu's reign, his son Liu Jing was named the Prince of Shanyang, and the capital was located here. In the seventeenth year, it was upgraded to a kingdom.

古文：城本北中郎将庾希所镇。
现代文：此城原由北中郎将庚希镇守。
English: This castle was originally guarded by Kitanakuro, who was the lord of the town of Goshi.

古文：中渎水又东，谓之山阳浦，又东入淮，谓之山阳口者也。
现代文：中读水又往东流，经过一处地方叫山阳浦，又往东注入淮水，汇流处叫山阳口。
English: The middle reading water flows eastward, passing through a place called Sanyangpu, and then eastward into Huai Shui, and the confluence is called Sanyangkou.

古文：又东，两小水流注之。
现代文：又往东流，有两条小水流来注入。
English: It flowed eastward again, and two small streams fed into it.

古文：淮水左径泗水国南，故东海郡也。
现代文：淮水左边流经泗水国南，就是旧时的东海郡。
English: The left side of the Huai River flows through the south of Surabaya, which is the old Donghai County.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：泗水，国名。
现代文：徐广《史记音义》说：泗水是国名。
English: Xu Guang's "Historical Notation" said: Surabaya is the name of the country.

古文：汉武帝元鼎四年初置，都淩。封常山宪王子思王商为国。
现代文：汉武帝元鼎四年开始设置，定都于凌，封给常山宪王的儿子思王商，立为王国。
English: It was established in the fourth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign of the Yuan Dynasty, with its capital at Ling. It was given to the son of King Changshan Xianwang, Siuwang Shang, and established as a kingdom.

古文：《地理志》曰：王莽更泗水郡为水顺，淩县为生淩，淩水注之，水出淩县，东流径其县故城东，而东南流注于淮，实曰淩口也。
现代文：《地理志》说：王莽把泗水郡改名为水顺，把凌县改名为生凌。凌水在这里注入。凌水发源于凌县，往东流经老城东边，然后往东南注入淮水，汇流处叫凌口。
English: "Geography" said: Wang Mang changed the name of Surabaya County to Shuishun and Ling County to Shengling. Lingshui was injected here. Lingshui originated in Ling County, flowed eastward through the east of the old city, and then injected into Huai Shui to the southeast. The confluence is called Lingkou.

古文：应劭曰淩水出县西南入淮，即《经》之所谓小水者也。
现代文：应韵说：凌水发源于凌县西南部，流注入淮水，就是《水经》里说的小水。
English: According to the rhyme: Lingshui originated in the southwestern part of Ling County, and the flow was injected into Huai Shui, which is the small water mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：又东至广陵淮浦县，人于海。
现代文：又往东流到广陵郡淮浦县，注人大海。
English: It also flowed eastward to Huaipu County, Guangling County, and poured into the sea.

