古文：十有九年春，王正月，诸侯盟于祝柯。
现代文：十九年春季，周历正月，各诸侯在祝柯结盟。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, all the lords allied themselves with Zhu Ke.

古文：晋人执邾子。
现代文：晋国人拘捕了邾悼公。
English: The Jin people arrested Zou Yingguo.

古文：公至自伐齐。
现代文：襄公从攻打齐国的地方回来。
English: Shigong returned from the battlefield where he had attacked Qi.

古文：取邾田，自漷水。
现代文：占取了邾田，以漷水为疆界。
English: occupied Putian, with Surabaya as its border.

古文：季孙宿如晋。
现代文：季孙宿去到晋国。
English: Ji Sunjuku went to Jin Province.

古文：葬曹成公。
现代文：安葬曹成公。
English: The funeral of Cao Chenggong.

古文：夏，卫孙林父帅师伐齐。
现代文：夏季，卫国的孙林父率兵攻打齐国。
English: In the summer, Sun Lin's father, the defender of the country, led his troops to attack Qi.

古文：秋七月辛卯，齐侯环卒。
现代文：秋季七月辛卯日，齐侯去世。
English: On the day of Xinwu in the autumn of July, Qi Hou passed away.

古文：晋士匄帅师侵齐至穀，闻齐侯卒，乃还。
现代文：晋国的士匄率领军队攻打齐国一直到穀地，借道齐侯去世的消息，就回国了。
English: The Shih Tzu of Jin led an army to attack Qi all the way to the Valley of Grain. After receiving the news of Qi's death, the Shih Tzu returned to China.

古文：八月丙辰，仲孙蔑卒。
现代文：八月丙辰日，仲孙蔑去世。
English: On August 3rd, Nakasone passed away.

古文：齐杀其大夫高厚。
现代文：齐国杀掉自己的大夫高厚。
English: Qi killed his own doctor Gao Hou.

古文：郑杀其大夫公子嘉。
现代文：郑国杀掉自己的大夫公子嘉。
English: Zheng Guo killed his own doctor, Gongzi Jia.

古文：冬，葬齐灵公。
现代文：冬季，安葬齐灵公。
English: In winter, Qilinggong was buried.

古文：城西郛。
现代文：在外城西边修筑城墙。
English: Build the wall on the west side of the outer city.

古文：叔孙豹会晋士匄于柯。
现代文：叔孙豹与晋国的士匄在柯地会见。
English: Uncles and grandsons of the leopards meet with the Shih Tzu of Jin in Ke Di.

古文：城武城。
现代文：在武城筑城。
English: Build a city in Wucheng.

古文：十九年春，诸侯还自沂上，盟于督扬，曰： 大毋侵小。 
现代文：十九年春季，诸侯从沂水边上回来，在督扬结盟，说： 大国不要侵犯小国。 
English: In the spring of the 19th year, the princes returned from the edge of Surabaya and made an alliance in Duyang, saying: Big countries should not encroach on small countries.

古文：执邾悼公，以其伐我故。
现代文：逮捕了邾悼公，这是因为进攻我国的缘故。
English: He was arrested because he attacked our country.

古文：遂次于泗上，疆我田。
现代文：诸侯的军队就驻扎在泗水边上，划定我国的疆界。
English: The armies of the princes were stationed on the edge of Surabaya to delineate the borders of our country.

古文：取邾田自漷水，归之于我。
现代文：取得了邾国的土田，从漷水以西的地方都划归我国。
English: They obtained the farmland of Surabaya, and all the land west of Surabaya was assigned to China.

古文：晋侯先归。
现代文：晋平公先回国。
English: Emperor Jinpyeong returned home first.

古文：公享晋六卿于蒲圃，赐之三命之服。
现代文：鲁襄公在蒲圃设享招待晋国的六卿，赐给他们华丽的三命车服。
English: Prince Lu Xiang invited the six nobles of Jin Province to Pu Pu, and presented them with magnificent three-life chariot suits.

古文：军尉、司马、司空、舆尉、候奄，皆受一命之服。
现代文：军尉、司马、司空、舆尉、候奄都接受一命车服。
English: The lieutenant, Sima, Siku, the public officer, and the candidate for election all received life jackets.

古文：贿荀偃束锦，加璧，乘马，先吴寿梦之鼎。
现代文：送给荀偃五匹束锦，加上玉璧，四匹马，再送给他吴寿梦的铜鼎。
English: He gave him five bundles of brocade, plus jade and four horses, and then gave him the bronze ring of Wu Shoumen.

古文：荀偃瘅疽，生疡于头。
现代文：荀偃长了恶疮，痈疽生在头部。
English: The maggots have developed malignant growths, and gangrene has appeared on the head.

古文：济河，及著雍，病，目出。
现代文：渡过黄河，到达著雍，病危，眼珠子都鼓了出来。
English: After crossing the Yellow River and arriving in Yong, he was critically ill and his eyes were bulging.

古文：大夫先归者皆反。
现代文：大夫先回去的都赶回来。
English: The doctors who went back first all rushed back.

古文：士匄请见，弗内。
现代文：士匄请求进见，荀偃不接见。
English: If a scholar requests an audience, he will not receive it.

古文：请后，曰： 郑甥可。 
现代文：派人问立谁为继承人，荀偃说： 郑国的外甥可以。 
English: He sent someone to ask who should be the heir, and Zou said: Zheng Guo's nephew can be the heir.

古文：二月甲寅，卒，而视，不可含。
现代文：二月十九日，死，眼睛不闭，口闭紧不能放进珠玉。
English: February 19th, dead, eyes not closed, mouth tightly shut, can't fit in the jewel.

古文：宣子盥而抚之曰： 事吴，敢不如事主！ 
现代文：士匄盥洗然后抚摸尸体，说： 事奉吴岂敢不如事奉您！ 
English: The scholar washed and then stroked the corpse, saying, "If you dare to serve Wu, it is better to serve you!"

古文：犹视。
现代文：荀偃的尸体还是没有闭眼。
English: The baboon's corpse still did not close its eyes.

古文：栾怀子曰： 其为未卒事于齐故也乎？ 
现代文：栾怀子说： 是为了齐国的事情没有完成的缘故吗？ 
English: Zou Huai Zi said: Is it because of the unfinished business in Qi?

古文：乃复抚之曰： 主苟终，所不嗣事于齐者，有如河！ 
现代文：就又抚摸着尸体说： 您如果死去以后，我不继续从事于齐国的事情，有河神为证！ 
English: He stroked the corpse again and said, "If you die, I will not continue to be engaged in the affairs of Qi, as evidenced by the river god!

古文：乃瞑，受含。
现代文：荀偃这才闭了眼，接受了放进嘴里的含玉。
English: It was only then that the baboon closed its eyes and accepted the pearls that were placed in its mouth.

古文：宣子出，曰： 吾浅之为丈夫也。 
现代文：士匄出去，说： 作为一个男人，我实在是浅薄啊。 
English: The scholar went out and said: As a man, I am really shallow.

古文：晋栾鲂帅师从卫孙文子伐齐。
现代文：晋国的栾鲂领兵跟从卫国的孙文子进攻齐国。
English: Jin's general Zou led the troops to attack Qi with the help of Sun Wenzi, who was defending the country.

古文：季武子如晋拜师，晋侯享之。
现代文：季武子去到晋国拜谢出兵，晋平公设享礼招待他。
English: Ji Wu Zi went to Jin Province to offer thanks for sending troops, and Jin Ping publicly set up a ceremony to invite him.

古文：范宣子为政，赋《黍苗》。
现代文：范宣子主政，赋《黍苗》这首诗。
English: Fan Xuan Zi presided over the government and wrote the poem "Seedling."

古文：季武子兴，再拜稽首曰： 小国之仰大国也，如百穀之仰膏雨焉！
现代文：季武子站起来，再拜叩头，说： 小国的仰望大国，好像各种谷物仰望润泽的雨水。
English: Jiwuko stood up, bowed again, and said, "A small country looking up to a big country is like a variety of grains looking up to moist rainwater.

古文：若常膏之，其天下辑睦，岂唯敝邑？ 
现代文：如果经常润泽，天下将会和睦，岂独是我国？ 
English: If you moisturize regularly, the world will be in harmony. Is our country the only one?

古文：赋《六月》。
现代文：就赋了《六月》这首诗。
English: This gave rise to the poem "June."

古文：季武子以所得于齐之兵，作林钟而铭鲁功焉。臧武仲谓季孙曰： 非礼也。
现代文：季武子把在齐国得到的兵器制作了林钟并用铭文记载鲁国的武功，臧武仲对季武子说： 这是不合于礼的。
English: Ji Wuzhong said to Ji Wuzhong, "This is not proper," because Ji Wuzhong had made a bell from the weapons obtained in Qi and recorded the military exploits of Lu with an inscription.

古文：夫铭，天子令德，诸侯言时计功，大夫称伐。
现代文：铭文，只是用来记载天子的德行，诸侯用来记载举动合于时令和建立的功绩，大夫用来记载征伐。
English: The inscriptions are only used to record the virtuous deeds of the sons of heaven, the lords to record the actions of the time and the achievements of the establishment, and the doctors to record the conquest.

古文：今称伐则下等也，计功则借人也，言时则妨民多矣，何以为铭？
现代文：现在记载征伐，那是降了一等了，记载功劳，那是借助别人的力量；记载合于时令，那么对百姓的妨碍又很多，用什么来载人铭文？
English: Now the record of the conquest, that is, has been downgraded; the record of the merit, that is, with the help of other people's strength; the record is in line with the times, so there are many obstacles to the people, what is used to carry the inscription?

古文：且夫大伐小，取其所得以作彝器，铭其功烈以示子孙，昭明德而惩无礼也。
现代文：而且大国攻打小国，拿他们所得到的东西来制作宗庙器具，记载他们的功绩，以此让子孙看到，这是为了宣扬明德而惩罚无礼。
English: Moreover, the big country attacked the small country, and they used what they got to make the ancestral temple equipment, recorded their achievements, so that their descendants could see that this was to promote virtue and punish rudeness.

古文：今将借人之力以救其死，若之何铭之？
现代文：现在是借助了别人的力量来拯救自己的死亡，怎么能记载这个呢？
English: Now it is with the help of others to save their own death, how can this be recorded?

古文：小国幸于大国，而昭所获焉以怒之，亡之道也。 
现代文：小国侥幸战胜大国，反而显示所得的战利品以激怒敌人，这是亡国之道啊。 
English: A small country defeats a big country by chance, but displays the spoils to infuriate the enemy. This is the way to ruin a country.

古文：齐侯娶于鲁曰颜懿姬，无子。其姪鬷声姬生光，以为大子。
现代文：齐灵公从鲁国娶妻，名叫颜懿姬，没有生孩子，她的侄女鬷声姬生了光，齐灵公把子光立为太子。
English: Lord Qi Ling married a woman from the State of Lu, named Yan Ying Ji, but had no children. Her niece, Yu Sheng Ji, gave birth to a son, and Lord Qi Ling made his son the crown prince.

古文：诸子，仲子，戎子。戎子嬖。
现代文：姬妾中有仲子，戎子，戎子受到宠爱。
English: Among the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines.

古文：仲子生牙，属诸戎子。戎子请以为大子。
现代文：仲子生了牙，把他托付给戎子，戎子请求立牙为太子，齐灵答应了。
English: When Nakako gave birth to Toa, he entrusted him to Ebisu. Ebisu requested that Toa be made crown prince, and Chiring agreed.

古文：许之。
现代文：仲子说： 不行。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：仲子曰： 不可。废常不祥，间诸侯难。
现代文：废弃常规，不吉祥；触犯诸侯，难于成功。
English: Abandon routine, not auspicious; offend princes, difficult to succeed.

古文：光之立也，列于诸侯矣。
现代文：光立为太子，已经参与诸侯盟会的行列了。
English: Ever since he became the crown prince, he has been a member of the League of Princes.

古文：今无故而废之，是专黜诸侯，而以难犯不祥也。
现代文：现在没有大罪而废掉他，这是专横而看不起诸侯，而用难于成功的事去触犯不吉祥的事。
English: To abolish it now without a serious crime is to be arrogant and look down on the princes, and to use something difficult to succeed in order to commit an inauspicious act.

古文：君必悔之。 公曰： 在我而已。 
现代文：君王一定会后悔。 齐灵公说： 一切由我。 
English: The king will surely regret it. Qi Ling Gong said: Everything is up to me.

古文：遂东大子光，使高厚傅牙，以为大子。夙沙卫为少傅。
现代文：就把太子光迁移到东部边境，派高厚做牙的太傅，立牙为太子，让夙沙卫做少傅。
English: He moved the crown prince to the eastern border, and appointed Gao Da Fu to be the crown prince, and Li Zha Wei to be the junior crown prince.

古文：齐侯疾，崔杼微逆光。疾病，而立之。
现代文：齐灵公生病了，崔杼偷偷地把光接来，趁在齐灵公病危的时候，立光为太子。
English: When Qi Ling Gong fell ill, Cui Gan secretly brought the light to take advantage of the time when Qi Ling Gong was critically ill, and made the light the crown prince.

古文：光杀戎子，尸诸朝，非礼也。
现代文：光杀了戎子，把尸体摆在朝廷上，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is not proper to kill the emperor's son and display the body in the imperial court.

古文：妇人无刑。虽有刑，不在朝市。
现代文：对妇女没有专门的刑罚，即使用刑，也不能把尸体摆在朝廷上。
English: There were no special punishments for women, and even if they were punished, their bodies could not be displayed in court.

古文：夏五月壬辰晦，齐灵公卒。
现代文：夏季，五月二十九日，齐灵公死。
English: In the summer, on May 29, Qilinggong died.

古文：庄公即位，执公子牙于句渎之丘。
现代文：齐庄公即位，在句渎之丘逮捕了公子牙。
English: When Prince Qizhuang ascended the throne, he arrested Prince Fang at the Hill of Deception.

古文：以夙沙卫易己，卫奔高唐以叛。
现代文：齐庄公认为夙沙卫出主意废掉自己，夙沙卫就逃亡到高唐并且叛变。
English: Qizhuang Gong believed that when Basha Wei made up his mind to abolish himself, Basha Wei fled to Gaotang and rebelled.

古文：晋士匄侵齐及穀，闻丧而还，礼也。
现代文：晋国的士匄入侵齐国，到达穀地，听到齐国的丧事就回去了，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the Shih Tzu of Jin to invade Qi, reach the valley, hear the mourning of Qi, and then return.

古文：于四月丁未，郑公孙虿卒，赴于晋大夫。
现代文：四月十三日，郑国的公孙虿死，向晋国的大夫发出讣告。
English: On April 13th, Zheng's great-grandson Zou died, and an obituary notice was sent to Jin's doctor.

古文：范宣子言于晋侯，以其善于伐秦也。
现代文：范宣子告诉了晋平公，因为他在进攻秦国的战役中表现很不错。
English: Fan Xuan Zi told Jin Ping Gong everything, because he performed very well in the campaign of attacking Qin.

古文：六月，晋侯请于王，王追赐之大路，使以行，礼也。
现代文：六月，晋平公向周灵王请求，周灵王追赐给他大路的车，让他跟着葬车行走，这是合于礼的。
English: In June, Prince Jinping made a request to King Zhou Ling. King Zhou Ling gave him a carriage and let him walk with the funeral carriage, which was proper.

古文：秋八月，齐崔杼杀高厚于洒蓝而兼其室。
现代文：秋季，八月，齐国崔杼在洒蓝杀了高厚，然后兼并了他的财货采邑。
English: In the autumn, in August, Qi Guo Cui Rong killed Gao Hou in Shenlan, and then annexed his wealth-gathering county.

古文：书曰： 齐杀其大夫。 从君于昏也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 齐杀其大夫 ，这是由于高厚听从了国君昏庸的命令。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: Qi killed his doctor, this was because Gao Hou obeyed the order of the sovereign.

古文：郑子孔之为政也专。国人患之，乃讨西宫之难，与纯门之师。
现代文：郑国的子孔执政独断专行，国内的人们很担心，就追究西宫那次祸难和纯门那次出兵的罪责。
English: Zheng's Zikong ruled arbitrarily, and the people in the country were very worried, so they investigated the West Palace's disaster and Chunmen's dispatch of troops.

古文：子孔当罪，以其甲及子革、子良氏之甲守。
现代文：子孔应该抵罪，就带领了他的甲士和子革、子良的甲士来保卫自己。
English: Zi Kong should plead guilty, so he led his armourers and Zige, Zili's armourers, to defend themselves.

古文：甲辰，子展、子西率国人伐之，杀子孔而分其室。
现代文：十一日，子展、子西率领国内的人们进攻，杀了子孔，瓜分了他的家财采邑。
English: On the 11th day, Zicheng and Zixi led the people of the country to attack, killed Zikong, and divided his family's wealth.

古文：书曰： 郑杀其大夫。 专也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 郑杀其大夫 ，这是因为子孔独断专行。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Zheng killed his doctor, this was because Zikong acted on his own.

古文：子然、子孔，宋子之子也。士子孔，圭妫之子也。
现代文：子然、子孔，是宋子的儿子；士子孔，是圭妫的儿子。
English: Ziran, Zi Kong, is the son of Songzi; Shizi Kong, is the son of Guizhou.

古文：圭妫之班，亚宋子而相亲也。二子孔亦相亲也。
现代文：圭妫的位置在宋子之下，但是互相亲近，两个子孔也互相亲近。
English: The position of Guijuan is below that of Songzi, but they are close to each other, and the two sub-holes are also close to each other.

古文：僖之四年，子然卒。简之元年，士子孔卒。
现代文：郑僖公四年，子然死；郑简公元年，士子孔死。
English: In the fourth year of Zheng Shao Gong, his son died; in the year of Zheng Jian, the scholar Kong died.

古文：司徒孔实相子革、子良之室。三室如一，故及于难。
现代文：子孔辅助子革、子良两家，三家像一家一样，所以都遭到祸难。
English: The daughter bore two sons, Zi Jia and Zi Liang, and the three families were like one family, so they all suffered misfortune.

古文：子革、子良出奔楚，子革为右尹。
现代文：子革、子良逃亡到楚国。子革做了右尹。
English: Ziga and Zira fled to Chu. Ziga became Uyin.

古文：郑人使子展当国，子西听政，立子产为卿。
现代文：郑国人让子展主持国事，子西主持政事，立子产为卿。
English: The people of Zheng allowed Zizhen to preside over state affairs, Zixi to preside over political affairs, and Zizang to be elevated to nobility.

古文：齐庆封围高唐，弗克。
现代文：齐国的庆封率军包围高唐，没有取胜。
English: Qingfeng of Qi led an army to encircle Gaotang, but failed to win.

古文：冬十一月，齐侯围之，见卫在城上，号之，乃下。
现代文：冬季，十一月，齐庄公亲自领兵包围高唐。见到夙沙卫在城墙上，大声喊他，他就下来了。
English: In winter, in November, Prince Qizhuang personally led an army to encircle Gaotang. When he saw Basha Wei on the city wall, he shouted at him, and he came down.

古文：问守备焉，以无备告。
现代文：齐庄公问夙沙卫防守的情况，夙沙卫告诉齐庄公说没有什么防备。
English: Qizhuang Gong asked Bansha Wei about the defense situation. Bansha Wei told Qizhuang Gong that there was no defense.

古文：揖之，乃登。
现代文：齐庄公向夙沙卫作揖，夙沙卫还揖以后，登上城墙。
English: Qizhuanggong made an offer to Basha Wei, and after Basha Wei returned the offer, he ascended the city wall.

古文：闻师将傅，食高唐人。
现代文：他听说齐军将要依着城墙进攻，就让高唐城里的人好好吃一顿。
English: When he heard that the Qi army would attack along the city wall, he let the people in the city of Gaotang have a good meal.

古文：殖绰、工偻会夜缒纳师，醢卫于军。
现代文：殖绰、工偻会在夜里垂下城去，迎接齐军进城，把夙沙卫在军中剁成肉酱。
English: The Succession and Workers' Youth Associations would go down to the city at night to welcome the Qi army into the city and make mincemeat of Basha Wei in the army.

古文：城西郛，惧齐也。
现代文：鲁国在外城西边修筑城墙，这是由于畏惧齐国入侵。
English: Lu built a wall on the west side of the outer city, fearing an invasion by Qi.

古文：齐及晋平，盟于大隧。
现代文：齐国和晋国讲和，在大隧结盟。
English: Qi and Jin made peace and formed an alliance in the Great Tunnel.

古文：故穆叔会范宣子于柯。
现代文：所以穆叔和范宣子在柯地会见。
English: That's why Mu Xiu and Fan Xuan Zi met in Ke Di.

古文：穆叔见叔向，赋《载驰》之四章。
现代文：穆叔进见叔向，赋《载驰》这首诗的第四章。
English: The fourth chapter of the poem "Carrying Forward" was written by Mu Shujin, who met his uncle Xiang.

古文：叔向曰： 肸敢不承命。 
现代文：叔向说： 肸岂敢不接受命令！ 
English: Uncle Xiang said: "How dare you not accept orders!

古文：穆叔归曰： 齐犹未也，不可以不惧。 
现代文：穆叔回国，说： 齐国还没有停止入侵，不能不害怕。 
English: When Mu Xiu returned to China, he said, "Qi has not yet stopped its invasion, and I cannot help but be afraid.

古文：乃城武城。
现代文：就在武城筑城。
English: Just build a city in Wucheng.

古文：卫石共子卒，悼子不哀。
现代文：卫国的石共子死了，他的儿子悼子不表示悲哀。
English: The son of the defender of the country, Shikotsuko, died, and his son, Yoriko, did not express his sorrow.

古文：孔成子曰： 是谓蹷其本，必不有其宗。
现代文：孔成子说： 这叫做拔掉了根本，必然不能保有他的宗族。 
English: Kong Cheng Zi said: This is called uprooting the root, and it is inevitable that he cannot keep his clan.

