古文：裴政，字德表，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴政字德表，河东闻喜人。
English: Baizheng is the name of the German watch, and Hedong is the name of the Chinese person.

古文：祖邃，父之礼，并《南史》有传。
现代文：祖父裴邃，父裴之礼，《南史》都有传。
English: Grandfather Pei Xuan, father Pei Zili, and "Southern History" have all been passed down.

古文：政幼聪明，博闻强记，达于从政，为当世所称。
现代文：裴政自幼聪明，见识广博，记忆力强，从事政治很通达，受到当时人们的称赞。
English: Baizheng was clever from a young age, knowledgeable, with a strong memory, and very adept at politics. He was praised by people at the time.

古文：仕梁，以军功封为夷陵侯，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：仕于梁朝，因军功封为夷陵侯，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He served the Liang Dynasty and was awarded the title of Yiling Marquis for his military service. He was appointed as Huangmen's chamberlain.

古文：及魏军围荆州，政在外见获，萧察谓政曰： 我，武皇帝之孙，不可为尔君乎？
现代文：魏国军队围攻荆州，裴政在城外被俘，萧鮞对裴政说： 我是梁武帝的孙子，不能够作为你的君主吗？
English: The Wei army besieged Jingzhou, and Baizheng was captured outside the city. Xiao Yu said to Baizheng: I am the grandson of Emperor Liangwu, can't I be your ruler?

古文：尔何烦殉身于七父。
现代文：你何必要为七父殉葬呢？
English: Why did you have to die and be buried for the seven fathers?

古文：若从我计，则贵及子孙，不然，分腰领矣。 
现代文：你若是听从我的计谋，就贵宠及于子孙。不然的话，就要身首异处了。 
English: If thou wilt hearken unto my counsel, then shalt thou find favour in the sight of thy children's children: but if not, thou shalt perish.

古文：锁之，送至城下，使谓元帝曰： 王僧辩闻台城破，已自为帝。
现代文：将裴政铐锁起来，送到荆州城下，让他对元帝说： 王僧辩听说台城被攻破，已经自立为帝。
English: He locked up Pei Zhengyu and sent him to the castle town of Jingzhou. He asked him to say to the Yuan Emperor, "Wang Sangye heard that Taicheng was breached, and he has become the emperor.

古文：王琳孤弱，不能复来。 
现代文：王琳孤单力弱，不能再来。 
English: Wang Lin is alone and weak. She can't come again.

古文：政许之。
现代文：裴政答应下来。
English: Baizheng agreed.

古文：既而告城中曰： 援兵大至，吾以间使被禽，当以碎身报国。
现代文：既到城下，裴政告诉城中的人说： 大队援兵就要来了。我因为秘密出使被他们俘虏，当粉身碎骨报效国家。 
English: As soon as he reached the outskirts of the city, Pei Zheng told the people in the city: "A large group of reinforcements is about to arrive. I was captured by them because of a secret mission, and I must sacrifice myself to serve the country."

古文：监者击其口，终不易辞。
现代文：监督的人抽打他的嘴，裴政始终不改口。
English: The supervisor slapped him in the mouth, but Baizheng never changed his mind.

古文：察怒，命趣行戮。
现代文：萧鮞恼怒，命人迅速把他杀掉。
English: Enraged, Xiao Yao ordered someone to kill him quickly.

古文：蔡大业谏曰： 此人之望也，杀之，则荆州不可下。
现代文：蔡大业谏阻说： 杀了他，正是这个人所希望的。如果杀掉他，荆州就不能攻下了。 
English: Cai Daye said, "Killing him is exactly what this man wanted. If he is killed, Jingzhou cannot be conquered."

古文：因得释。
现代文：裴政因而得到释放。
English: As a result, Baizheng was released.

古文：会江陵平，与城中朝士俱送京师。
现代文：适逢江陵被平定，裴政和城中的朝廷官员一同被押送京城。
English: When Gangneung was pacified, Pei Zheng and the court officials in the city were escorted to the capital.

古文：周文闻其忠，援员外散骑侍郎，引入相府。
现代文：周文帝闻知裴政忠贞，授予员外散骑侍郎之职，引领入丞相府。
English: Emperor Zhou Wen heard about Pei Zhengzhong and gave him the position of a non-commissioned officer, leading him to enter the prime minister's office.

古文：命与卢辩依《周礼》建六官，并攒次朝仪，车服器用，多遵古礼，革汉、魏之法，事并施行。
现代文：命裴政和卢辩根据《周礼》设置六官，一同撰拟朝仪，车马服饰，器物用具，大多遵循古代礼法，革除汉、魏之法，事情一并实行。
English: Baizheng and Lu Yan were ordered to set up six offices according to the "Weekly Rites," and together they drafted the imperial regalia, chariot and horse costumes, and utensils and tools. Most of them followed the ancient etiquette, excluding the Han and Wei laws, and things were implemented together.

古文：寻授刑部下大夫，转少司宪。
现代文：不久，授刑部下大夫之职，转任少司宪。
English: Soon, he was transferred from the post of doctor under the Department of Sentencing to the post of Junior Constitutional Judge.

古文：政明习故事，又参定周律。
现代文：裴政熟悉史实，又参与制定周朝的刑律。
English: Baizheng was familiar with historical facts and participated in the formulation of the criminal law of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：能饮酒，至数斗不乱。
现代文：善于饮酒，饮至数斗仍不醉。
English: He is good at drinking alcohol, and can drink up to several buckets without getting drunk.

古文：簿案盈几，剖决如流，用法宽平，无有冤滥。
现代文：文簿卷宗堆满几案，析理裁决如流水般迅速，使用刑法宽大公平，没有冤狱和滥杀。
English: The case files are full of several cases, the analysis and adjudication are as swift as water, the use of criminal law is lenient and fair, and there is no unjust imprisonment and indiscriminate killing.

古文：囚徒犯极刑者，乃许其妻子入狱就之。至冬，将行决，皆曰： 裴大夫致我于死，死无所恨。 
现代文：因徒犯有死罪，裴政允许其妻子儿子入狱看望，到了冬天将要处决的时候，都说 ：裴大夫裁定我死罪，我死了没有什么遗憾的。 
English: Because the prisoner had committed a capital crime, Baizheng allowed his wife and son to visit him in prison. When it was time for the execution in the winter, they both said, "Dr. Baizheng sentenced me to death. I have no regrets about dying."

古文：又善钟律，尝与长孙绍远论乐，事在《绍远传》。
现代文：裴政又擅长音乐，曾经和长孙绍远议论音乐，事在《绍远传》。
English: Baizheng is also good at music. He once discussed music with his eldest grandson Shao Yuan in "The Biography of Shao Yuan."

古文：隋开皇元年，为率更令，加上仪同三司。
现代文：隋文帝开皇元年，裴政任率更令，加授上仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, the appointment rate of Pei Zheng was increased, and he was awarded the title of Shang Yi and three divisions.

古文：诏与苏威等修定律令。
现代文：诏令与苏威等人共同修订律令。
English: Dahirong and Su Wei and others jointly revised the ritsuryo.

古文：采魏、晋刑典，下至齐、梁，沿革轻重，取其折衷。
现代文：采集魏、晋的刑典，下至齐、梁，沿用变革，刑法轻重，取其折衷。
English: Collect the criminal codes of Wei and Jin, down to Qi and Liang, continue to use reform, criminal law is important, and make a compromise.

古文：同撰著者十余人，凡疑滞不通，皆取决于政。
现代文：一同撰写的有十几人，凡有疑惑阻滞不通，皆由裴政决断。
English: There are more than a dozen people writing together, and if there is any doubt or blockage, it will be decided by Pei Zheng.

古文：进位散骑常侍，转左庶子。
现代文：晋升为散骑常侍，转任左庶子。
English: He was promoted to Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, and transferred to the position of Soso.

古文：多所匡正，见称纯悫，东宫凡有大事，皆以委之。
现代文：多有匡正，被称为纯正忠诚。东宫凡是有什么大事，都委托给裴政处置。
English: Most of them are upright and are said to be pure and loyal. Whenever there is a big event at the East Palace, it is entrusted to Baizheng.

古文：右庶子刘荣，性甚专固。
现代文：右庶子刘荣，生性十分专断。
English: His second son, Liu Rong, is very arbitrary by nature.

古文：时武职交番，通事舍人赵元恺作辞见帐，未及成。
现代文：当时武职轮流值班，通事舍人赵元恺制作值班名单，名单还没来得及作好。
English: At that time, military personnel took turns on duty, and the secretary Zhao Yuanqi made a duty list, but the list was not ready yet.

古文：太子再三催促，荣令元恺口奏，不须造帐。
现代文：太子再三催促，刘荣让元恺口奏，不必制作名单。
English: At the prince's repeated urging, Liu Rong let Yuan Xuan speak, and there was no need to make a list.

古文：及奏，太子问： 名帐安在？ 
现代文：元恺上奏，太子问： 名单在哪里？ 
English: The prince asked: "Where is the list of names?"

古文：元恺云： 禀承刘荣，不听造帐。 
现代文：元恺回答说： 秉承刘荣的命令，不让制作名单。 
English: Yuan Qi replied: "Following Liu Rong's order, do not allow the production of the list.

古文：太子即以诘荣，荣便拒讳，太子付政推问。
现代文：太子随即诘问刘荣，刘荣便拒不认帐。太子将元恺交给裴政推问。
English: The crown prince then interrogated Liu Rong, who refused to acknowledge the account. The crown prince handed Yuan Qi over to Pei Zheng for questioning.

古文：未及奏状，阿附荣者先言于太子曰： 政欲陷荣，推事不实。 
现代文：裴政还未来得及上奏，阿谀依附刘荣的人先对太子说： 裴政想陷害刘荣，推问事情不实。 
English: Baizheng did not have time to play, but Liu Rong's followers first said to the prince: Baizheng wants to frame Liu Rong, and the question is not true.

古文：太子召责之，政曰： 凡推事有两，一察情，一据证，审其曲直，以定是非。
现代文：太子召裴政责问，裴政说： 凡是审理案件，必须有两点，一是观察情由，二是依据证据，观察其曲直，以确定是非。
English: The prince summoned Baizheng for questioning, and Baizheng said: Whenever a case is tried, there must be two points, one is to observe the reason, and the other is to observe its straightness based on evidence to determine right and wrong.

古文：臣察荣位高任重，纵实语元恺，盖是纤介之愆，计不须讳。
现代文：臣看刘荣位高任重，即使确实对元恺说了，大概也只是小小的过失，估计也不必否认。
English: The courtier regarded Liu Rong's position as highly important, and even if he did say it to Yuan Qi, it was probably just a small mistake, and he did not have to deny it.

古文：又察元恺，受制于荣，岂敢以无端之言妄相点累。
现代文：再看元恺，受刘荣控制，怎敢用无由头的言语妄自迁累刘荣呢？
English: Look at Yuan Xuan, under Liu Rong's control, how dare he use unsubstantiated words to incriminate Liu Rong?

古文：二人之情理正相似。
现代文：二人的情由，理由很相似。
English: Their reasons are very similar.

古文：元恺引左卫率崔茜等证，茜款状悉与元恺符同。
现代文：元恺引左卫率崔等人作证，崔的陈说和元恺所说的全部相符。
English: Cui's testimony is consistent with everything that Yuan Shao said, as testified by Yuan Shao, Zuo Wei and Cui.

古文：察情既敌，须以证定。
现代文：观察情由既然相等，就必须根据证据来定。
English: Since the reasons for observation are equal, it must be determined on the basis of evidence.

古文：臣谓荣语元恺非虚。 
现代文：臣认为刘荣对元恺说的话不假。 
English: The vassal believed that what Liu Rong said to Yuan Qi was true.

古文：太子亦不罪荣，而称政平直。
现代文：太子也不怪罪刘荣，而称赞裴政公平正直。
English: The crown prince did not blame Liu Rong, but praised Pei Zheng for his fairness and honesty.

古文：政好面折人短，而退无后言。
现代文：裴政喜欢当面揭人短处，而退出后就不再说什么。
English: Baizheng likes to expose people's shortcomings in person, and will not say anything after quitting.

古文：时云定兴数入侍太子，为奇服异器，进奉后宫，又缘女宠，来往无节。
现代文：当时，云定兴多次入东宫侍奉太子，把奇装异服和怪异的器物，进献给后宫，又因为女儿的恩宠，出入宫中，没有节制。
English: At that time, Yun Dingxing repeatedly entered the East Palace to serve the crown prince, bringing strange clothes and strange objects to the harem, and because of her daughter's grace, there was no restraint in entering and leaving the palace.

古文：政数切谏，太子不纳。
现代文：裴政多次直言劝谏，太子不采纳。
English: Pei Zheng repeatedly advised him bluntly, but the prince did not accept.

古文：政谓定兴曰： 公所为不合礼度。
现代文：裴政对云定兴说 ：公所作所为不合乎礼法。
English: Baizheng said to Yun Dingxing: What you have done is not in accordance with etiquette.

古文：又元妃暴薨，道路籍籍，此于太子非令名也。
现代文：再者，元妃暴死，路人议论纷纷，这对太子不是好名声。
English: Moreover, the sudden death of the former empress, passers-by have been discussing, this is not a good reputation for the prince.

古文：愿公自引退，不然将及祸。 
现代文：但愿公自动引退，不然的话祸将及身。 
English: I hope that he will retire voluntarily, otherwise, disaster will befall him.

古文：定兴怒，以告太子，太子益疏政。
现代文：云定兴大怒，把这些告诉了太子，太子更加疏远裴政。
English: Yun Dingxing was furious and told this to the prince, who became even more estranged from Pei Zheng.

古文：由是出为襄州总管，妻子不之官，所受秩奉，散给僚吏。
现代文：裴政因此而被贬为襄州总管，妻子儿女没有随他到任，得到的俸禄，都散给了僚属。
English: As a result, Baizheng was demoted to the position of the chief administrator of Xiangzhou. His wife and children did not follow him to the post, and the salary he received was distributed to his colleagues.

古文：人犯罪者，阴悉知之，或竟岁不发，至再三犯，乃因都会时，于众中召出，亲案其罪，五人处死，流、徒者甚众。
现代文：有人犯了罪，裴政私下里都知道，有的一年到头也不揭发出来，等到屡次犯罪，就借助集会的机会，当着众人把他们喊出来，亲自审理其罪行，有五个人被处死，流放和被罚处劳役的人很多。
English: Some people committed crimes, and Baizheng knew about them in private. In some cases, they were not exposed for a whole year. When they committed repeated crimes, he used the opportunity of the meeting to call them out in front of everyone and personally tried their crimes. Five people were executed, and many people were exiled or sentenced to forced labor.

古文：合境惶慑，令行禁止，称为神明，尔后不修囹圄，殆无诤讼。
现代文：整个襄州因此惶恐惊惧，令行禁止，称赞裴政神明。自此之后，不修整监狱，几乎没有什么辩争诉讼。
English: As a result, the whole of Xiangzhou panicked, banned the practice, and praised Baizheng Shenming. Since then, without repairing the prison, there has been almost no litigation.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死于官任。
English: He died in office.

古文：著《承圣实录》十卷。
现代文：著有《承贤实录》十卷。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "The True Record of Cheng Xian."

古文：及太子废，文帝追忆之曰： 向遣裴政、刘行本在，共匡弼之，犹应不令至此。 
现代文：等到太子被废，文帝追忆裴政说： 如果让裴政和刘行本还在，共同匡正辅助太子，应该不让太子到这个地步。 
English: When the crown prince was dethroned, Emperor Wen recalled Baizheng and said: If Baizheng and Liu Xingben were still alive, they would jointly rectify and assist the crown prince, and the crown prince should not be allowed to reach this stage.

古文：子南金，位膳部郎，学涉有文藻，以轻财贵义称。
现代文：儿子裴南金，任膳部郎，学问所涉，多有文采，以轻财贵义受人赞誉。
English: His son, Pei Nankin, was appointed as the Minister of Cuisine. He was well-versed in culture, and was praised for being frivolous with money.

古文：李谔，字士恢，赵郡人也。
现代文：李谔字士恢，赵郡人。
English: Li Junzhihuai, a native of Zhao County.

古文：博学解属文。
现代文：学问广博，能写文章。
English: He is well-educated and can write articles.

古文：仕齐，为中书舍人，有口辩，每接对陈使。
现代文：仕于齐国，任中书舍人，能言善辩，常常接待应对陈国的使者。
English: He served the State of Qi, and was appointed as the chief scribe. He was eloquent, and often received envoys from the State of Chen.

古文：周平齐，拜天官都上士。
现代文：周国平定齐国，任天官都上士。
English: Zhou Quanguo conquered Qi Quanguo, and all high-ranking officials were promoted to the rank of sergeant.

古文：谔见隋文帝有帝王志操，深自结纳。
现代文：李谔见隋文帝有帝王的志向操守，与之结交甚深。
English: Li Yu saw that the Sui Emperor had the aspirations and ethics of an emperor, and forged a deep friendship with him.

古文：及帝为丞相，甚见亲待，访以得失。
现代文：文帝为丞相时，待李谔十分亲近，向李谔询问得失。
English: When Emperor Wen was the prime minister, he was very close to Li Xi and asked Li Xi about the gains and losses.

古文：时兵革屡动，国用虚耗，谔上《重谷论》以讽焉。
现代文：当时，天下屡有战乱，国家财物浪费很多，李谔上《重谷论》来讽谏。
English: At that time, there were frequent wars in the world, and there was a lot of waste of national wealth and property. Li Jun went to the "Heavy Valley Theory" to ridicule it.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：文帝采纳了李谔的建议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：及受禅，历比部、考功二曹侍郎，赐爵南和伯。
现代文：文帝受禅继位，李谔任比部、考功二曹侍郎，赐爵南和伯。
English: Emperor Wen was succeeded by Emperor Zhen, while Emperor Li Rong appointed him as the head of the imperial household, the second-highest-ranking attendant of the imperial examinations, and conferred peerages on Emperor Nan and Emperor Bo.

古文：谔性公方，明时务。
现代文：李谔性格梗直方正，明达时务。
English: Li Yan is a straightforward and upright person, and is well-informed about current affairs.

古文：迁书侍御史。
现代文：升任书侍御史。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shushimi no mikoto.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 朕昔为大司马，每求外职，李谔陈十二策，苦劝不许，朕遂决意在内。
现代文：文帝对群臣说 ：朕当初任大司马时，常常请求在京城之外任职，李谔陈述十二条计策，苦苦劝阻，不许朕任外职，朕就决意留在朝中。
English: Emperor Wen said to the courtiers, "When I was the grand steward at the beginning, I often requested to serve outside the capital. Li Qiye presented 12 measures to dissuade me, and I was not allowed to serve outside the capital. I decided to stay in the imperial court.

古文：今此事业，谔之力也。 
现代文：如今这样的事业，全靠李谔的力量。 
English: Nowadays, this kind of business relies entirely on the strength of Li Wei.

古文：赐物二千段。
现代文：赐给李谔财物二千段。
English: Li Qiye was given 2,000 pieces of property.

古文：谔见礼教凋弊，公卿薨亡，其爱妾侍婢，子孙辄嫁卖之，遂成风俗，乃上书曰： 臣闻追远慎终，人德归厚，三年无改，方称为孝。
现代文：李谔见礼教凋零破弊，公卿死亡之后，子孙就将其爱妾侍婢嫁出卖掉，形成了一种风俗。就上书说 ：臣听说追慕远风，慎待其终，人们的德行归于淳厚，三年不要改变，才能称之为孝。
English: After the death of a nobleman, his descendants married off his beloved concubines and handmaidens, forming a custom. He wrote a letter saying: "Vassals have heard of the pursuit of the wind, beware of its end, people's virtues belong to Junhou, do not change for three years, in order to be called filial piety."

古文：如闻大臣之内，有父祖亡没，日月未久，子孙无赖，引其妓妾，嫁卖取财，有一于此，实损风化。
现代文：如今听说大臣之中，有的父祖亡故之后，时间不久，子孙无赖，就将其姬妾，嫁卖出去换取钱财。有一人这样做，就实在有损于风俗教化。
English: Now I have heard that, among ministers, some sons and grandsons of scoundrels sold their wives and concubines in exchange for money soon after the death of their fathers and grandfathers. If one person did this, it would really damage the enlightenment of customs.

古文：妾虽微贱，亲承衣履，服斩三年，古今通式。
现代文：妾虽然卑贱，但因亲自承接父祖衣履，应服重孝三年，这是古今惯例。
English: Although a concubine is lowly, she should serve three years of filial piety because she personally inherited her father's clothes and shoes. This has been the practice from ancient times to the present.

古文：岂容遽褫衰绖，强傅铅华，泣辞灵几之前，送付他人之室？
现代文：岂能容许立刻脱去孝服，强行傅施粉黛，泣辞于灵牌之前，送付到他人室中？
English: Would it be possible to allow him to immediately take off his filial piety, forcibly forge money, make a tearful speech in front of the spirit board, and send it to someone else's room?

古文：凡在见者，犹致伤心，况乎人子，能堪斯忍！
现代文：凡是见到这种情况的人，尚且伤心，何况作为人子，岂能忍受这些！
English: For all who see these things and grieve, the Son of Man will not be able to endure them.

古文：复有朝廷重臣，位望通贵，平生交旧，情若弟兄。
现代文：还有一些朝廷重臣，职位声望都很高贵，平生交友，情如兄弟。
English: There are also some high-ranking courtiers, whose positions and reputations are very noble. They have been friends all their lives and are like brothers.

古文：及其亡没，杳同行路，朝闻其死，夕规其妾，方便求娉，以得为限。
现代文：等其亡没之后，就远如路人，早上听说旧友死讯，晚上就规劝其妾，方便时就嫁出去，以得人求聘为限。
English: After his death, he was as far away as a passer-by. In the morning he heard about the death of an old friend, in the evening he persuaded his concubine, and when it was convenient he married her, as long as someone was looking for a job.

古文：无廉耻之心，弃友朋之义。
现代文：没有廉耻之心，背弃朋友情义。
English: They have no sense of shame and betray the feelings of their friends.

古文：且居家理务，可移于官，既不正私，何能赞务？ 
现代文：而且居家处理事务，可以移于官场，既然不能纠匡私欲，怎么能够赞助政务？ 
English: Moreover, if you handle affairs at home, you can move to the officialdom. Since you can't rectify selfishness, how can you sponsor government affairs?

古文：上览而嘉之。
现代文：文帝观览李谔的上书而嘉奖他。
English: After reading the article, Emperor Wen praised Yang Yong.

古文：五品已上妻妾不得改醮，始于此也。
现代文：五品以上官员的妻妾不许改嫁，从此开始。
English: From now on, the wives and concubines of officials with five or more court ranks are not allowed to remarry.

古文：谔又以时文体尚轻薄，流宕忘反，上书曰：
现代文：李谔又因当时文章崇尚轻薄，流宕忘返，上书说：
English: Because the article at that time advocated frivolity and forgetfulness, Li Yan said in the letter:

古文：臣闻古先哲王之化人也，必变其视听，防其嗜欲，塞其邪放之心，示以淳和之路。
现代文： 臣听说古代聪明的帝王教化百姓，必定改变其听到和看到的东西，防止其嗜好和欲望，堵塞其邪恶放荡之心，指示一条淳厚平和的道路。
English: The minister heard that the wise emperors of ancient times had educated the people, and they must change what they hear and see, prevent their hobbies and desires, block their evil and dissolute hearts, and point out a pure and peaceful path.

古文：五教六行，为训人之本，《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《易》，为道义之门。
现代文：五教六行，是训导百姓的根本；《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《易》，是进入道义的门径。
English: The Five Teachings and Six Practices are the foundation for instructing the people; "Poetry," "Scripture," "Rite," and "Easy" are the gateways to morality.

古文：故能家复孝慈，人知礼让，正俗调风，莫大于此。
现代文：故而能够家家孝顺慈爱，人人知道礼仪谦让，匡正民俗，调理风俗，没有比这个更重要的了。
English: Therefore, there is nothing more important than being able to cultivate filial piety and benevolence. Everyone knows the etiquette of modesty, the rectification of folk customs, and the adjustment of customs.

古文：其有上书献赋，制诔镌铭，皆以褒德序贤，明勋证理。
现代文：有上书献赋，制讠来镌铭的，都用来褒扬德行，述说贤哲，标明勋业，论证事理。
English: If there is a book dedication or a seal engraved with an inscription, it is used to praise virtue, describe sages, mark meritorious deeds, and discuss matters of evidence.

古文：苟非惩劝，义不徒然。
现代文：只要不是责罚和奖励，就决不是徒劳无功。
English: As long as it is not punishment and reward, it is by no means a wasted effort.

古文：降及后代，风教渐落。
现代文： 下及后代，风俗教化渐渐衰落。
English: Down to the next generation, the custom and education gradually declined.

古文：魏之三祖，更尚文词，忽君人之大道，好雕虫之小艺。
现代文：魏国的三祖，更加崇尚文词，忽略君主的大道理，喜好雕虫小技。
English: The three forefathers of the state of Wei were more devoted to literature, ignored the great principle of the monarch, and preferred the small skill of carving insects.

古文：下之从上，有同影响，竞骋文华，遂成风俗。
现代文：下面的人跟从上面的人，就像影随形响应声一样，争相显示文采，于是就形成一种风俗。
English: The people below follow the people above, like shadows following a voice, vying to show their prowess, and thus a custom is formed.

古文：江左齐、梁，其弊弥甚，贵贱贤愚，唯务吟咏。
现代文：江左齐、梁，这种弊病更为厉害，不论贵贱贤愚，只是务求吟诗咏赋。
English: Jiang Zuoqi, Liang, this kind of malady is more severe. Regardless of whether they are noble or lowly, they just want to be gifted in chanting.

古文：遂复遗理存异，寻虚逐微，竞一韵之奇，争一字之巧。
现代文：于是又丢掉了理而保存了异端，追逐虚无微末，竞一韵之奇，争一字之巧。
English: So they lost reason and preserved heresy, chasing after nothingness, competing for a rhyme's wonder, for a word's coincidence.

古文：连篇累牍，不出月露之形，积案盈箱，唯是风云之状。
现代文：连篇累牍，超不出月亮露珠这些形象，积案盈箱，只是风和云之类的景物。
English: It's a long story, and there's nothing better than these images of the moon and dewdrops. There's a lot of work to be done, but it's just scenery like wind and clouds.

古文：世俗以此相高，朝廷据兹擢士。
现代文：世俗用这些比较高下，朝廷要根据这些选拔官员。
English: The world uses these to compare high and low, and the imperial court should select officials according to these.

古文：禄利之路既开，爱尚之情愈笃。
现代文：功名利禄之路既然已经开通，爱好崇尚之情就更加笃实。
English: Now that the road to fame and fortune has been opened, the love and admiration for the dragon is even more solid.

古文：于是闾里童昏，贵游总卯，未窥六甲，先制五言。
现代文：于是，闾里老少，贵游子弟，还不知道天干地支，就先撰写五言诗。
English: As a result, Balinese young and old, the children of Guiyu, did not yet know the heavenly and earthly branches, so they first wrote a five-character poem.

古文：至如羲皇、舜、禹之典，伊、傅、周、孔之说，不复关心，何尝入耳。
现代文：至于羲皇、舜、禹的典章，伊尹、傅说、周公、孔子的学说，就不再关心，何曾听得进去！
English: As for the edicts of Emperor Xing, Emperor Zhou, and Emperor Yu, and the teachings of Yi Yin, Fu Sheng, Zhou Gong, and Confucius, they no longer care about them.

古文：以傲诞为清虚，以缘情为勋绩，指儒素为古拙，用词赋为君子。
现代文：把高傲放诞看作清高虚无，把抒发情感作为勋业功绩，指责儒者的品德操行是古朴笨拙的，借助词赋而成为人格高尚的人。
English: They regard lofty pride as a lofty nothingness, the expression of emotion as a meritorious achievement, and the moral conduct of Confucians as quaint and clumsy. With the help of words, they become noble people.

古文：故文笔日繁，其政日乱，良由弃大圣之轨模，构无用以为用也。
现代文：所以，文章日见繁多，政治日益混乱，确实是因为放弃了大圣的楷模，造成了把无用的当作有用的局面。
English: Therefore, the multiplicity of articles and the increasing confusion of politics are indeed due to the abandonment of the great saint's model, creating a situation in which the useless is regarded as useful.

古文：捐本逐末，流遍华壤，递相师祖，久而愈扇。
现代文：丢弃根本，追逐末节，遍布整个华夏境内，互相学习效法，时间越久就越加盛行。
English: Abandoning the fundamentals, chasing the ends, all over the territory of China, learning from each other, the longer the time, the more prevalent.

古文：及大隋受命，圣道聿兴，屏黜浮词，遏止华伪。
现代文： 大隋承受天命，圣道始兴，罢黜浮艳的文词，遏止华丽的伪饰。
English: The Great Sui Dynasty accepted the destiny of heaven, the holy path began to flourish, banished the flashy words and phrases, and curbed the gorgeous falsifications.

古文：自非怀经抱持，志道依仁，不得引预搢绅，参厕缨冕。
现代文：不是胸藏经典，怀抱朴质，志存于道，心依于仁，就不能成为官员，侧身官吏之列。
English: If you do not cherish the classics, embrace simplicity, aspire to the Tao, and depend on benevolence, you cannot become an official, and you will be relegated to the ranks of officials.

古文：开皇四年，普诏天下，公私文翰，并宜实录。
现代文：开皇四年，颁诏于天下，公私文章翰墨，都应据实而录。
English: In the first four years of the emperor's reign, the imperial edict was issued to the world, and all public and private articles should be recorded truthfully.

古文：其年九月，泗州刺史司马幼之文表华艳，付所司推罪。
现代文：这一年九月，泗州刺史司马幼之文表华艳，交付有司追究其罪。
English: In September of the same year, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Sima Yu's literary works were brilliant, and he was handed over to the police to investigate his crime.

古文：自是公卿大臣感知正道，莫不钻仰坟素，弃绝华绮，择先王之令典，行大道于兹世。
现代文：自此以后，公卿大臣都明白了正道，没有人不仰慕古代典籍，放弃华艳绮糜，选择古代帝王的好典章，行大道于当世。
English: Since then, nobles and ministers have understood the right way. No one does not admire the ancient classics, give up the glamorous ephemera, choose the good etiquette of the ancient emperors, and walk the road in the present world.

古文：如闻外州远县，仍踵弊风，选吏举人，未遵典则。
现代文： 如今听说边远州县，依然继承那种凋敝的世风，选择官吏，举荐人才，不遵循法典规则。
English: Today, I heard that outlying prefectures and counties are still inheriting that fading world style, selecting officials, recommending talents, and not following the rules of the code.

古文：宗党称孝，乡曲归仁，学必典谟，交不苟合，则摈落私门，不加收齿；其学不稽古，逐俗随时，作轻薄之篇章，结朋党而求誉。则选充吏职，举送天朝。
现代文：宗族同党称赞其孝顺，乡里归于仁爱，要学习就一定学习古代典籍，交往而不随随便便的人，就被摒斥在门外，不加录用；学习不依据古人，追逐世俗，随从时议，写轻薄浮艳的文章，结交朋党而追求名誉的人，就选拔为官吏，举荐到朝廷。
English: His filial piety was praised by his clansmen and party members, the countryside was attributed to benevolence, and if you wanted to study, you had to study ancient classics. Those who did not socialize freely were rejected and not hired; those who did not study according to the ancients, pursued the mundane, followed the current discussions, wrote frivolous and flashy articles, and made friends with the party and pursued honor were selected as officials and recommended to the imperial court.

古文：盖由县令、刺史，未行风教，犹挟私情，不存公道。
现代文：大概是因为县令、刺史不推行风化教育，还夹杂私情，心里没有公道。
English: Probably because the county ordinance and the history of the stabbing do not promote moral education, but also mixed with personal feelings, there is no justice in the heart.

古文：臣既忝宪司，职当纠察。
现代文：臣既然忝居宪司，就应尽纠察之职。
English: Since the vassal lives with the registrar, he should do his duty as a picket.

古文：若闻风即劾，恐挂纲者多，请勒有司，普加搜访，有如此者，具状送台。
现代文：如果听到风声就弹劾，恐怕要有很多人触犯刑律。请求勒令有司，广泛加以搜求寻访，如有这样的人，就陈述情状送达宪台。 
English: If the rumor of impeachment is heard, I am afraid that there will be many people who will violate the criminal law. Request an order to have a judge, conduct an extensive search and search, and if there is such a person, report the situation to the Constitutional Office.

古文：谔又以当官者好自矜伐，复上奏具陈其弊。请加罪黜，以惩风轨。
现代文：李谔又因为做官的人喜好自高自大，再次上书陈说其弊端，请求加以纠罪贬黜，以惩戒风范。
English: Because officials like to be arrogant, Li Yan once again submitted a letter to expose their shortcomings, requesting that they be punished and disciplined.

古文：上以谔前后所奏颁示天下，四海靡然向风，深革其弊。
现代文：文帝把李谔前后的奏章颁布天下，四海之内都趋于风教，深刻地革除了弊端。
English: Emperor Wen promulgated the musical scores before and after Li Xi to the whole world, and all over the world, they tended to follow the tradition, and profoundly eliminated the drawbacks.

古文：谔在职数年，务存大体，不尚严猛，由是无刚謇之誉，而潜有匡正之志。
现代文：李谔任职数年，务求存其大体，不崇尚威严刚猛，因此没有刚正的美誉，而是心存匡谬纠正的志向。
English: Li Wei served for several years, and in order to survive, he did not advocate authority and rigor, so he did not have a reputation for rectitude. Instead, he had the ambition to correct absurdities.

古文：邳公苏威以临道店舍，乃求利之徒，事业污杂，非敦本之义。遂奏约遣归农。
现代文：邳公苏威认为临近官道的店家，乃是求利之人，从事的行业卑污杂乱，不合乎重农的道理，于是就奏请减少，将店家遣归家乡务农。
English: Ying Gong Su Wei thought that the merchants close to the official road were profit-seekers, engaged in the industry of filth and disorder, and did not conform to the principle of heavy farming, so he reduced the number of merchants and sent the merchants back to their hometown to work in agriculture.

古文：有愿依旧者，在所州县，录附市籍，仍撤毁旧店，并令远道，限以时日。
现代文：有人愿意依旧开店，就在他们所在的州县，附录于城市的户籍，仍然命令他们拆去原来的店铺，远离官道，限期办理。
English: Some people are willing to still open a store, in their state and county, appended to the city's household registration, still ordered them to demolish the original store, away from the official road, deadline.

古文：时逢冬塞，莫敢陈诉。
现代文：时逢寒冬，没有人敢于诉说。
English: In the cold winter, no one dared to complain.

古文：谔因别使，见其如此，以农工有业，各附所安，逆旅之与旗亭，自古非同一概，即附市籍，于理不可。
现代文：李谔因出使别的地方，见到他们这样，认为农民和工人各有其业，各自依附所安之业，行旅中的店铺和集市上的酒楼，自古以来就不一样，就是附属于城市户籍，在道理上也行不通。
English: Li Wei, who was on a mission to another place, saw them like this, and thought that farmers and workers each have their own business, and each depends on the other's business. The shops in travel and the restaurants in the market have been different since ancient times, that is, they are attached to the city's household registration, and it does not work in principle.

古文：且行旅之所依托，岂容一朝而废？
现代文：况且，临道店铺是行旅的依托，岂能容许一朝废除？
English: Moreover, since the shops along the street are the mainstay of travelers, can they be allowed to be abolished overnight?

古文：徒为劳扰，于事非宜。
现代文：拆除临道店铺，白白劳动扰乱百姓，不合于事理。
English: It is unreasonable to demolish the shops in Linduo and disturb the people in vain.

古文：次大体、大钧，并位尚书郎。鲍宏，字润身，东海郯人也。
现代文：就擅专裁决，令一切依旧。出使回京到了朝堂，然后才奏知文帝，文帝认为他处理得很好，说： 体察国家的大臣，应当这样。 后来，李谔因为年纪大了，出京任通州刺史，甚有德政，人们都心悦诚服。
English: When the emissary returned to Beijing and arrived at the imperial court, he reported the matter to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen thought that he had handled the matter well and said, "This is how a minister of a country should be judged." Later, because Li Qiye was old, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Tongzhou. There was a lot of virtue in his government, and people were sincerely impressed.

古文：父机，以才学知名。
现代文：卒于官任。鲍宏字润身，东海剡人。父亲鲍机，因才能学问而知名。
English: He died in office. Bao Hongzhe Runchi, a native of the East China Sea. His father, Bao Ji, was famous for his talent and learning.

古文：仕梁，位书侍御史。
现代文：仕于梁朝，官至书侍御史。
English: Served in the Liang Dynasty, and rose through the ranks to become a courtier and historian.

古文：宏七岁而孤，为兄泉之所爱育。
现代文：鲍宏七岁时死了父亲，由兄长泉之爱护抚育。
English: When Baohong was seven years old, his father died, and he was raised by his elder brother, Quan Zi.

古文：年十二，能属文，尝和湘东王绎诗，绎嗟赏不已，引为中记室。
现代文：年满十二岁，就能作文章，曾经奉和湘东王萧绎诗，萧绎嗟叹赞赏不已，引荐为中记室。
English: At the age of twelve, he was able to write an article. He was once commended by Hunan King Xiao Yizhuang for his poem, Xiao Yizhuang, and was highly praised. He was recommended as a junior secretary.

古文：累迁通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：多次升迁至通直散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times to the rank of full-time samurai.

古文：江陵平，归于周，明帝甚礼之，引为麟趾殿学士。
现代文：江陵被平定，归顺周朝，周明帝待他很有礼仪，任命为麟趾殿学士。
English: After Gangneung was pacified and surrendered to the Zhou Dynasty, Emperor Zhou Ming treated him with great courtesy and appointed him as a scholar of the Linzi Palace.

古文：累迁遂伯下大夫。
现代文：多次升迁至遂伯下大夫。
English: He was promoted several times to junior doctor.

古文：与杜子晖聘陈，谋伐齐，陈遂出兵度江以侵齐。
现代文：和杜子晖出使陈国，谋划讨伐齐国。
English: He and Du Ziqun dispatched envoys to Chen Guo and planned to invade Qi Guo.

古文：帝尝问宏取齐策，宏以为 先皇往日，出师洛阳，彼有其备，每不克捷。
现代文：陈国就出兵渡江侵略齐国，周武帝曾经向鲍宏询问夺取齐国的策略，鲍宏认为： 先皇以往攻齐，从洛阳出兵，他们有防备，每次都不能取胜。
English: Chen Guo sent troops to cross the Yangtze River to invade Qi. Zhou Wudi once asked Baohong about the strategy of conquering Qi. Baohong thought: The former emperor used to attack Qi and send troops from Luoyang. They were prepared and could not win every time.

古文：如臣计者，进兵汾、潞，直掩晋阳，出其不虞，以为上策。 
现代文：按照臣的计谋，进兵汾、潞，直袭晋阳，出其不意，才是上策。 
English: According to the minister's stratagem, the best strategy is to enter the army at dusk and dawn, directly attack Jinyang, and take it by surprise.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：周武帝听从鲍宏的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：及定山东，除小御正，赐爵平遥县伯，加仪同。
现代文：等到齐国被平定，任命鲍宏为小御正，赐爵平遥县伯，加授仪同。
English: When Qi was subdued, Bao Hong was appointed as a minor imperial official, given the title of peer of Pingyao County, and the award ceremony was held.

古文：隋文帝作相，奉使山南。
现代文：隋文帝为丞相时，鲍宏奉命出使山南。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen was chancellor, Bao Hong was ordered to go to Shannan.

古文：会王谦举兵于蜀，路次潼州，为谦将达奚惎所执，逼送成都，竟不屈节。
现代文：适逢王谦在蜀举兵反叛，鲍宏路经潼州，被王谦的部将达奚抓获，强行送往成都，鲍宏终于不能屈服。
English: At the same time that Wang Qian raised an army to rebel in Shu, Baohong Road passed through Zhangzhou. He was captured by Wang Qian's subordinate, Daju, and forcibly sent to Chengdu. Baohong finally could not give in.

古文：谦败，驰传入京，文帝嘉之，赐以金带。
现代文：王谦失败后，鲍宏被迅速传入京城。文帝嘉奖鲍宏宁死不屈，赐给他金带。
English: After Wang Qian's defeat, Bao Hong was quickly transferred to Beijing. Emperor Wen commended Bao Hong's indomitable spirit and gave him a gold belt.

古文：及受禅，加开府，进爵为公。
现代文：文帝受禅即位，加授鲍宏为开府，晋封爵位为公。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen's accession to the throne, awarded Baohong the title of Kaifu, and conferred the title of Duke.

古文：历利、邛二州刺史，秩满还京。
现代文：历任利、邛二州刺史，任满回京。
English: Successive incumbents of Toshimitsu and Kojima, who had made history in the two prefectures, returned to Kyoto at the end of their terms.

古文：时有尉义臣者，其父崇不从尉迟迥，从复与突厥战死。
现代文：当时有一个名叫尉义臣的人，其父尉迟崇不跟从尉迟迥造反，后来在与突厥军队作战中战死。
English: At that time, there was a man named Yi Yichen. His father, Yi Xiong, rebelled against Yi Xiong, and later died in battle with the Turkish army.

古文：上嘉之，将赐姓金氏。
现代文：文帝嘉奖他，准备赐给他姓刘金氏，向群臣询问。
English: Emperor Wen praised him, prepared to give him the surname Liu Jin, and inquired from his ministers.

古文：访及群下，宏曰： 昔项伯不同项羽，汉高赐其姓刘氏，秦真父能死难，魏武赐姓曹氏。
现代文：鲍宏说： 当初项伯不同于项羽，汉高祖赐其姓刘；秦贞的父亲能为国死难，魏武帝赐其姓曹。
English: Baohong said: At first, Xiang Bo was different from Xiang Yu. The ancestor of the Han Dynasty gave him the surname Liu; Qin Zhen's father died for the country, and Emperor Wu gave him the surname Cao.

古文：请赐以皇族。 帝曰： 善。 因赐义臣姓杨。
现代文：请求把皇族之姓赐予尉义臣。 文帝说 ：好。 因此就赐义臣姓杨。
English: He asked for the imperial family name to be given to his second-in-command, Yixin. Emperor Wen said, "Good, so I will give Yixin the surname Yang."

古文：后授均州刺史，以目疾免，卒于家。
现代文：后来又授任为均州刺史，因生眼病免官。死于家中。
English: Later, he was also appointed as the governor of the province of Gyeongju, but was removed from office due to an eye disease. He died at home.

古文：未几，敬真有疾，见俱罗为祟而死。
现代文：当初，周武帝敕令鲍宏修撰《皇室谱》一部，分作《帝绪》、《疏属》、《赐姓》三篇。
English: At first, Emperor Zhou Wu ordered Bao Hong to compile a part of the "Imperial Family Tree," which was divided into three parts: "Emperor," "Dissociation" and "Giving Surname."

古文：柳彧，字幼文，河东人也。
现代文：有文集十卷行于世。柳彧字幼文，河东解人。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies in the world. Liu Xuan Zi Juwen, Hedong Qianren.

古文：世居襄阳。
现代文：世代居于襄阳。
English: He has lived in Xiangyang for generations.

古文：父仲礼，《南史》有传。
现代文：父柳仲礼，《南史》中有传。
English: His father, Liu Zhonglei, is mentioned in "Southern History."

古文：仲礼，梁败见囚于周，复家河东。
现代文：梁国被战败后，柳仲礼被周国俘虏，又在河东安下家。
English: After the defeat of Liang Guo, Liu Zhongli was captured by Zhou Guo and went to live in Hedong An.

古文：彧少好学，颇涉经史。
现代文：柳彧少年时喜爱学习，对经史多有涉猎。
English: When he was a boy, Yanagisawa loved to study and dabbled in history.

古文：周大冢宰宇文护引为中外府记室，久而出为宁州总管掾。
现代文：周大冢宰宇文护用为中外府记室，过了很久，出任宁州总管掾。
English: Zhou Dada's secretary, Yu Wenyu, used it as the central and foreign prefectural office, and after a long time, he became the chief administrator of Ningzhou.

古文：武帝亲总万机，彧诣阙求试。
现代文：周武帝亲自执政，柳彧到朝中请求应试。
English: Emperor Zhou Wudi ruled personally, and Liu Bei went to the court to request an examination.

古文：帝异之，以为司武中士。
现代文：武帝认为柳彧非同寻常，任命为司武中士。
English: Emperor Wu thought that Liu Ye was extraordinary and appointed him as Sifu sergeant.

古文：转郑令。
现代文：转任郑县令。
English: Transferred to Zheng County.

古文：平齐之后，帝赏从官，留京者不预。
现代文：平定齐国之后，武帝奖赏跟从征伐的官员，留守京城的人没有奖赏。
English: After the pacification of Qi, Emperor Wu rewarded the officials who followed the conquest, but there was no reward for those who stayed behind in Beijing.

古文：彧上表曰： 今太平告始，信赏宜明，酬勋报劳，务先有本。
现代文：柳彧上表说： 如今刚刚得到太平，有功者必定要得赏赐，赏赐应该分明，酬谢勋绩，报答功劳，务必要有所本。
English: Liu Wei said on the table: Now that peace has just been achieved, those who have merit must be rewarded. The reward should be clear, reward for merit, reward for merit, and must have capital.

古文：屠城破邑，出自圣规，斩将搴旗，必由神略。若负戈擐甲，征扞劬劳。
现代文：攻破城池，出自陛下谋划，斩敌将拔敌旗，必定出自陛下的神略，就像披坚执锐，征伐辛劳一样。
English: To break through the city, comes from His Majesty's planning, to cut off the enemy will be to pull down the enemy's flag, must come from His Majesty's strategy, just like to wear a hard hat, to conquer and toil.

古文：至于镇抚国家，宿卫为重。
现代文：至于镇守安抚国家，在宫中守卫，担任警戒，也是重要的。
English: As for the town guards, it is also important to pacify the country, guard in the palace, and serve as a warning.

古文：俱禀成算，非专己能，留从事同，功劳须等。 
现代文：都是秉承已定的计划，不只是自己的能力。留守京师和跟从征伐，事情是一样的，功劳必须相等。 
English: They are all adhering to the predetermined plan, not just their own ability. Staying in Beijing and following the conquest are the same thing, and the merit must be equal.

古文：于是留守并加品级。
现代文：于是留守京城的人都一同加官晋级。
English: As a result, everyone who stayed behind in Kyoto was promoted together.

古文：隋文帝受禅，历尚书虞部、屯田二侍郎。
现代文：隋文帝受禅继位，柳彧历任尚书虞部、屯田二侍郎。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was succeeded by Emperor Zhen, and Liu Bei successively served as Shang Shuguo's secretary and Tonden's second attendant.

古文：时制三品已上，门皆列戟。
现代文：按照当时的制度，三品以上的官员，门外皆竖有戟槊。
English: According to the system in place at the time, officials with three or more court ranks had shackles on the outside of their doors.

古文：左仆射高颎子弘德封应国公，申牒请戟。
现代文：左仆射高赹的儿子高弘德，封爵应国公，申行牒文，请求在门外竖立戟槊。
English: Gao Hongde, the son of Gao Jian, the left-hand servant of Gao Jian, was knighted in response to the country's ruler, petitioned for a petition, and requested to erect a gate outside the gate.

古文：彧判曰： 仆射之子更不异居，父之戟槊已列门外，尊有厌卑之义，子有避父之礼，岂容外门既设，内阁又施？ 
现代文：柳彧在申请文书上批道： 仆射之子没有另外居处，父亲的戟槊已竖立在门外，尊贵有超出卑贱的道理，儿子有回避父亲的礼仪，岂能容许门外已经设置，内房又设立呢？ 
English: In the application document, Liu Yao criticized: If the son of a servant does not have another place to live, the father's crossbow has been erected outside the door, there is a principle of dignity beyond lowliness, and the son has the etiquette of avoiding his father, can he allow the door to be set up and the inner room to be set up?

古文：事竟不行。
现代文：此事终于没有实行。
English: In the end, this did not happen.

古文：颎闻而叹伏。
现代文：高赹听到后，赞叹佩服。
English: After hearing it, Gao Yao was full of admiration.

古文：后迁书侍御史，当朝正色，甚为百僚敬惮。
现代文：后来升任书侍御史，立于朝堂，神色端正，百官十分敬重畏惧。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and was stationed in the Imperial Court. He had an upright demeanor, and was highly respected and feared by all the officials.

古文：上嘉其婞直，谓曰： 大丈夫当立名于世，无容容而已。 
现代文：文帝嘉奖其刚直，对他说： 大丈夫应当建立功名于世，不能与世沉浮。 
English: Emperor Wen commended his steadfastness and said to him, "A good man should establish a good name in the world, and should not be swayed by the world.

古文：赐钱十万，米百石。
现代文：赏赐给柳彧钱十万，米一百石。
English: Liu Xuan was awarded 100,000 yuan and 100 koku of rice.

古文：时刺史多任武将，类不称职，彧上表曰： 伏见诏书以上柱国和干子为杞州刺史，其人年垂八十。钟鸣漏尽。
现代文：当时，刺史之职多由武将担任，很多人不称职，柳彧上表说： 伏见诏书任命上柱国和干子为杞州刺史，和干子年近八十，已是钟鸣漏尽之时。
English: At that time, the post of scribe was mostly held by military generals, and many people were not qualified for the job. Liu Xuan said on the table: Fuxi Imperial Edict appointed Shangzhuang Guo and Gan Zi as scribes of Zhangzhou, and Gan Zi was nearly eighty years old, and it was time for the bell to ring out.

古文：前在赵州，暗于职务，政由群小，贿赂公行。
现代文：从前在赵州，对职务已是糊涂，政务由一群小人决断，贿赂公然盛行。
English: Once upon a time in Zhaozhou, there was confusion about positions, government affairs were decided by a group of villains, and bribery was openly rife.

古文：百姓吁嗟，歌谣满道，乃云： 老禾不早杀，余种秽良田。 
现代文：百姓感慨，歌谣遍及道路，以至于说 老禾不早杀，余种秽良田。 
English: The people were moved, and songs and ballads filled the roads, so much so that it was said that old crops should not be killed prematurely, and other kinds of filthy fields would spring up.

古文：古人云： 耕当问奴，织当问婢。 
现代文：古人说： 耕种应当问奴仆，纺织应该问婢女。 
English: The ancients said: "Farming should be done by slaves, and weaving should be done by maids."

古文：此言各有所能也。
现代文：这说的是各有所能。
English: It's a case of each to their own.

古文：干子弓马武用，是其所长；临人莅职，非其所解。
现代文：干子擅长骑马射箭，冲锋陷阵；治理百姓，担当职务，则不是他所能明白的。
English: Gan Zi is good at riding a horse, shooting arrows, and charging into battle; governing the people and taking on positions is not something he can understand.

古文：如谓优老尚年，自可厚赐金帛，若令刺举，所损殊大。
现代文：如果说优待年老的人，自然可以多多赐给金银布帛；若令其做刺史，所损害的就特别大。
English: If we talk about giving preferential treatment to the elderly, it is natural to give more and more gold and silver cloth to the crane; if we make it do embroidery, the damage will be particularly large.

古文：臣死而后已，敢不竭诚。 
现代文：臣死了也就罢了，岂敢不竭尽忠诚！ 
English: A vassal's death is enough, how dare he not be loyal to the end!

古文：上善之，干子竟免。
现代文：文帝认为柳彧说得对，干子终于被免职。
English: Emperor Wen thought that Liu Ye was right, and Gan Zi was finally dismissed.

古文：有应州刺史唐君明，居母丧，娶雍州长史厍狄士文之从父妹。
现代文：应州刺史唐君明，居母丧期间，娶雍州长史库狄士文叔父的妹妹。
English: At the time of his mother's death, the prefect of Yingzhou, Shi Tangjunming, married the younger sister of the uncle of the governor of Yongzhou, Shu Di Shiwen.

古文：彧劾之曰： 君明忽劬劳之痛，惑嬿尔之亲，冒此苴缞，命彼褕翟。
现代文：柳彧弹劾他说 ：唐君明忽视丧母的悲痛，惑于燕尔新婚的亲情，把丧母的孝服遮掩起来，穿上那种带有文采的祭服。
English: Liu Ye impeached him, saying: Tang Junming ignored the grief of his mother's death, deceived by Yan Er's newly married family, covered up his mother's lost filial piety, and put on that kind of ceremonial dress with literary style.

古文：不义不昵，《春秋》载其将亡：无礼无仪，诗人欲其遄死。
现代文：没有亲义，《春秋》记载这样的人将要灭亡；没有礼义，诗人想要这样的人快些死。
English: Without filial piety, "Spring and Autumn" records that such a person will perish; without courtesy, the poet wants such a person to die sooner.

古文：士文赞务神州，名位通显，弃二姓之重匹，违六礼之轨仪。
现代文：士文任职于国家，名高位显，背弃二姓的重要对比，违背六礼的法式规范。
English: The scholar and the man of letters serve the country, the name is high-ranking, the important contrast of the two surnames is abandoned, and the French-style norm of the six formalities is violated.

古文：请禁锢终身，以惩风俗。 
现代文：请将唐君明终身囚禁，以惩戒风俗。 
English: Please imprison Tang Junming for life to punish the custom.

古文：二家竟坐得罪。
现代文：二家竟然连坐获罪。
English: The two families were even convicted together.

古文：隋承丧乱之后，风俗颓坏，彧多所矫正，上甚嘉之。
现代文：隋朝承接丧乱之后，风俗颓废败坏，柳彧多有矫正，文帝很赞赏他。
English: After the Sui Dynasty inherited the turmoil, the customs were corrupted and the willows were mostly corrected. Emperor Wen appreciated him very much.

古文：又见上勤于听受，百僚奏请多有烦碎，因上疏谏曰： 人君出令，诫在烦数。
现代文：另，柳彧见文帝听政理事甚勤，文武百官奏请的事情多有繁琐零碎，因而上疏劝谏说： 君主发布命令，戒除繁琐。
English: In addition, Liu Xuan saw that Emperor Wen was very diligent in listening to the political director, and the things requested by the civil and military officials were mostly cumbersome and fragmentary. Therefore, Shangxu advised him to say: The monarch issued an order to eliminate the cumbersome.

古文：是以舜任五臣，尧咨四岳，设官分职，各有司存，垂拱无为，天下以乂。
现代文：因此，舜把事情交付五臣，尧咨询四岳，设置官员，分担职务，各自都有自己的职责，尧、舜垂袖拱手无所作为，而天下平安。
English: Therefore, if you entrust the matter to the five ministers, consult the four mountains, set up officials, and share duties, each of them will have their own responsibilities. If you do nothing, the world will be safe.

古文：所谓劳于求贤，逸于任使。
现代文：这就是所说的在求取贤才上辛劳，在任命使用上安逸。
English: This is what is meant by the saying that it is hard work to attract talents, but it is easy to appoint them.

古文：比见事无大小，咸关圣职。
现代文：及见事无大小巨细，都请陛下裁处。
English: and all matters, large and small, are submitted to His Majesty's judgment.

古文：陛下留心政道，无惮疲劳，至乃营造细小之事，出给轻微之物，一日之内，酬答百司，至乃日旰忘食贫，分夜未寝，动以文簿，忧劳圣躬。
现代文：陛下留心政务，不畏惧疲劳，至于建造房舍这样的小事，供给轻细微小之物，一日之内，应酬答对百官，以至于日已至晚忘记进食，夜至更深未能安寝，举动都是文书簿记，忧扰劳累陛下之本。
English: His Majesty attends to the affairs of state and does not fear fatigue. As for such trifles as the construction of buildings and the provision of trifles, within a day he answers to a hundred officials, to the extent that he forgets to eat by day's end and is unable to sleep soundly by night's end. His actions are a matter of paperwork, a source of worry and weariness for His Majesty.

古文：伏愿思臣至言，少减烦务。 
现代文：伏愿陛下考虑臣的至诚之言，稍稍减少一些繁琐的事务。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will consider my sincere words and slightly reduce some of the burdensome matters.

古文：上览而嘉之。
现代文：文帝看了柳彧的上书，甚为赞赏。
English: After reading the article, Emperor Wen praised Yang Yong.

古文：以其家，敕有司与之筑宅，因曰： 柳彧正直之士，国之龟宝也。 
现代文：因为柳彧家中贫困，文帝敕令有司给柳彧建筑宅院，说 ：柳彧是正直之士，是国家的瑰宝。 
English: Because of the poverty in Liu Bei's family, Emperor Wen ordered an official to build a residence for Liu Bei, saying: Liu Bei is an honest man and a national treasure.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：柳彧受到的重视就像这样。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：右仆射杨素当途显贵，百僚慑惮，无敢忤者，尝以少谴，敕送南台。
现代文：右仆射杨素当权，显赫尊贵，百官都很畏惧，没有人敢于不顺从。曾因小小的罪过，敕令送往南台。
English: His right-hand man, Yang Su, was in power. He was a prominent and respected man. All the officials were afraid of him. No one dared to disobey him. He was sent to Nantai by imperial order for a minor offense.

古文：素恃贵，坐彧床。
现代文：杨素自恃宠贵，坐在柳彧的座位上。
English: Yang Su, who fancies himself as a favorite, sits on the seat of the willow branch.

古文：彧从外来，见素如此，于阶下端笏整容曰： 奉敕推公罪。 
现代文：柳彧从外面进来，看见杨素这样，在台阶上端着手板正色道 ：尊奉敕令追究公的罪过。 
English: Liu Yao came in from outside and saw Yang Su like this. At the top of the steps, the signboard read: "Respect the imperial edict to investigate public crimes."

古文：素遽下。
现代文：杨素急忙下来。
English: Yang Su hurried down.

古文：彧据案坐，立素于庭前，辩诘事状。
现代文：柳彧依桌案坐下，让杨素站在大厅堂前，辩白诘问事情的来龙去脉。
English: Liu Wei sat down according to the table plan, and asked Yang Su to stand in front of the hall to discuss the background of the matter.

古文：素由是衔之。
现代文：杨素因此忌恨柳彧。
English: As a result, Yang Su became jealous of Liu Yao.

古文：彧时方为上所信任，故素未有以中之。
现代文：但因柳彧此时正得文帝的信任，所以杨素没有中伤柳彧。
English: However, since Liu Bei was gaining the trust of Emperor Wen at this time, Yang Su did not slander Liu Bei.

古文：彧见近代以来，都邑百姓每至正月十五日，作角抵戏，递相夸竞，至于糜费财力，上奏请禁绝之曰： 窃见京邑，爰及外州，每以正月望夜，充街塞陌，鸣鼓聒天，燎炬照地，人戴兽面，男为女服，倡优杂伎，诡状异形。
现代文：柳彧见近代以来，通都大邑的百姓每逢正月十五日，就作角抵戏，互相争竞夸耀，以至于浪费很多财力，上书请求禁绝角抵戏说 ：私下见到京城和京城之外的州县，每逢正月十五日夜，人群充塞街道，鼓声震天，火炬照彻大地，人人头戴兽形面具，男子身穿女人之服，倡优耍弄杂技，奇形怪状。
English: Since modern times, the people of Tongdu County have been competing with each other on the 15th day of the first month of the year, wasting a lot of financial resources. He wrote a letter requesting that the competition be banned, saying, "I have seen privately that in Beijing and the counties outside of Beijing, on the evening of the 15th day of the first month of the year, the crowds fill the streets, the drums shake the sky, the torch shines through the earth, everyone wears a beast-shaped mask, men wear women's clothes, and the acrobats perform acrobatics, with strange shapes.

古文：外内共观，曾不相避。
现代文：男男女女都来观看，互相不曾回避。
English: Men and women came to watch, and they did not avoid each other.

古文：竭赀破产，竞此一时。
现代文：竭尽资财，破费财产，都在此时一争高低。
English: The exhaustion of capital and the destruction of property are all competing at this time.

古文：尽室并孥，无问贵贱，男女混杂，缁素不分。
现代文：人们倾室而出，不论高低贵贱，男女互相混杂，黑白不分。
English: People poured out of the room, regardless of high and low, men and women mixed with each other, black and white.

古文：秽行因此而生，盗贼由斯而起。
现代文：污秽的行为因此而生，盗贼由此而起。
English: Out of this cometh lewdness, and out of this cometh theft.

古文：非益于化，实损于人。
现代文：不仅无益于教化，而且实在有损于百姓。
English: Not only is it not conducive to enlightenment, but it is actually detrimental to the people.

古文：请颁天下，并即禁断。 
现代文：请求颁诏天下，一并立即禁止。 
English: Requesting the issuance of an imperial edict to the whole world is prohibited immediately.

古文：诏可其奏。
现代文：诏令准许柳彧的上奏。
English: The imperial edict agreed to Xu's request.

古文：是岁，持节巡河北五十二州，奏免长吏赃污不称职者二百余人，州县肃然，莫不震惧。
现代文：这一年，柳彧持符节出巡河北五十二州，奏请罢免贪赃枉法和不称职的长官二百多人，州县整肃，无不震惊畏惧。
English: This year, Liu Ye went on a tour of Hebei's fifty-two prefectures to appeal for the removal of more than two hundred corrupt and incompetent officials and the rectification of prefectures and counties. Everyone was shocked and afraid.

古文：上嘉之，赐绢布二百匹，氈三十领，拜仪同三司，岁余，加员外散骑常侍。
现代文：文帝嘉奖柳彧，赐给绢布二百匹，毛毡三十领，授予仪同三司。过了一年多，加授员外郎散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Wen conferred the award on Liu Xuan, gave him 200 pieces of silk cloth and 30 pieces of woolen cloth, and awarded him with the title of Sanji. More than a year later, he was awarded the title of Geiro Sanzhijishi.

古文：仁寿初，持节巡省太原道十九州。
现代文：仁寿初年，持节巡视太原道十九州。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, he made an inspection tour of the nineteen prefectures of Taiyuan Province.

古文：及还，赐绢百五十匹。
现代文：回京后，又赐绢一百五十匹。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was given another 150 yakitori.

古文：彧尝得博陵李文博所撰《政道集》十卷，蜀王秀遣人求之。彧送之于秀，秀复赐彧奴婢十口。
现代文：柳彧曾经得到博陵李文博撰写的《政道集》十卷。蜀王杨秀派人来索求，柳彧把书送给杨秀，杨秀又赐给柳彧十名奴仆和婢女。
English: Liu Bei once obtained ten volumes of the "Political Road Book" written by Boling Li Wenbo. King of Shu, Yang Xiu, sent someone to ask for it. Liu Bei gave the book to Yang Xiu, and Yang Xiu gave Liu Bei ten slaves and maids.

古文：及秀得罪，杨素奏彧以内臣交通诸侯，除名，配戍怀远镇。
现代文：等到杨秀得罪，杨素上奏，说柳彧以朝廷大臣交结诸侯王，将柳彧除去名籍，发配到怀远镇戍边。
English: When Yang Xiu was found guilty, Yang Su made a speech, saying that Liu Xuan was a minister of the imperial court who had befriended princes, removed Liu Xuan's name from the register, and sent him to Huaiyuan Town.

古文：行达高阳，有诏徵进。
现代文：行至高阳，有诏令征回京师。
English: They went as far as Goyang, but were ordered by imperial edict to return to Beijing.

古文：至晋阳，遇汉王谅作乱，遣使驰召彧入城。
现代文：回至晋阳，适逢汉王杨谅作乱，派遣使者召柳彧入城。
English: When he returned to Jinyang, the Han King Yang Peng sent an envoy to summon Liu Xuan to the city.

古文：而谅反形已露，彧入城，度不得免，遂诈中恶不食，自称危笃。
现代文：杨谅造反的形势已经明显，柳彧入城后，估计难以幸免，就假装患了恶疾不能进食，自称已是十分危险。
English: The situation of Yang Peng's rebellion was already obvious. After Liu Xuan entered the city, it was estimated that it would be difficult to escape, so he pretended to have a bad disease and could not eat, claiming that it was already very dangerous.

古文：谅怒囚之。
现代文：杨谅恼怒，把柳彧囚禁起来。
English: Yang was so angry that he imprisoned Liu Xuan.

古文：及谅败，杨素奏彧心怀两端，以候事变，迹虽不反，心实同逆。
现代文：杨谅失败后，杨素奏柳彧怀有二心，等待事情发生变化，表面虽没有造反，心里实际上已和叛逆者相同。
English: After the failure of Yang Peng, Yang Suxiao and Liu Xuan were ambivalent, waiting for things to change. Although there was no rebellion on the surface, they were actually the same as the rebels in their hearts.

古文：坐徙敦煌。
现代文：柳彧又坐罪发配到敦煌。
English: Liu Yao was also sentenced to Dunhuang.

古文：素卒，乃自申理，有诏徵还。
现代文：杨素死后，柳彧就自己上书申辩，诏令征还京师。
English: After Yang Su's death, Liu Ye sent a letter to plead his case and was ordered to return to Beijing.

古文：卒于道。
现代文：死于途中。
English: He died on the way.

古文：有子绍，为介休令。赵绰，字士倬，河东人也。
现代文：赵绰字士倬，河东人。
English: Zhao Zhouzhi, a native of Hedong.

古文：性质直刚毅。
现代文：生性质朴正直，刚强果决。
English: His nature is simple and honest, strong and decisive.

古文：周初为天官府史，以恭谨恪勤，擢授夏官府下士。
现代文：周朝初年任天官府史，因为恭谦谨慎，做事勤恳，擢升为夏官府下士。
English: In the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, he was appointed as a Tianguanfu historian. Because he was respectful, prudent and diligent in his work, he was promoted to corporal of the Xiaguanfu.

古文：稍以明干见知，为内史中士。
现代文：稍后，又因精明干练为人所知，任内史中士。
English: Later, he became known for his shrewdness and ability, and was appointed as a sergeant of internal history.

古文：父艰去职，哀毁骨立，世称其孝。
现代文：因父丧辞官，悲哀过度损坏了身体，世人都称赞他孝顺。
English: Because of his father's death, his grief has damaged his body excessively, and the world has praised him for his filial piety.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，知其清正，引为录事参军。
现代文：隋文帝为丞相时，知道赵绰清廉正直，用为录事参军。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen was the prime minister, he knew that Zhao Zuo was honest and used him as a record to join the army.

古文：迁掌朝大夫，从行军总管是云晖击叛蛮，以功拜仪同。
现代文：升任掌朝大夫，跟随行军总管是云晖打击叛乱的蛮族，因功授予仪同之职。
English: He was promoted to the post of the doctor in charge of the imperial court, followed by the general manager of the march, who was a barbarian from Yunnan who fought against the rebellion, and was awarded the same post for his service.

古文：文帝受禅，授大理丞。
现代文：文帝受禅继位，授赵绰大理丞之职。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen's succession and gave Zhao Zhuo the post of grand secretary.

古文：处法平允，考绩连最。
现代文：赵绰执法公平允当，考绩接连都是最好的。
English: Zhao Cao's law enforcement is fair and reasonable, and his performance appraisal is the best one after another.

古文：历大理正、尚书都官侍郎，每有奏谳，正色侃然，渐见礼重。
现代文：历任大理正、尚书都官侍郎，每次奏闻案件，神色端庄，渐渐地受到重视。
English: Successive Dai Risho, Shoshu, and Miyako retainers, each time they report a case, they look dignified and gradually receive attention.

古文：上以盗贼不禁，将重其法，绰进谏曰： 律者天下之大信，其可失乎！ 
现代文：文帝因盗贼不能禁绝，准备加重刑法，赵绰进谏说 ：法律是天下最可信任的，怎么能够失去呢？ 
English: Because Emperor Wen could not stop thieves, he was preparing to increase the severity of the criminal law. Zhao Chaojin said: The law is the most trusted in the world, how can it be lost?

古文：上忻然纳之，因谓曰： 若更有闻见，宜数言之。 
现代文：文帝高兴地采纳了赵绰的建议，因而对赵绰说： 如果再听到见到什么，应该多多进言。 
English: Emperor Wen gladly accepted Zhao Zhaozhu's suggestion and said to Zhao Zhaozhu, "If you hear or see something again, you should say more."

古文：迁大理少卿。
现代文：升任赵绰为大理少卿。
English: Zhao Zhuo was promoted to Dali Shaoqing.

古文：故陈将萧摩诃，其子世略在江南作乱，摩诃当从坐。
现代文：萧摩诃原是陈国的将领，他的儿子萧世略在江南叛乱，摩诃依律应该连坐。
English: Xiao Maqian was a general in the State of Chen. His son, Xiao Shiliu, rebelled in the south of the Yangtze River. Maqian Yiliu should be seated next to him.

古文：上曰： 世略年未二十，亦何能为！
现代文：文帝说 ：萧世略年龄还不到二十岁，怎么能够做这样的事！
English: Wen Di said: Xiao Shiliu is less than twenty years old, how can he do such a thing!

古文：以其名将之子，为人逼耳。 
现代文：因为他是名将的儿子，被人逼迫才这样做罢了。 
English: Because he is the son of a famous general, he was forced to do so.

古文：因赦摩诃。
现代文：因而赦免了摩诃。
English: So he pardoned Capricorn.

古文：绰固谏不可，上不能夺，欲待绰去而赦之，因命绰退食。
现代文：赵绰坚决谏阻，认为不可赦免。文帝不能让赵绰屈从，就想等赵绰退朝后赦免摩诃，因而命令赵退朝就餐。
English: Zhao Zhaozhu resolutely resisted, believing that he could not be pardoned. Emperor Wen could not make Zhao Zhaozhu yield, so he wanted to wait for Zhao Zhaozhu to pardon Ma Jun after he retired, so he ordered Zhao Zhaozhu to have dinner.

古文：绰曰： 臣奏狱未决，不敢退朝。 
现代文：赵绰说 ：臣上奏的案件没有裁决，不敢退朝。 
English: Zhao Qiao said: The case reported by the minister has not been adjudicated, and I dare not return to the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 大理其为朕特放摩诃也。 
现代文：文帝说 ：大理就为朕特别释放摩诃吧！ 
English: Wendi said, "Dali, please release Capricorn for me!"

古文：因命左右释之。
现代文：因而命身边的人将摩诃释放。
English: As a result, the people around him are killed and the Capricorn is released.

古文：刑部侍郎辛亶尝衣绯裈，俗云利官，上以为厌蛊，将斩之，绰曰： 据法不当死，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：刑部侍郎辛曾经穿粉红色的裤子，俗话说是吉利之官，文帝认为是妖邪，准备将辛斩首。赵绰说： 根据法律，辛不应有死罪，臣不敢遵命。 
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Xin, used to wear pink trousers. According to the saying, he was an official of good luck. Emperor Wen thought he was a demon and prepared to behead Xin. Zhao Qiao said: According to the law, Xin should not have the death penalty. The minister did not dare to follow the order.

古文：上怒甚，谓曰： 卿惜辛亶而不自惜也？ 
现代文：文帝非常愤怒，对赵绰说： 你怜惜辛，就不怜惜自己吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen was very angry and said to Zhao Qiao: If you pity Xin, won't you pity yourself?

古文：命左仆射高颎将绰斩之。
现代文：命令左仆射高赹将赵绰斩首。
English: He ordered his left-hand man to shoot Gao Qi and behead Zhao Zhao.

古文：绰曰： 陛下宁可杀臣，不可杀辛亶。 
现代文：赵绰说： 陛下宁可杀了臣，也不可杀辛。 
English: Zhao Qiao said: Your Majesty would rather kill a vassal than kill Xin.

古文：至朝堂，解衣当斩。上使人谓绰曰： 竟如何？ 
现代文：到了朝堂，赵绰解衣赴死，文帝派人问赵绰说 ：究竟怎么样？ 
English: When he arrived at the imperial court, Zhao Chaozhe undressed and went to his death. Emperor Wen sent someone to ask Zhao Chaozhe and said, "What's going on?

古文：对曰： 执法一心，不敢惜死。 
现代文：赵绰回答说 ：一心执行法律，不敢顾惜死亡。 
English: Zhao Cao replied, "I am dedicated to enforcing the law, and I dare not spare my own life."

古文：上拂衣入，良久乃释之。
现代文：文帝生气地进去了，很久才把赵绰释放。
English: Wen Di angrily went inside, and it took a long time to release Zhao Qiao.

古文：明日，谢绰，劳勉之，赐物三百段。
现代文：次日，文帝向赵绰道歉，慰劳勉励赵绰，赐给他物品三百段。
English: The next day, Emperor Wen apologized to Zhao Qiao, consoled and encouraged Zhao Qiao, and gave him 300 pieces of articles.

古文：时上禁行恶钱，有二人在市以恶钱易好者，武候执以闻，上悉令斩之。
现代文：当时，禁止质料薄劣的私人铸造的钱在市面流通，有两个人在集市上用这种劣质的钱换好钱，武候把他们抓起来奏知文帝，文帝令将二人都杀了。
English: At that time, privately minted money with poor quality materials was prohibited from circulating in the market. There were two people who used this poor quality money to exchange for good money in the bazaar. They were arrested and reported to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen ordered that both of them be killed.

古文：绰谏曰： 此人坐当杖，杀之非法。 
现代文：赵绰谏阻说 ：这两个人论罪应该杖击，杀了他们不合法律。 
English: Zhao Chaozhen said: These two people should be beaten with a cane, and killing them is against the law.

古文：上曰： 不关卿事。 
现代文：文帝说 ：不关你的事。 
English: Wendi said, "It's none of your business."

古文：绰曰： 陛下不以臣愚暗，置在法司，欲妄杀人，岂得不关臣事？ 
现代文：赵绰说 ：陛下不因为臣愚昧，把臣放在法司的位置，想要随便杀人，怎能不关臣之事？ 
English: Zhao Chao said, "Your Majesty, if it is not because of the ignorance of your subjects that you have placed your subjects in the position of law officers and want to kill people at will, how can it not be a matter of concern to your subjects?"

古文：上曰： 撼大木不动者，当退。 
现代文：文帝说： 摇撼大事摇撼不动，应该退下。 
English: Wen Di said: Shake the event and shake it, it should retreat.

古文：对曰： 臣望感天心，何论动木！ 
现代文：赵绰回答说： 臣希望感动天心，何论摇撼大树！ 
English: Zhao Zhaozhu replied: "The minister hopes to move the heart of heaven, let alone shake the tree!

古文：上复曰： 啜羹者，热则置之。
现代文：文帝又说： 喝羹的话，热了就放下。
English: Wendi also said: If you drink soup, put it down when it gets hot.

古文：天子之感，欲相挫邪？ 
现代文：天子的威势，想要挫动吗？ 
English: Do you want to frustrate the power of the Son of God?

古文：绰拜而益前，诃之不肯退。
现代文：赵绰拜礼而又向前，文帝斥责他也不肯后退。
English: Zhao Chao bowed and stepped forward, but Emperor Wen rebuked him and he refused to step back.

古文：上遂入。
现代文：文帝于是就到内室去了。
English: Wen Di then went to the inner room.

古文：书侍御史柳彧复上奏切谏，上乃止。
现代文：书侍御史柳又上书奏请，直言切谏，文帝才作罢。
English: The scribe, Goshiryu, again asked for a recital, but Emperor Wen refused to do so.

古文：上以绰有诚直之心，每引入阁中，或遇上与皇后同榻，即呼绰坐，评论得失。
现代文：文帝认为赵绰有忠诚正直之心，常常引入内室，有时遇见文帝和皇后同榻，文帝就招呼赵绰坐下，议论得失。
English: Emperor Wen thought that Zhao Chao had a loyal and honest heart, and often brought him into the inner room. Sometimes he met Emperor Wen and the empress sleeping together. Emperor Wen invited Zhao Chao to sit down and discuss the gains and losses.

古文：前后赏赐以万计。
现代文：前后赏赐的财物以万数计。
English: The number of rewards is in the tens of thousands.

古文：后进开府，赠其父为蔡州刺史。
现代文：后来，晋位开府，追赠其父为蔡州刺史。
English: Later, he ascended to the throne and founded the capital, posthumously bestowing his father with the title of Caizhou Sashih.

古文：时河东薛胄为大理卿，俱名平恕。然胄断狱以情，而绰守法，俱为称职。
现代文：当时，河东薛胄任大理卿，和赵绰都以公平宽恕闻名，然而，薛胄裁断刑狱根据情理，而赵绰则是遵守法律，都认为他很称职。
English: At that time, Hedong Xueyuan was the Secretary of Justice, and both Xueyuan and Zhaoqiao were known for their fairness and forgiveness. However, Xueyuan's sentence was based on reason, while Zhaoqiao's was in accordance with the law, and both considered him to be very competent.

古文：上每谓绰曰： 朕于卿无所爱惜，但卿骨相不当贵耳。 
现代文：文帝经常对赵绰说： 对于卿，朕没有什么好爱惜的，只是卿的骨相当不得富贵。 
English: Emperor Wen often said to Zhao Qiao, "As for my lord, I have nothing to be sorry for, but my lord's bones are not very rich.

古文：仁寿中，卒官，上为之流涕，中使吊祭，鸿胪监护丧事。
现代文：仁寿中，赵绰死于官任，文帝为赵绰之死痛哭流涕，派遣宫中使者前往吊唁祭奠，鸿胪监护丧事。
English: In his benevolent life, Zhao Cao died in office. Emperor Wen wept bitterly for the death of Zhao Cao, sent an emissary from the palace to pay condolences and pay tribute, and Hongtao supervised the funeral.

古文：二子元方、元袭。
现代文：二个儿子，名赵元方、赵元袭。
English: They have two sons, named Zhao Yuanfang and Zhao Yuanhai.

