古文：孝武皇帝封弟为鲁恭王。
现代文：汉武帝封弟弟为鲁恭王。
English: Emperor Hanwu's younger brother, Emperor Feng, became King Lugong.

古文：恭王坏孔子宅以为宫，得佚《尚书》百篇，《礼》三百，《春秋》三十篇，《论语》二十一篇，闻弦歌之声，俱复封涂，上言武帝。
现代文：鲁恭王拆毁孔子旧宅修建宫室，得到失传的《尚书》一百篇、《礼》三百篇、《春秋》三十篇、《论语》二十一篇，同时听到宅内有弹琴瑟、唱诗歌的声音，因为惧怕，又重新把它封闭起来，用泥涂好，并将此事上奏了汉武帝。
English: King Lu Gong demolished the old house of Confucius to build a palace, and obtained the lost "Shangshu" one hundred, "Li" three hundred, "Chunqiu" thirty, and "Analects" twenty-one. At the same time, he heard the sound of playing the harp and singing poetry in the house. Because of fear, he closed it again, painted it with mud, and played Emperor Hanwu on the matter.

古文：武帝遣吏发取，古经《论语》，此时皆出。
现代文：汉武帝派遣官吏去打开取出那些东西，经书和《论语》，这时都出现了。
English: Emperor Hanwu sent officials to open and take out those things, and the scriptures and the Analects all appeared.

古文：经传也而有弦歌之声，文当兴於汉，喜乐得闻之祥也。
现代文：经传是无声的书却出现了令人听见弹琴唱歌之声的事情，这是古文该在汉代兴盛，经传欢庆自己被发掘出来的一种吉兆。
English: It is an auspicious sign that ancient texts should have flourished in the Han Dynasty, and that sutras should celebrate their discovery.

古文：当传於汉，寝藏墙壁之中，恭王之，圣王感动弦歌之象。
现代文：它们应当流传于汉代，所以静静地藏在墙壁之中，鲁恭王发掘了它们，就出现了使圣王感动的弹琴唱歌的现象。
English: They should have been handed down in the Han Dynasty, so they were quietly hidden in the walls. When King Lugong unearthed them, the phenomenon of playing the piano and singing that moved the holy king appeared.

古文：此则古文不当掩，汉俟以为符也。
现代文：这就说明古代文献不该被埋没，而汉朝等待它们出现作为兴盛的征兆。
English: This shows that ancient documents should not be buried, and the Han Dynasty waited for them to appear as a sign of prosperity.

古文：孝成皇帝读百篇《尚书》，博士郎吏莫能晓知，征天下能为《尚书》者。
现代文：汉成帝阅读百篇《尚书》，朝中博士、郎官没有谁能通晓，征求天下能究治《尚书》的人。
English: Emperor Han Chengdu read hundreds of "Shangshu," and none of the chancellors, doctors, and officials could understand it, and asked the world for people who could study "Shangshu."

古文：东海张霸通《左氏春秋》，案百篇序，以《左氏》训诂造作百二篇，具成奏上。
现代文：东海郡张霸精通《左氏春秋》，根据百篇《尚书》的序言，采用《左氏春秋》的文字解释，编造出一百零二篇本《尚书》，全部完成后奏报给汉成帝。
English: Zhang Ba of Donghai County was well versed in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and based on the preamble of the hundred "Shang Shu," he used the textual explanation of "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and made up a hundred and two "Shang Shu," all of which were submitted to Han Chengdi after completion.

古文：成帝出秘《尚书》以考校之，无一字相应者，成帝下霸於吏，吏当器辜大不谨敬。
现代文：汉成帝取出秘藏的《尚书》用来考订校对它，没有一个字是相合的。汉成帝就把张霸交给司法官吏去审讯治罪。
English: Emperor Hancheng took out the secret "Shang Shu" and used it to test and proofread it, and none of the words matched. Emperor Hancheng then handed Zhang Ba to judicial officials to be tried and punished.

古文：成帝奇霸之才，赦其辜，亦不其经，故百二《尚书》传在民间。
现代文：司法官判张霸犯了欺君之罪。汉成帝认为张霸的才能出众，赦免了他的罪，也不毁掉他的经书，所以一百零二篇本《尚书》才流传在民间。
English: The judicial officer convicted Zhang Ba of the crime of defrauding the emperor. Emperor Hancheng believed that Zhang Ba's talent was outstanding, pardoned his sin, and did not destroy his scriptures, so the 102 "Shang Shu" books were only circulated among the people.

古文：孔子曰 才难 ，能推精思，作经百篇，才高卓遹，希有之人也。
现代文：孔子说： 人才难得啊。 张霸能够推究精深的思想，编写经书百篇，才高卓越，是世上稀有的人物。
English: Confucius said: "Talent is rare. Zhang Ba is able to investigate profound thoughts and compile hundreds of scriptures, which is high excellence. He is a rare person in the world.

古文：成帝赦之，多其文也。
现代文：汉成帝赦免他，是欣赏他的文才。
English: Han Chengdi pardoned him, appreciating his literary talent.

古文：虽奸非实，次序篇句，依倚事类，有似真是，故不烧灭之。
现代文：他的经文虽然是伪造的不真实的，但在编排篇章句子，组织材料安排内容上，就像真的经书一样，所以汉成帝不烧毁他的经书。
English: Although his scriptures were forged and untrue, they were just like real scriptures in the arrangement of chapters and sentences, the organization of materials and the arrangement of content, so Han Chengdi did not burn his scriptures.

古文：疏一椟，相遣以书，书十数札，奏记长吏，文成可观，读之满意，百不能一。
现代文：整治一只书匣，把自己的作品赠送别人，写出十几根木简的公文呈报长官，文章写成后受看，阅读它令人满意，这样的人一百个当中难挑出一个来。
English: It is difficult to single out one person out of a hundred who can tidy up a bookcase, give away his or her work, write a dozen or so simple official documents and submit them to the chief reporter. After the article is written, it is read, and it is satisfying to read.

古文：张霸推精思至於百篇，汉世类，成帝赦之，不亦宜乎？
现代文：张霸推究精深的思想写出百篇文章，在汉代很少有这类人才，汉成帝赦免他，不也是很应该的吗？
English: In the Han Dynasty, there were very few people with this kind of talent. Emperor Hancheng pardoned him. Wasn't it the right thing to do?

古文：杨子山为郡上计吏，见三府为《哀牢传》不能成，归郡作上，孝明奇之，征在兰台。
现代文：杨子山任郡的上计吏，看到三府编写《哀牢传》不能成功。回到郡中写成后上报朝廷，汉明帝认为他是奇才，征召他在兰台为官。
English: Yang Zishan served as the county's chief accountant, and saw that the three prefectures could not succeed in compiling the "Lamentation Biography." After returning to the county to write it and report it to the court, Han Mingdi thought he was a genius and conscripted him to be an official in Lantai.

古文：夫以三府掾吏，丛积成才，不能成一篇。
现代文：凭三府中的属官，聚集了大批人材，而不能写出一部《哀牢传》。
English: With the subordinate officials in the three prefectures, a large number of talents were gathered, but they could not write a "Lamentation."

古文：子山成之，上览其文。
现代文：杨子山写成了《哀牢传》，皇帝采用了他的文章。
English: Yang Zishan wrote "Biography of a Sorrowful Prisoner," and the emperor adopted his article.

古文：子山之传，岂必审是？
现代文：杨子山的《哀牢传》，难道就这么好吗？
English: Is Yang Zishan's "Lamentation" really that good?

古文：传闻依为之有状，会三府之士，终不能为，子山为之，斯须不难。
现代文：关于哀牢的情况当时传说纷纭，聚集三府中的人士，终究不能写出来，杨子山写它，顷刻写成，毫不困难。
English: At that time, there were various legends about the circumstances of the mourning. After all, people from the three prefectures could not write it, but Yang Zishan could write it in an instant, without any difficulty.

古文：成帝赦张霸，岂不有以哉？
现代文：汉成帝赦免张霸，难道没有原因吗？
English: Emperor Hancheng pardoned Zhang Ba, is there no reason?

古文：孝武之时，诏百官对策，董仲舒策文最善。
现代文：汉武帝时，召见百官考试对策，董仲舒的策文最好。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, there were hundreds of strategies for official examinations, and Dong Zhongshu's strategy was the best.

古文：王莽时，使郎吏上奏，刘子骏章尤美。
现代文：王莽时，命郎官上奏章，刘子骏的奏章尤其华美。
English: Wang Mangshi, the son of a high-ranking official, played the music, and Liu Zixuan's music was particularly beautiful.

古文：美善不空，才高知深之验也。
现代文：这种美和善都不是空虚的，而是他们才高智深的证明。
English: This kind of beauty and goodness are not empty, but a proof of their high intelligence.

古文：《易》曰： 圣人之情见於辞。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 圣人的情感体现在卦辞和爻辞中。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The saint's emotions are embodied in the gossip and gossip.

古文：文辞美恶，足以观才。
现代文：文辞的美与丑，足以看出一个人的才智。
English: The beauty and ugliness of words are enough to show a person's intelligence.

古文：永平中，神雀群集，孝明诏上《爵颂》，百官颂上，文皆比瓦石，唯班固、贾逵、傅毅、杨终、侯讽五颂金玉，孝明览焉。
现代文：永平年间，有一大群神雀停落在京师，汉明帝下诏书，令官吏和文人以神雀的出现为题，写歌功颂德的文章献上。百官的颂文献上，文章都用瓦石作比喻，只有班固、贾逵、傅毅、杨终、侯讽五个人写的颂像金玉般的美好，汉明帝采纳了这些文章。
English: During the Yongping era, a large flock of sacred sparrows landed in Beijing. Emperor Hanming issued an edict, ordering officials and writers to write praise articles on the theme of the appearance of the sacred sparrows. In the praise literature of hundreds of officials, the articles were all made with the metaphor of stone. Only the praise of the golden beauty written by five people, namely, Ban Gu, Jia Wei, Fu Yi, Yang Zhen and Hou Lin, was adopted by Emperor Hanming.

古文：夫以百官之众，郎吏非一，唯五人文善，非奇而何？
现代文：凭百官的人数众多，郎官也不止一人，只有五个人的文章写得好，他们不是奇才而是什么呢？
English: According to the large number of officials, there is more than one vassal, and only five people's articles are well written. They are not wizards, but what are they?

古文：孝武善《子虚》之赋，征司马长卿。
现代文：汉武帝欣赏《子虚赋》，就征召司马长卿为官。
English: Emperor Hanwu appreciated "Zi Hu Fu" and called up Sima Changqing for the post.

古文：孝成玩弄众书之多，善扬子云，出入游猎，子云乘从。
现代文：汉成帝阅读的书很多，只欣赏杨子云的文章，无论出入游猎，杨子云都乘车随从。
English: Han Chengdi read a lot of books, but he only appreciated Yang Ziyun's articles. Regardless of whether he went out for hunting, Yang Ziyun always accompanied him by car.

古文：使长卿、桓君山、子云作吏，书所不能盈牍，文所不能成句，则武帝何贪？成帝何欲？
现代文：假如让司马长卿、桓君山、杨子云当官，写书不能成篇，写文章不能成句，那么汉武帝贪图什么，汉成帝欲求什么呢？
English: If Sima Changqing, Huan Junshan, and Yang Ziyun were allowed to become officials, writing a book could not be made into a book, and writing an article could not be made into a sentence, then what did Emperor Hanwu covet, and what did Emperor Hancheng desire?

古文：故曰： 玩扬子云之篇，乐於居千石之官；挟桓君山之书，富於积猗顿之财。 
现代文：所以说：欣赏杨子云的文章，比当了年俸一千石的大官还要高兴；拥有恒君山写的书，比猗顿积聚的财富更富有。
English: Therefore, he said, "appreciating Yang Ziyun's articles is even more gratifying than being a high-ranking official with an annual salary of a thousand stone; owning a book written by Heng Junshan is richer than the wealth accumulated by Xing Tong."

古文：韩非之书，传在秦庭，始皇叹曰： 独不得与此人同时！ 
现代文：韩非的书，流传在秦朝的宫廷，秦始皇感叹说： 偏偏不能和此人生活在同一个时代。 
English: Han Fei's book circulated in the court of the Qin Dynasty. Qin Shi Huang lamented, "I can't live in the same era as this person."

古文：陆贾《新语》，每奏一篇，高祖左右，称曰万岁。
现代文：陆贾写作《新语》，每当上奏一篇，汉高祖左右的臣子就高呼 万岁 。
English: When Lu Jia wrote "Xinhua," every time he played it, the courtiers around Han Gao Zu shouted "long live."

古文：夫叹思其人，与喜称万岁，岂可空为哉？
现代文：感叹思慕那个人与欢呼万岁，难道能凭空产生吗？
English: Can the lamentation, the yearning for that person, and the cheers for long life come out of thin air?

古文：诚见其美，欢气发於内也。
现代文：确实看到了它的优美之处，高兴之气就发自于内心。
English: I really saw the beauty of it, and the joy came from my heart.

古文：候气变者，於天不於地，天，文明也。
现代文：观测气象变化，在于天不在于地，因为天的文采鲜明。
English: The observation of meteorological changes depends on the sky, not on the ground, because the sky is bright.

古文：衣裳在身，文着於衣，不在於裳，衣法天也。
现代文：衣和裳穿在身上，文采装饰在于衣，而不在于裳，衣效法于天。
English: Clothes and costumes are worn on the body, the literary decoration is in the clothes, not in the clothes, the clothes imitate the sky.

古文：察掌理者左不观右，左文明也。
现代文：看手相的人看左手，不看右手，因为左手手纹鲜明。
English: People who look at palmistry look at the left hand, not the right, because the left hand has distinctive markings.

古文：占在右，不观左，右，文明也。
现代文：占卜在于右边，不看左边，因为右边文采鲜明。
English: Divination lies on the right, do not look at the left, because the right is more vivid.

古文：《易》曰： 大人虎变其文炳，君子豹变其文蔚。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 大人发怒，威猛如虎，仪表威严，光彩照人。君子发怒，威仪如豹，仪态雍容，清朗华美。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: Adults are angry, powerful as tigers, majestic appearance, shining. Gentlemen are angry, dignified as leopards, graceful posture, clear and gorgeous.

古文：又曰： 观乎天文，观乎人文。 
现代文：又说： 观察天文现象，观察人文现象。 
English: He also said: Observe astronomical phenomena, observe humanistic phenomena.

古文：此言天人以文为观，大人君子以文为操也。
现代文：这是说天和人都是以文采作为外观的，大人和君子都是以文饰表现仪表的。
English: This is to say that both heaven and man use elegance as their appearance, and both adults and gentlemen use elegance to express their appearance.

古文：高祖在母身之时，息於泽陂，蛟龙在上，龙觩炫耀；及起，楚望汉军，气成五采；将入咸阳，五星聚东井，星有五色。
现代文：汉高祖在母亲身怀他时，他的母亲在湖泽岸边休息，蛟龙伏在她的身上，龙角光彩夺目；等到汉高祖兴起之时，楚军望汉军阵营，云气成五彩；汉高祖将要进入咸阳城时，金、木、水、火、土五星聚集于东井宿这一方，五星又呈见白、青、黑、赤、黄五种颜色。
English: When Han Gao Zu was in his mother's womb, his mother rested on the shore of the lake, the dragon lay on her body, and the dragon's horns were dazzling; when Han Gao Zu arose, the Chu army watched the Han army camp, and the clouds became colorful; when Han Gao Zu was about to enter Xianyang City, the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth gathered on the side of Dongjing Inn, and the five stars were white, blue, black, red, and yellow.

古文：天或者憎秦，灭其文章；欲汉兴之，故先受命以文为瑞也。
现代文：天也许由于憎恶秦朝，就泯灭了它的文彩，而想让汉朝兴盛，所以先授予天命，以文彩作为它的祥瑞。
English: The heavens, perhaps because of their hatred of the Qin Dynasty, extinguished its Wencai, and wanted the Han Dynasty to flourish, so they first granted the Mandate of Heaven to use Wencai as its auspiciousness.

古文：恶人操意，前後乖违。
现代文：恶人的品行思想，前后自相矛盾。
English: The moral thoughts of the wicked contradict themselves.

古文：始皇前叹韩非之书，後惑李斯之议；燔《五经》之文，设挟书之律。
现代文：秦始皇先是赞叹韩非的书，后来又迷惑于李斯的议论，烧毁《诗》、《书》、《易》、《礼》、《春秋》这五种儒家经书，制定了禁止藏书的法令。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang first praised Han Fei's book, and later, puzzled by Li Si's argument, burned the five Confucian scriptures of "Poetry," "Book," "Ease," "Rite" and "Spring and Autumn," and issued a decree prohibiting the collection of books.

古文：五经之儒，抱经隐匿，伏生之徒，窜藏土中。
现代文：究治五经的儒生，抱着经书隐藏起来；伏生这类人，逃窜躲藏于深山之中。
English: Confucians, who study the Five Classics, hide themselves with their scriptures; people like Fusheng escape and hide in the mountains.

古文：殄贤圣之文，厥辜深重，嗣之及孙。
现代文：秦始皇灭绝贤圣的经文，他的罪恶深重，帝位没有传到孙辈就灭亡了。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang destroyed the scriptures of the sages and saints. His crime was very serious. He died without passing the imperial throne to his grandchildren.

古文：李斯创议，身伏五刑。
现代文：李斯由于首先提出建议，身受五种刑罚。
English: Rees received five penalty points for making the suggestion in the first place.

古文：汉兴，易亡秦之轨，削李斯之迹。
现代文：汉代兴起，改变了已灭亡了的秦代的法令，废除了李斯的做法。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty changed the decrees of the Qin Dynasty, which had already perished, and abolished the practice of lice.

古文：高祖始令陆贾造书，未兴《五经》。
现代文：汉高祖才命令陆贾写文章，但没有使五经兴盛。
English: Henkel's ancestors only ordered Lu Jia to write articles, but did not make the Five Classics flourish.

古文：惠、景以至元、成，经书并修。
现代文：从汉惠帝、汉景帝以至汉元帝、汉成帝各朝，五经及各种书籍同时编纂。
English: From Han Hui Emperor, Han Jing Emperor to Han Yuan Emperor, Han Cheng Emperor, the Five Classics and various books were compiled at the same time.

古文：汉朝郁郁，厥语所闻，孰与亡秦？
现代文：汉朝文化兴盛，就已经知道的情况来说，同已灭亡的秦朝相比怎么样呢？
English: As far as the cultural prosperity of the Han Dynasty is concerned, which is already known, how does it compare to the Qin Dynasty, which has already perished?

古文：王莽无道，汉军云起，台阁废顿，文书弃散。
现代文：王莽不行道义，汉军如云兴起，台阁败坏，文章书籍丢失散佚。
English: Wang Mang was immoral, the Han army rose like a cloud, the cabinet was corrupted, articles and books were lost and scattered.

古文：光武中兴，修存未详。
现代文：光武帝复兴汉代，收集整理图书尚未完备。
English: Emperor Guangwu revived the Han Dynasty, but the collection of books is still incomplete.

古文：孝明世好文人，并征兰台之官，文雄会聚。
现代文：汉明帝一代喜欢文人，把他们征召到兰台里做官，文豪得以会聚在一起。
English: Emperor Hanming's generation liked literati and conscripted them to work as officials in Lantai, so that great writers could get together.

古文：今上即，诏求亡失，购募以金，安得不有好文之声！
现代文：当今皇帝即位，下诏征求亡失了的图书，用金钱广泛收购征集，怎么会没有喜好文化的好名声呢？
English: Now that the emperor has ascended to the throne, issued an edict to solicit lost books, and used money to widely purchase and collect, how can there not be a good reputation for liking culture?

古文：唐、虞既远，所在书散；殷、周颇近，诸子存焉。汉兴以来，传文未远，以所闻见，伍唐、虞而什殷、周，焕炳郁郁，莫盛於斯！
现代文：唐、虞时代久远，当时图书已经散佚；殷、周时代稍微近一些，诸子的书籍还留存于世间，汉代兴盛以来，传播文化的时间不长，根据人们的所见所闻，已经五倍于尧、舜时代，十倍于殷、周时代，文化光辉灿烂繁荣昌盛，没有哪一个朝代有汉代这样兴盛。
English: The Tang and Yu dynasties are long gone, when books have been scattered; the Yin and Zhou dynasties are slightly closer, and the books of their sons still remain in the world. Since the Han Dynasty flourished, the time for spreading culture has not been long. According to what people have seen and heard, it has been five times that of the Zhou and Yan dynasties, and ten times that of the Yin and Zhou dynasties. Culture is brilliant and prosperous, and no dynasty has flourished like the Han Dynasty.

古文：天晏，者星辰晓烂；人性奇者，掌文藻炳。
现代文：天空晴朗无云，星辰明亮无比；人的本质奇异，手掌纹理的文彩鲜明。
English: The sky is clear and cloudless, the stars are incomparably bright; the essence of man is strange, and the texture of the palm is vivid.

古文：汉今为盛，故文繁凑也。
现代文：汉朝发展到今天已经很昌盛，所以文化繁荣发达。
English: The development of the Han Dynasty has been very prosperous to this day, so the culture is prosperous and developed.

古文：孔子曰： 文王既殁，文不在兹乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 周文王死了以后，一切礼乐文化不都在我这里吗！ 
English: Confucius said, "After the death of King Zhouwen, isn't all the culture of ritual music here with me?

古文：文王之文，传在孔子。
现代文：周文王时代的文化，承传在孔子。
English: The culture of the Zhou Dynasty was passed down to Confucius.

古文：孔子为汉制文，传在汉也。
现代文：孔子为汉代整理文化典籍，承传在汉代。
English: Confucius organized cultural classics for the Han Dynasty and passed it down to the Han Dynasty.

古文：受天之文。
现代文：承受从天而降的文化，文人应当奉行。
English: The literati should follow the culture that has descended from the heavens.

古文：文人宜遵五经六艺为文，诸子传书为文，造论著说为文，上书奏记为文，文德之操为文。
现代文：五经、六艺是文化，诸子著作是文化，著书立说是文化，上书奏文是文化，文饰仪表是文化。
English: The Five Classics and the Six Arts are culture, the works of all sons are culture, the writing of books is culture, the writing of songs is culture, and the decoration of culture is culture.

古文：立五文在世，皆当贤也。
现代文：在世间能够成就五种文化当中的一种，都应当受到称赞。
English: To be able to achieve one of the five cultures in the world should be commended.

古文：造论著说之文，尤宜劳焉。
现代文：著书立说的文化，尤其应当嘉奖它。
English: In particular, the culture of writing books and establishing theories should be commended.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：发胸中之思，论世俗之事，非徒讽古经、续故文也。
现代文：抒发胸中的思想，论述世俗间的事情，不仅仅是背颂点古经、续写点旧文章而已。
English: Expressing the thoughts in one's heart and discussing worldly affairs is not just a matter of reciting ancient scriptures and continuing old articles.

古文：论发胸臆，文成手中，非说经艺之人所能为也。
现代文：议论发自胸臆，文章成于手中，这不是只懂得解释经书的人所能做到的。
English: To speak from the heart and write with the hand is not something that can be done only by those who know how to interpret scripture.

古文：周、秦之际，诸子并作，皆论他事，不颂主上，无益於国，无补於化。
现代文：周、秦时代，诸子都在著书立说，论述的全是其他事情，没有称颂帝王的，对国家没有什么好处，对于教化也没有什么补益。
English: In the Zhou and Qin dynasties, all the sons were writing books and theories, discussing completely different things. Without praising the emperor, there is no benefit to the country, and there is no benefit to enlightenment.

古文：造论之人，颂上恢国，国业传在千载，主德参贰日月，非适诸子书传所能并也。
现代文：写作《论衡》的人，歌颂君王的功德，弘扬国家的隆盛，使国家的功业流传千载，使君王的德行与日月同辉，这不是刚才提到的先秦诸子的著作能够相比的。
English: The people who wrote "On Balance" sang the praises of the king's merits, promoted the prosperity of the country, made the country's achievements spread for thousands of years, and made the king's virtues shine with the sun and moon. This is not comparable to the works of the pre-Qin sons just mentioned.

古文：上书陈便宜，奏记荐吏士，一则为身，二则为人。
现代文：上书陈述治理国家的建议和办法，写奏记向上级推荐官吏士人，一则是为了自身，二则是为了他人。
English: One is for oneself, and the other is for others, to write a letter to state the suggestions and methods for governing the country, and to write a report to recommend officials and scholars to their superiors.

古文：繁文丽辞，无上书文德之操。
现代文：文章繁多辞句华丽，却没有一点是为了君王的。
English: There is a lot of writing, a lot of rhetoric, but none of it is for the king.

古文：治身完行，徇利为私，无为主者。
现代文：在文采仪表上，根据礼仪修养自己，使行为完美无缺，实际上仍是为了个人的私利，没有一点是为了君王的。
English: In terms of etiquette, cultivating oneself according to etiquette and perfecting one's behavior is still for personal self-interest, and nothing is for the king.

古文：夫如是，五文之中，论者之文多矣。则可尊明矣。
现代文：如果是这样，五种文化之中，著书立说的文化是最好的，因而值得尊重也就很清楚了。
English: If so, it is clear that of the five cultures, the culture of writing is the best, and therefore worthy of respect.

古文：孔子称周曰： 唐、虞之际，於斯为盛，周之德，其可谓至德已矣！ 
现代文：孔子称颂周代说： 唐尧、虞舜时代以后，就数周武王这个时代人才最盛，周代的功德，可以说是最高的了！ 
English: Confucius said in praise of the Zhou Dynasty: After the Tang and Yu Dynasties, the Zhou Dynasty, the era of King Wu, was the most prosperous in terms of talent. The merits of the Zhou Dynasty can be said to be the highest!

古文：孔子，周之文人也，设生汉世，亦称汉之至德矣。
现代文：孔子是周代的文人，假如他生在汉代，也会称颂汉代的最高功德了。
English: Confucius was a scholar of the Zhou Dynasty. If he had been born in the Han Dynasty, he would have extolled the highest merits of the Han Dynasty.

古文：赵他王南越，倍主灭使，不从汉制，箕踞椎髻，沉溺夷俗。
现代文：赵他在南越称王，背叛汉朝断绝使臣往来，不奉行汉朝的制度，坐似畚箕发挽椎髻，沉溺于夷人的风俗之中。
English: Zhao proclaimed himself king in South Vietnam, betrayed the Han Dynasty, cut off diplomatic relations, did not follow the Han Dynasty's system, sat like a king, and indulged in barbaric customs.

古文：陆贾说以汉德，惧以帝威，心觉醒悟，蹶然起坐。
现代文：陆贾用汉朝的功德去劝说他，用汉朝君王的威势去恐吓，使他从内心觉察醒悟，猛然起身端坐。
English: Lu Jia used the merits of the Han Dynasty to persuade him, and used the power of the Han Dynasty to intimidate him, so that he was awakened from the heart, and suddenly got up and sat down.

古文：世儒之愚，有赵他之惑；鸿文之人，陈陆贾之说。观见之者，将有蹶然起坐，赵他之悟。
现代文：俗儒的愚昧，有如赵他一样的糊涂；擅长写文章的人，陈述陆贾的劝说，读到文章的人，将会有猛然起身端坐，如赵他一般的醒悟过来。
English: The ignorance of the vulgar Confucian is as muddled as that of Zhao; those who are good at writing articles, stating Lu Jia's persuasion, and those who read the article will suddenly get up and sit down, like Zhao and his general awakening.

古文：汉氏浩烂，不有殊卓之声。
现代文：汉代的功德浩大灿烂，怎么会不享有卓越的名声呢？
English: The merits and virtues of the Han Dynasty were so great and splendid, how could it not enjoy a reputation for excellence?

古文：文人之休，国之符也。
现代文：文人卓越，是国家的祥瑞。
English: The excellence of literati is the auspiciousness of the country.

古文：望丰屋知名家，睹乔木知旧都。
现代文：看到宏丽的住宅就知道是户有名望的人家，看到高大的树木就知道这里曾经是旧都。
English: If you see a magnificent house, you will know that it is the home of a famous person. If you see tall trees, you will know that this was once the old capital.

古文：鸿文在国，圣世之验也。
现代文：国家有大文人，这是太平盛世的证明。
English: The country has great writers, which is proof of the prosperous Taiping era.

古文：孟子相人以眸子焉，心清则眸子了，了者，目文了也。
现代文：孟子凭人的眼睛察看人，心地光明，眼睛就会明亮。
English: Mencius looked at people with human eyes. If the heart is bright, the eyes will be bright.

古文：夫候国占人，同一实也。
现代文：所谓明亮，指的是眼睛的文彩明亮。占验国家和占验人，实际上是同一回事。
English: The so-called bright refers to the bright color of the eyes. It is actually the same thing to test the country and the person.

古文：国君圣而文人聚，人心惠而目多采。
现代文：国君圣明而文人会聚，人心聪敏而眼睛多彩。
English: The sovereign is bright and the literati are gathered, the people are intelligent and the eyes are colorful.

古文：蹂蹈文锦於泥涂之中，闻见之者，莫不痛心。
现代文：在烂泥中践踏有花纹的锦绸，听到看见的人没有谁不会痛心。
English: There is no one who will not be saddened to hear and see the patterned brocade trampled in the mud.

古文：知文锦之可惜，不知文人之当尊，不通类也。
现代文：知道践踏了文锦可惜，却不知道文人应当尊重，这就是不懂得类比了。
English: To know that it is a pity to trample on the literary arts, but not to know that the literati should respect them, is to not understand the analogy.

古文：天文人文，文岂徒调墨弄笔，为美丽之观哉？
现代文：文人写的文章，哪里只是玩弄笔墨追求华丽的外表呢？
English: Where are the articles written by literati that are just playing with pen and ink in pursuit of a gorgeous appearance?

古文：载人之行，传人之名也。
现代文：它是记载人们的行为，传播人们的名声的。
English: It is to record people's behavior and spread people's reputation.

古文：善人愿载，思勉为善；邪人恶载，力自禁裁。
现代文：善良的人希望得到记载，所以想努力去做好事；邪恶的人厌恶记载，所以就自己尽力节制恶行。
English: Good people want to be recorded, so they want to work hard to do good things; evil people hate records, so they try their best to control evil deeds.

古文：然则文人之笔，劝善惩恶也。
现代文：这样说来，文人的笔的作用在于劝善惩恶了。
English: In this way, the role of the writer's pen is to persuade good and punish evil.

古文：谥法所以章善，即以著恶也。
现代文：谥法之所以表彰美善，就是以此来暴露丑恶。
English: The reason why the Fa commends the beautiful and the good is to expose the ugly.

古文：加一字之谥，人犹劝惩，闻知之者，莫不自勉。
现代文：加一个字的谥号，人们就知道劝善惩恶，听见的人，没有谁不自勉。
English: Add a single syllable, and people will know how to exhort good and punish evil. No one who hears will not be self-disciplined.

古文：况极笔墨之力，定善恶之实，言行毕载，文以千数，传流於世，成为丹青，故可尊也。
现代文：何况尽笔墨的力量，评定善恶的真实情况，言语行动全部记载，文章以千数计算，流传在世间上，成为不可磨灭的作品，所以值得尊重。
English: What's more, all the power of the pen and ink, the true situation of evaluating good and evil, the words and actions are all recorded, and the articles are counted in thousands and spread around the world, becoming indelible works, so they are worthy of respect.

