古文：孟知祥，字保胤，邢州龙冈人也。
现代文：孟知祥字保胤，邢州龙冈县人。
English: Meng Zhi Xiang Zi Baotian, from Longgang County, Ganzhou.

古文：其叔父迁，当唐之末，据邢、洺、磁三州，为晋所虏。
现代文：叔父孟迁，唐末时，占据邢、沼、磁三州，被晋俘虏。
English: Uncle Meng Qian, at the end of the Tang Dynasty, occupied the three states of Min, Numa and Jiaozhou, and was captured by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：晋王以迁守泽潞，梁兵攻晋，迁以泽潞降梁。
现代文：晋王派孟迁守泽、潞二州，后梁兵攻打晋国，孟迁献出泽、潞二州向后梁投降。
English: The king of Jin sent Meng Qian to guard Zhe and Shao Erzhou, while the soldiers of Houliang attacked Jin Province. Meng Qian surrendered Zhe and Shao Erzhou to Houliang.

古文：知祥父道，独留事晋而不显。
现代文：孟知祥的父亲孟道，独自留下来追随晋王而没有颢贵。
English: Meng Zhi Xiang's father, Meng Dao, was left alone to follow the Jin king and did not become a nobleman.

古文：及知祥壮，晋王以其弟克让女妻之，以为左教练使。
现代文：到孟知祥长大后，晋王把他弟弟李克让的女儿嫁给他，任为左教练使。
English: After Meng Zhixiang grew up, Jin Wang married the daughter of his brother Li Kejan to him and appointed him as the left coach.

古文：庄宗为晋王，以知祥为中门使。
现代文：唐庄宗当晋王时，任孟知祥为中门使。
English: When Tangzhuangzong was the king of Jin, he appointed Meng Zhixiang as the middle gate envoy.

古文：前此为中门使者多以罪诛，知祥惧，求他职，庄宗命知祥荐可代己者，知祥因荐郭崇韬自代，崇韬德之，知祥迁马步军都虞候。
现代文：这之前做中门使的人大多因罪被杀，孟知祥害怕，请求别的职位，唐庄宗命令孟知祥推荐可以代替他的人，孟知祥因而推荐郭崇韬代替自己，郭崇韬感激他，孟知祥迁马步军都虞候。
English: Prior to this, most of the people who served as middle gate envoys were killed for crimes. Meng Zhixiang was afraid and asked for other positions. Tang Zhuangzong ordered Meng Zhixiang to recommend people who could replace him. Meng Zhixiang therefore recommended Guo Chongyao to replace himself. Guo Chongyao was grateful to him. Meng Zhixiang's relocation of horse and foot troops was expected.

古文：庄宗建号，以太原为北京，以知祥为太原尹、北京留守。
现代文：唐庄宗建立后唐，以太原为北京，任孟知祥为太原尹兼北京留守。
English: After the establishment of Tangzhuangzong in Tang, Taiyuan was originally Beijing, and Ren Mengzhi Xiang was Taiyuan Yin and Beijing.

古文：魏王继岌代蜀，郭崇韬为招讨使，崇韬临诀，白曰： 即臣等平蜀，陛下择帅以守西川，无如孟知祥者。 
现代文：魏王李继岌伐蜀，郭崇韬任招讨使，郭崇韬临别时，陈奏说： 等到我们平定蜀国，陛下挑选将帅守西川，没有谁比孟知祥更合适的了。 
English: The Wei king Li Jie precariously conquered Shu, Guo Chongzhen was appointed as the envoy to invite and dissuade, and when Guo Chongzhen was about to leave, Chen Suo said: Wait until we have pacified Shu, His Majesty will select a commander to guard West River, and there is no one more suitable than Meng Zhixiang.

古文：已而唐兵破蜀，庄宗遂以知祥为成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使。
现代文：不久唐兵攻破蜀国，唐庄宗就任孟知祥焉成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使。
English: Soon after, Tang soldiers invaded Shu Province, and Tang Zhuozong was appointed deputy ambassador to Meng Zhixiang, Chengdu Yin, and Jianan, West Sichuan.

古文：知祥驰至京师，庄宗戒有司盛供帐，多出内府珍奇诸物以宴劳之。
现代文：孟知祥驰马到京师，唐庄宗命令官府大排帐幕什物，拿出很多内府珍奇宝物并设宴犒劳他。
English: When Meng Zhixiang rode his horse to Beijing, Tang Zhuozong ordered the government to make a big row of tents, take out a lot of rare treasures and set up a banquet to reward him.

古文：酒酣，语及平昔，以为笑乐，叹曰： 继岌前日乳臭兒尔，乃能为吾平定两川，吾徒老矣，孺子可喜，然益令人悲尔！
现代文：酒酣耳热之际，说到平时过去，谈笑取乐，唐庄宗感叹说： 李继岌前些时不过是乳臭未干的小子，却能为我平定两川，我枉自老了，后生可喜，但更加令人悲伤了！
English: On the occasion of the wine-drinking fever, when it came to the ordinary past, talking and having fun, Tang Zhuangzong sighed: Li Jizhe was just a young boy some time ago, but he was able to calm the two rivers for me. I have grown old in vain. The future can be joyful, but it is even more sad!

古文：吾忆先帝弃世时，疆土侵削，仅保一隅，岂知今日奄有天下，九州四海，珍奇异产，充牣吾府！ 
现代文：我想起先帝去世时，土地被侵犯削割，只能保住一方哪知今天一下占据了天下，九州岛四海，珍奇异产，塞满了我的府库！ 
English: I remember that when the former emperor died, the land was encroached upon and carved up, and only one side could be preserved, but today it suddenly occupies the whole world, Kyushu Island, the four seas, rare and exotic products, filled my treasury!

古文：因指以示知祥，曰： 吾闻蜀土之富，无异于此，以卿亲贤，故以相付。 
现代文：因而指着给孟知祥看，说： 我听说蜀地富裕，并不比这里差，因你既是亲戚又较贤明，因此把蜀地交托给你。 
English: So he pointed to Meng Zhixiang and said, "I heard that Shu Di is rich, not worse than here, because you are both a relative and more wise, so I entrusted Shu Di to you.

古文：同光四年正月戊辰，知祥至成都，而崇韬已死。
现代文：同光四年正月戊辰日，孟知祥到达成都，而郭崇韬已死。
English: On the first day of the fourth lunar month of the same year, Meng Zhixiang arrived in Chengdu, and Guo Chongyao was dead.

古文：魏王继岌引军东归，先锋康延孝反，攻破汉州。
现代文：魏王李继岌率军东归，先锋康延孝反叛，攻破漠州。
English: Wei King Li Jie led the army to return to the east, pioneer Kang Yanxiao rebelled, and defeated Muzhou.

古文：知祥遣大将李仁罕会任圜、董璋等兵击破延孝，知祥得其将李肇、侯弘实及其兵数千以归。
现代文：孟知祥派大将李仁罕会同任圜、董璋等人的军队攻破康延孝，孟知祥抓获康延孝的将领李肇、侯弘实及其士兵几千人回到成都。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent the general Li Renhan to defeat Kang Yanxiao with the army of the same-titled Yu, Dong Yu and others. Meng Zhixiang captured Kang Yanxiao's generals Li Zhao and Hou Hongsi and thousands of their soldiers returned to Chengdu.

古文：而庄宗崩，魏王继岌死，明宗入立。
现代文：适时唐庄宗驾崩，魏王李继岌也死了，唐明宗登位。
English: Tang Zhuangzong died at the right time, Wei King Li Jigu also died, and Tang Mingzong ascended the throne.

古文：知祥乃训练兵甲，阴有王蜀之志。
现代文：孟知祥于是训练士卒准备兵器，暗中有在蜀称王的打算。
English: Meng Zhixiang then trained the soldiers to prepare weapons, secretly intending to become the king of Shu.

古文：益置义胜、定远、骁锐、义宁、飞棹等军七万余人，命李仁罕、赵廷隐、张业等分将之。
现代文：增设义胜、定远、骁锐、义宁、飞棹等军七万多人，任命李仁罕、趟廷隐、张业等人分别率领。
English: More than 70,000 people were added to the armies of Yisheng, Dingyuan, Jiarui, Yining and Fei'ao, and Li Renhan, Wai Tingyin, Zhang Ye and others were appointed as leaders.

古文：初，魏王之班师也，知祥率成都富人及王氏故臣家，得钱六百万缗以犒军，其余者犹二百万。
现代文：当初，魏王回师时，孟知祥搜刮成都富人和王氏旧臣的家产，得钱六百万绘犒赏军队，还剩下二百万。
English: At the beginning, when Wei Wang returned to his division, Meng Zhixiang raided the family estates of rich people in Chengdu and former ministers of the Wang clan, got six million yuan to reward the army, and still had two million left.

古文：任圜自蜀入为相，兼判三司，素知蜀所余钱。
现代文：任圜从蜀进京任宰相，兼判三司事，素来知道蜀中有剩下的钱。
English: From Shu to Beijing, Ren Zheng served as prime minister and concurrently held three posts. He always knew that there was money left over in Shu.

古文：是冬，知祥拜侍中，乃以太仆卿赵季良赍官告赐之，因以为三川制置使，督蜀犒军余钱送京师，且制置两川征赋。
现代文：这年冬，孟知祥拜为侍中，于是唐明宗让太仆卿赵季良带着命官文告赐给他，顺便任赵季良为三川制置使，督送蜀帅犒劳军队余钱到京师，而且令他办置两川赋税。
English: In the winter of that year, Meng Zhi Xiang Bai was an attendant, so Tang Mingzong asked the eunuch Zhao Jiliang to give him a message from the commanding officer. In addition, Zhao Jiliang was appointed as the envoy for the construction of Sanchuan, and sent the surplus money of the labor army to the Beijing division, and ordered him to build two rivers and pay taxes.

古文：知祥怒，不奉诏。
现代文：孟知祥发怒，不执行诏命。
English: Meng Zhixiang became angry and did not carry out the edict.

古文：然知祥与季良有旧，遂留之。
现代文：但孟知祥和赵季良有旧交，于是留下他。
English: But Meng Zhixiang had an old friendship with Zhao Jiliang, so he stayed behind.

古文：枢密使安重诲颇疑知祥有异志，思有以制之。
现代文：枢密使安重诲很怀疑孟卸祥有二心，考虑拿什么办法控制他。
English: The Privy Councilor An Chongyong was very suspicious of Meng Shulxiang's double-mindedness and considered how to control him.

古文：初，知祥镇蜀，庄宗以宦者焦彦宾为监军，明宗入立，悉诛宦者，罢诸道监军。
现代文：当初，孟知祥镇守蜀时，唐庄宗以宦官焦彦宾为监军，唐明宗即位，把宦官全部杀掉，罢免各道监军。
English: At first, when Meng Zhi Xiang Zhen was guarding Shu, Tang Zhuang Zong took the eunuch Jiao Yanbin as the overseer, Tang Ming Zong ascended the throne, killed all the eunuchs, and dismissed the overseers of each province.

古文：彦宾已罢，重诲复以客省使李严为监军。
现代文：焦彦宾罢任后，安重诲又任客省使李严为监军。
English: After the resignation of Jiao Yanbin, An Chongyuan also appointed the guest minister Li Yan to supervise the troops.

古文：严前使蜀，既归而献策伐蜀，蜀人皆恶之，而知祥亦怒曰： 焦彦宾以例罢，而诸道皆废监军，独吾军置之，是严欲以蜀再为功也。 
现代文：李严以前出使蜀国，回去后就献计伐蜀，蜀人都很憎恶他，而孟知祥也发怒说： 焦彦宾已依例罢免，而且各道都废除了监军，只有我军设置，这是李严想靠蜀再次立功。 
English: Li Yan had previously sent an envoy to Shu, and when he returned, he made a plan to attack Shu. The Shu people hated him very much, and Meng Zhixiang also said angrily: Jiao Yanbin has been dismissed in accordance with the rules, and the supervising troops have been abolished in all provinces, and only our troops have been set up. This is because Li Yan wants to rely on Shu to make another contribution.

古文：掌书记母昭裔及诸将吏皆请止严而无内，知祥曰： 吾将有以待其来！ 
现代文：掌书记毋昭裔和将吏们都请求阻止李严，不接纳他，孟知祥说： 我会有办法等他来！ 
English: Meng Zhixiang said, "I will find a way to wait for him to come!"

古文：严至境上，遣人持书候知祥，知祥盛兵见之，冀严惧而不来，严闻之自若。
现代文：李严到达蜀境，派人送信等孟知祥的答复，孟知祥带很多兵见他，希望李严害怕而不来，李严获知后神态自如。
English: When Li Yan arrived in Shu, he sent someone to deliver Meng Zhixiang's reply. Meng Zhixiang brought many soldiers to see him, hoping that Li Yan would be afraid and not come. Li Yan looked at ease after learning this.

古文：天成二年正月，严至成都，知祥置酒召严。
现代文：天成二年正月，李严到达成都，孟知祥摆酒召见李严。
English: In the first month of the second year of Tiancheng, Li Yan arrived in Chengdu, and Meng Zhixiang invited Li Yan with wine.

古文：是时，焦彦宾虽罢，犹在蜀，严于怀中出诏示知祥以诛彦宾，知祥不听，因责严曰： 今诸方镇已罢监军，公何得来此？ 
现代文：这时，焦彦宾虽被罢免，人还在蜀，李严从怀中拿出诏书要孟知祥杀掉焦彦寅，孟知祥不听命，因而斥责李严说： 如今各方镇都已废除监军，你凭什么来这里？ 
English: At this time, although Jiao Yanbin was deposed, people were still in Shu. Li Yan took out a decree from his bosom to Meng Zhixiang to kill Jiao Yanbin. Meng Zhixiang did not obey his orders, so he rebuked Li Yan and said: Nowadays, all towns have abolished the supervision army. Why did you come here?

古文：目客将王彦铢执严下，斩之。
现代文：用眼神示意客将王彦铢把李严抓下去，杀掉了他。
English: With a sign in his eyes, Wang Yanjun grabbed Li Yan and killed him.

古文：明宗不能诘。
现代文：唐明宗不敢责问。
English: Tang Mingzong did not dare to question him.

古文：初，知祥镇蜀，遣人迎其家属于太原，行至凤翔，凤翔节度使李从严闻知祥杀李严，以为知祥反矣，遂留之。
现代文：当初，孟知祥镇守蜀时，派人到太原迎接自己的家属，走到凤翔时，凤翔节度使李从暇听说孟知祥杀了李严，以为孟知祥反叛了，于是扣留了他的家属。
English: At first, when Meng Zhixiang was guarding Shu Town, he sent someone to Taiyuan to welcome his family. When he went to Fengxiang, Fengxiang Festival made Li hear from his spare time that Meng Zhixiang had killed Li Yan. He thought that Meng Zhixiang had rebelled, so he detained his family.

古文：明宗既不能诘，而欲以恩信怀之，乃遣客省使李仁矩慰谕知祥，并送琼华公主及其子昶等归之。
现代文：唐明宗既不敢责问，反而想用恩宠安抚他，于是派客省使李仁矩前去安慰劝说孟知祥，并把琼华公主和他的儿子孟昶等人送归到他身边来。
English: Tang Mingzong did not dare to reprimand him, but instead wanted to appease him with grace, so he sent Li Renqin to comfort and persuade Meng Zhixiang, and sent Princess Qionghua and his son Meng Yao and others back to him.

古文：知祥因请赵季良为节度副使，事无大小，皆与参决。
现代文：孟知祥趁势请求任命赵季良为节度副使，事情无论大小，都和他一同决断。
English: Meng Zhixiang took advantage of the situation to request the appointment of Zhao Jiliang as deputy envoy to the festival, and the matter, no matter how big or small, was decided together with him.

古文：三年，唐徙季良为果州团练使，以何瓚为节度副使。
现代文：三年，后唐调赵季良任果州团练使，任何瓒焉节度副使。
English: Three years later, Zhao Jiliang, a post-Tang dynasty official, was appointed as the envoy of the Guozhou Reunification and the vice-envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：知祥得制书匿之，表留季良，不许。
现代文：孟知祥得到制书藏起来，上表请求留下趟季良，未被批准。
English: Meng Zhixiang was ordered to hide the book, and his request to be allowed to stay in Qiliang was not approved.

古文：乃遣其将雷廷鲁至京师论请，明宗不得已而从之。
现代文：于是派他的将领雷廷鲁到京师辩论请求，唐明宗迫不得已而同意了。
English: As a result, he sent his general, Lei Tinglu, to Beijing to debate the request, and Tang Mingzong reluctantly agreed.

古文：是时，瓚行至绵谷，惧不敢进，知祥乃奏瓚为行军司马。
现代文：这时，何瓒到达绵谷，害怕而不敢前进，孟知祥于是奏请任何瓒焉行军司马。
English: At this time, He Ying arrived in Mian Valley, afraid and not daring to advance, Meng Zhixiang then invited any marching Sima.

古文：是岁，唐师伐荆南，诏知祥以兵下峡，知祥遣毛重威率兵三千戍夔州。
现代文：这年，后唐军攻伐剂南，诏令孟知祥率兵出三峡，孟知祥派毛重威率兵三千人戍守夔州。
English: In this year, after the Tang army attacked the south, the emperor ordered Meng Zhixiang to lead the troops out of the Three Gorges, and Meng Zhixiang sent Mao Chongwei to lead three thousand soldiers to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：已而荆南高季兴死，其子从诲请命，知祥请罢戍兵，不许。
现代文：不久荆南高季兴死，他的儿子高从诲请降。孟知祥请求撤掉戍守的军队，未被批准。
English: Soon after, Jingnan Gao Jixing died, and his son Gao Congyi asked to abdicate. Meng Zhixiang's request to withdraw the garrisoned troops was not approved.

古文：知祥讽重威以兵鼓噪，溃而归，唐以诏书劾重威，知祥奏请无劾，由是唐大臣益以知祥为必反。
现代文：孟知祥暗示毛重威率兵闲事，溃散而回，后唐下诏害审理毛重威，孟知祥上奏请求不要审理，从此后唐的大臣更加认为孟知祥必定要反叛。
English: Meng Zhixiang insinuated that Mao Chouei and his soldiers were meddling, broke up and returned. After the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to put Mao Chouei on trial, Meng Zhixiang made a request not to be tried. From then on, the Tang Dynasty's ministers increasingly believed that Meng Zhixiang must rebel.

古文：四年，明宗将有事于南郊，遣李仁矩责知祥助礼钱一百万缗。知祥觉唐谋欲困己，辞不肯出。
现代文：四年，唐明宗将在南郊杞天，派李仁矩责令孟知祥资助祀礼钱一百万缙，孟知祥察觉朝廷想设计困迫自己，推辞不愿出钱。
English: In the fourth year, Tang Mingzong sent Li Renzhen to the southern suburb of Shantian and ordered Meng Zhixiang to fund a gift of one million baht. Meng Zhixiang noticed that the imperial court wanted to design and force him, but he refused to pay.

古文：久之，请献五十万而已。
现代文：遇了很久，纔请求进献五十万而已。
English: It's been a long time, but I'm only asking for half a million.

古文：初，魏王继岌东归，留精兵五千戍蜀。
现代文：当初，魏王李继岌东归时，留下精兵五千人戍守蜀。
English: In the beginning, when Wei King Li Jizhi returned to the East, he left behind five thousand elite soldiers to guard Shu.

古文：自安重诲疑知祥有异志，听言事者，用己所亲信分守两川管内诸州，每除守将，则以精兵为其牙队，多者二三千，少者不下五百人，以备缓急。
现代文：自从安重诲怀疑孟知祥有二心以来，听取论事者的意见，任用自己亲信的人分守两川所辖各州，每次任命守将，就派精兵做他的牙队，多的雨三千人，少的不下五百人，以防出现紧急的事。
English: Ever since An Chongzhen suspected that Meng Zhixiang was of two minds, he listened to the opinions of the commentators, appointed his closest confidants to guard the states under the jurisdiction of the two rivers, and each time he appointed a guard general, he sent elite soldiers to be his tooth team, more than three thousand people and less than five hundred people, in order to prevent emergencies.

古文：是岁，以夏鲁奇为武信军节度使；分东川之阆州为保宁军，以李仁矩为节度使；又以武虔裕为绵州刺史。
现代文：这年，任夏鲁奇焉武信里节度使；分束川的板州建保宁军，任李仁矩焉保宁里节度使；又任武虔裕为绵州刺史。
English: In this year, Xia Ruchi was appointed as the envoy of the Banshu Jianbo Ning Army in Bunchu River, Li Ren Rong was appointed as the envoy of the Banshu Jianbo Ning Army, and Wu Qianyu was appointed as the envoy of the Banshu Jianbo Ning Army.

古文：仁矩与东川董璋有隙，而虔裕重诲表兄，由是璋与知祥皆惧，以谓唐将致讨。
现代文：李仁矩和东川的董璋有矛盾，而武虔裕是安重诲的表兄，因此董璋和孟知祥都感到害怕，认为朝廷要讨伐他们了。
English: Li Ren Rong and Dongchuan's Dong Quan had a conflict, and Wu Qian Yu was the cousin of An Chong Quan. Therefore, both Dong Quan and Meng Zhixiang were afraid and thought that the imperial court was going to fight them.

古文：自璋镇东川，未尝与知祥通问，于是璋始遣人求婚以自结。
现代文：自从董璋镇守束川，不曾和孟知祥通消息，在这时董璋纔派人去求婚以便交结。
English: He had not communicated with Meng Zhixiang since he was the governor of Sokchuan Town. At that time, Dong Hao sent someone to ask for her hand in marriage so that they could meet.

古文：而知祥心恨璋，欲不许，以问赵季良，季良以为宜合从以拒唐，知祥乃许。
现代文：而孟知祥心里憎恨董璋，想不答应，便就这事征询趟季良的意见，赵季良认为应当进行联合以抗拒朝廷，孟知祥这纔同意。
English: However, Meng Zhixiang hated Dong Xuan in his heart, and if he did not want to agree, he would ask Zhao Jiliang's opinion on the matter. Zhao Jiliang believed that they should join forces to resist the imperial court, and Meng Zhixiang agreed.

古文：于是连表请罢还唐所遣节度使、刺史等。
现代文：于是共同上奏请求罢免召回朝廷派遣的节度使、刺史等人。
English: As a result, they jointly petitioned for the dismissal and recall of the imperial envoys sent by the imperial court, such as Mao and Zhishi.

古文：明宗优诏慰谕之。
现代文：唐明宗下韶好言安慰劝导他们。
English: Tang Mingzong gave them words of comfort and advice.

古文：长兴元年二月，明宗有事于南郊，加拜知祥中书令。
现代文：长兴元年二月，唐明宗在南郊祀天，加拜孟知祥焉中书令。
English: In February of the first year of Changxing, the Tang and Ming Dynasties worshipped Heaven in the southern suburbs, and the mid-year edict to worship Meng Zhi Xiang was issued.

古文：初，知祥与璋俱有异志，而重诲信言事者，以璋尽忠于国，独知祥可疑，重诲犹欲倚璋以图知祥。
现代文：当初，盂知祥和董璋都有二心，而安重诲听信论事的人，认为董璋尽心忠于国家，祇有孟知祥可疑，安重诲想靠董璋谋取孟知祥。
English: At first, both Zou Zhixiang and Dong Yao were of two minds, but those who listened to and believed in An Chong Yao thought that Dong Yao was loyal to the country, only Meng Zhixiang was suspicious, and An Chong Yao wanted to rely on Dong Yao to seek Meng Zhixiang.

古文：是岁九月，董璋先反，攻破阆州，擒李仁矩杀之。
现代文：逭年九月，董璋先反叛，攻破阗州，擒获李仁矩并把他杀掉。
English: In September of the year of the Rooster, Dong Xuan rebelled first, broke through Zhangzhou, captured Li Ren and killed him.

古文：是月应圣节，知祥开宴，东北望再拜，俯伏呜咽，泣下沾襟，士卒皆为之歔欷，明日遂举兵反。
现代文：这月应圣节，孟知祥设宴，望着东北方再拜，趴在地上哭泣，泪下沾襟，士兵们都为之哽咽，第二天就举兵反叛了。
English: This month, on the occasion of the holy day, Meng Zhixiang held a banquet, looked to the northeast and bowed again, lying on the ground and weeping, tears streaming down his face, the soldiers were choked by it, and the next day they raised an army and rebelled.

古文：是秋，明宗改封琼华公主为福庆长公主，有司言前世公主受封，皆未出降，无遣使就籓册命之仪。
现代文：这年秋，唐明宗改封琼华公主为福庆长公主，官府称前代公主受封，都没有出嫁，因此没有派遣使臣去藩国册封的礼仪。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Tang and Ming dynasties changed the title of Princess Qionghua to the eldest princess of Fuqing. The government claimed that the previous princess had been given the title, but had not married, so there was no ceremony of sending an envoy to the province to confer the title.

古文：诏有司草具新仪，乃遣秘书监刘岳为册使。
现代文：唐明宗下韶官府起草新的礼仪，于是派秘书监刘岳任册使。
English: Tang Mingzong's lower eunuch government drafted a new etiquette, so he sent Liu Yue, the secretary-supervisor, as the envoy.

古文：岳行至凤翔，闻知祥反，乃旋。
现代文：刘岳到达凤翔，听说孟知祥反叛，只好返回。
English: Liu Yue arrived at Fengxiang, heard that Meng Zhixiang had rebelled, and had to return.

古文：明宗下诏削夺知祥官爵，命天雄军节度使石敬瑭为都招讨使，夏鲁奇为副。
现代文：唐明宗下诏削除孟知祥的官爵，任命天雄军节度使石敬瑭焉都招讨使，夏鲁奇为副使。
English: Tang Mingzong issued an edict to remove Meng Zhixiang's official title, and appointed Tianxiong Jun's military commander, Shi Jingxuan, as the envoy, and Xialuqi as the deputy envoy.

古文：知祥遣李仁罕、张业、赵廷隐将兵三万人会璋攻遂州，别遣侯弘实将四千人助璋守东川，又遣张武下峡取渝州。
现代文：孟知祥派李仁罕、张业、赵廷隐率兵三万人会同董璋攻打遂州，另派侯弘实率四千人协助董璋守束川，又派强武向三峡方向攻取渝州。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent 30,000 soldiers led by Li Renhan, Zhang Ye and Zhao Tingyin to attack Suizhou together with Dong Quan, and sent 4,000 soldiers led by Hou Hongzhi to help Dong Quan defend Sokchuan, and also sent strong troops to attack Yuzhou in the direction of the Three Gorges.

古文：唐师攻剑门，杀璋守兵三千人，遂入剑门。
现代文：后唐军进攻剑门，杀死董璋的守兵三千人，于是进入剑门。
English: Later, the Tang army attacked Jianmen, killed 3,000 of Dong Yao's guards, and then entered Jianmen.

古文：璋来告急，知祥大骇，遣廷隐分兵万人以东，已而闻唐军止剑州不进，喜曰： 使唐军急趋东川，则遂州解围，吾势沮而两川摇矣。
现代文：董璋前来告急，孟知祥大惊，派趟廷隐分兵一万人束去，不久听说后唐军在剑州停止不前，高兴地说： 如果唐军急奔束川，那么遂州解围，我们气势衰落，两川便动摇了。
English: Meng Zhixiang was shocked and sent a detachment of ten thousand soldiers to Tingyin. Soon after he heard that the Tang army was halted in Jianzhou, he said happily: If the Tang army rushes to Sokchuan, then Suzhou will be relieved, our momentum will decline, and the two rivers will be shaken.

古文：今其不进，吾知易与尔。 
现代文：如今唐军停止不前，我知道容易对付了。 
English: Now that the Tang army has stopped advancing, I know it is easy to deal with.

古文：十二月，敬瑭及廷隐战于剑门，唐师大败。
现代文：十二月，石敬瑭和趟廷隐在剑门交战，后唐军大败。
English: In December, Shi Jingyao and Wai Tingyin fought at the Jianmen Gate, after which the Tang army suffered a major defeat.

古文：张武已取渝州，武病卒，其副将袁彦超代将其军，又取黔州。
现代文：张武已攻取渝州，张武病死，他的副将袁彦超代他率领军队，又攻取黔州。
English: Zhang Wu had conquered Yuzhou, Zhang Wu died of illness, his vice-general Yuan Yanchao led the army on his behalf, and conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：二年正月，李仁罕克遂州，夏鲁奇死之，知祥以仁罕为武信军留后，遣人驰鲁奇首示敬瑭军，敬瑭乃班师。
现代文：二年正月，李仁罕攻克遂州，夏鲁奇战死，孟知祥任李仁罕为武信军留后，派人驰马把夏鲁奇的头送给石敬瑭的军队看，石敬瑭只好回师。
English: In the first month of the second year, Li Renhan conquered Suizhou, and Shailuqi died in the battle. After Meng Zhixiang left Li Renhan for the Wuxin army, he sent someone to ride a horse to give Shailuqi's head to Shi Jingyao's army. Shi Jingyao had to return to his division.

古文：利州李彦珂闻唐军败东归，乃弃城走，知祥以赵廷隐为昭武军留后。
现代文：利州李彦珂听说后唐军失败束归，就弃城逃跑，孟知祥任赵廷隐焉昭武军留后。
English: When Li Yan Ke of Lizhou heard that the Tang army had been defeated and forced to retreat, he abandoned the city and fled. Meng Zhixiang remained behind as Zhao Tingyin led the Zhaowu army.

古文：李仁罕进攻夔州，刺史安崇阮弃城走，以赵季良为留后。
现代文：李仁罕进攻夔州，刺史安崇阮弃城逃跑，孟知祥任趟季良焉留后。
English: Li Renhan attacked Zhangzhou, An Chong Ruan abandoned the city and fled, and Meng Zhixiang stayed behind.

古文：是时，唐军涉险，以饷道为艰，自潼关以西，民苦转馈，每费一石不能致一斗，道路嗟怨，而敬瑭军亦旋，所在守将又皆弃城走。
现代文：这时，后唐军因跋涉天险，供应军饷的道路艰险，从潼关以西，老百姓苦于运输供应，每花费一石粮的运价而不能送到一斗，怨声载道，而石敬瑭回师，各地守将又弃城逃跑。
English: At this time, the post-Tang army was trekking due to natural hazards, and the road to supply military supplies was arduous and dangerous. From the west of Shaoguan, the common people suffered from transportation and supply, and they could not send one bucket of grain for every one stone of freight cost, and the complaints were rampant. While Shijian returned to the division, the provincial governors abandoned the city and fled.

古文：明宗忧之，以责安重诲。
现代文：唐明宗对此忧虑，斥责安重诲。
English: Tang Mingzong was worried about this and reprimanded Ahn.

古文：重诲惧，遽自请行。
现代文：安重诲害怕，急忙请求外任。
English: Afraid of losing his job, he hurriedly asked to be reassigned.

古文：而重诲亦以被谗得罪死。
现代文：最后安重诲也因受到谗毁获罪而死。
English: In the end, An Chongyi also died as a result of being beaten and beaten.

古文：明宗谓致知祥等反，由重诲失策，及重诲死，乃遣西川进奏官苏愿、进奉军将杜绍本西归招谕知祥，具言知祥家属在京师者皆无恙。
现代文：唐明宗说，导致孟知祥等人反叛，是由于安重诲失策。到安重诲死后，就派西川进奏官苏愿、进奉军将杜绍本西归，招降晓谕孟知祥，详细告知孟知祥，他在京师的家属都很平安。
English: Tang Mingzong said that the rebellion of Meng Zhixiang and others was caused by the blunders of An Chongyi. After the death of An Chongyi, he sent Saikawa's envoy officer Su Zhan and the envoy general Du Shaobeng to Xi Gui, invited Meng Zhixiang to surrender, and informed Meng Zhixiang in detail that his family members in Beijing were all safe.

古文：知祥闻重诲诛死，而唐厚待其家属，乃邀璋欲同谢罪，璋曰： 孟公家属皆存，而我子孙独见杀，我何谢为！ 
现代文：孟知祥获知安重诲被诛杀，而唐廷厚待他的家属，于是邀约董璋想一同谢罪，董璋说： 你孟公的家属都在，而我的子孙偏被杀掉，我谢什么！ 
English: When Meng Zhixiang learned that An Chongyi had been killed, and that Tang Ting had treated his family well, he invited Dong Yao to join him in expressing his gratitude. Dong Yao said, "You Meng Gong's family are all here, but my children and grandchildren have been killed, why should I be grateful!

古文：知祥三遣使往见璋，璋不听，乃遣观察判官李昊说璋，璋益疑知祥卖己，因发怒，以语侵昊。
现代文：孟知祥三次派使臣去见董璋，董璋不听从，于是派观察判官李昊游说董璋，董璋更加疑心孟知祥出卖自己，因而发怒，说话冒犯李昊。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent envoys to meet with Dong Hao three times, but Dong Hao did not listen, so he sent the observation judge Li Hao to lobby Dong Hao. Dong Hao was more suspicious of Meng Zhixiang betraying himself, so he got angry and spoke to offend Li Hao.

古文：昊乃劝知祥攻之。
现代文：李昊于是劝孟知祥攻打他。
English: Li Hao then advised Meng Zhixiang to attack him.

古文：而璋先袭破知祥汉州，知祥遣赵廷隐率兵三万，自将击之，阵鸡距桥。
现代文：而董璋先袭击攻破孟知祥的汉州，孟知祥派趟廷隐率兵三万人，亲自统率前去攻打董璋，在鹦距桥摆开战阵。
English: But Dong Xuan attacked and defeated Meng Zhixiang's Hanzhou first. Meng Zhixiang sent 30,000 soldiers to Tingyin, personally led them to attack Dong Xuan, and set up a battle line at the Parachute Bridge.

古文：知祥得璋降卒，衣以锦袍，使持书招降璋，璋曰： 事已及此，不可悔也！ 
现代文：孟知祥得到董璋的降兵，给他穿上锦袍，派他带信招降董璋。董璋说： 事情已到这步，不能后悔了！ 
English: Meng Zhixiang obtained Dong Yao's surrender, dressed him in a brocade robe, and sent him with a letter to invite Dong Yao to surrender. Dong Yao said: Things have come to this stage, I can't regret it!

古文：璋军士皆噪曰： 徒曝我于日中，何不速战？ 
现代文：董璋的士兵喧哗说： 枉自让我们晒太阳，为什么不速战速决？ 
English: Dong Xuan's soldiers shouted: "It's no use letting us bask in the sun, why don't you make a quick decision?

古文：璋即麾军以战。
现代文：董璋随印指挥军队作战。
English: Dong Hao went to fight with the Indian army.

古文：兵始交，璋偏将张守进来降，知祥乘之，璋遂大败，走。
现代文：军队刚交战，董璋的副将张守进前来投降，孟知祥乘机进攻敌军，董璋于是大败，逃跑。
English: The army had just been engaged in battle, when Zhang Shou, the vice-commander of Dong Xuan, came forward to surrender, and Meng Zhixiang took the opportunity to attack the enemy army. As a result, Dong Xuan was defeated and fled.

古文：过金雁桥，麾其子光嗣使降，以保家族，光嗣哭曰： 自古岂有杀父以求生者乎，宁俱就死！ 
现代文：经过金雁桥，让他的儿子董光嗣出面投降，以便保全家族，董光嗣哭着说： 自古以来哪有杀父求生的人呢！宁愿一道去死。 
English: After passing through the Golden Goose Bridge, he asked his son, Dong Guangzhi, to surrender in order to save his family. Dong Guangzhi cried and said, "Since ancient times, who has killed his father to survive? I would rather die together."

古文：因与璋俱走。
现代文：因而和董璋一同逃跑。
English: So he ran away with Dong Xuan.

古文：知祥遣赵廷隐追之，不及，璋走至梓州见杀，光嗣自缢死，知祥遂并有东川。
现代文：孟知祥派赵廷隐追他们，没追上，董璋逃跑到梓州被杀，董光嗣上吊自杀。孟知祥于是兼并了柬川。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent Zhao Tingyin to chase them, but he couldn't catch them. Dong Xuan fled to Zizhou and was killed, and Dong Guangzi hanged himself. Meng Zhixiang then annexed Qamdo.

古文：然自璋死，知祥卒不遣使谢唐。
现代文：但从董璋死后，孟知祥始终未派使臣向唐廷谢罪。
English: However, after the death of Dong Xuan, Meng Zhixiang never sent an envoy to Tang Ting to apologize.

古文：唐枢密使范延光曰： 知祥虽已破璋，必借朝廷之势，以为两川之重，自非屈意招之，彼亦不能自归也。 
现代文：后唐枢密使范延光说： 孟知祥虽已攻破董璋，还是需要藉助朝廷的威势，来提高他在两川的地位，但若不是委屈心意招降他，他也不会自愿归附。 
English: Fan Yanguang, a post-Tang envoy, said: Although Meng Zhixiang has defeated Dong Xi, he still needs to use the power of the imperial court to improve his status in the two rivers, but if he is not aggrieved, he will not voluntarily surrender.

古文：明宗曰： 知祥，吾故人也，本因间谍致此危疑，抚吾故人，何屈意之有？ 
现代文：唐明宗说： 孟知祥是我的老朋友，起初因受到挑拨离间，纔造成现在这样的危难局面，安抚我的老朋友，怎能说是委屈心意呢？ 
English: Tang Mingzong said: Meng Zhixiang is an old friend of mine. At first, because he was provoked, he caused such a dangerous situation. To appease my old friend, how can it be said to be a wronged heart?

古文：先是，克宁妻孟氏，知祥妹也。
现代文：这之前，李克宁的妻子孟氏，是孟知祥的妹妹。
English: Prior to this, Li Kening's wife, Meng, was Meng Zhixiang's sister.

古文：庄宗已杀克宁，孟氏归于知祥，其子瑰，留事唐为供奉官。
现代文：唐庄宗杀掉李真空后，孟氏回到孟知祥那里，她的儿子李坏，留在唐廷，任供奉官。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong killed Li Chuang, Meng returned to Meng Zhixiang. Her son, Li Bad, stayed in Tangting and served as an official.

古文：明宗即遣瑰归省其母，因赐知祥诏书招慰之。
现代文：唐明宗就派李坏回去探望他的母亲，因而赐给孟知祥诏书招降安慰他。
English: Tang Mingzong sent Li Hao back to visit his mother, so he gave Meng Zhixiang an imperial edict of surrender to comfort him.

古文：知祥兼据两川，以赵季良为武泰军留后、李仁罕武信军留后、赵廷隐保宁军留后、张业宁江军留后、李肇昭武军留后。
现代文：孟知祥兼据两川，任赵季良焉武泰军留后、李仁罕为武信里留后、赵廷隐焉保窒里留后、张业焉空江里留后、李肇焉昭武里留后。
English: Meng Zhixiang was also assigned to the two rivers, Zhao Jiliang was assigned to the Wuchai army, Li Renhan was assigned to the Wuxin army, Zhao Ting was assigned to the Baotou army, Zhang Ye was assigned to the Kuangjiang army, and Li Zhaoyuan was assigned to the Zhaobou army.

古文：季良等因请知祥称王，以墨制行事，议未决而瑰至蜀。
现代文：趟季良等人因而请求孟知祥称王，以墨写制书行事，拟议未决而李瓖到蜀。
English: Therefore, Ji Liang and others requested Meng Zhixiang to declare himself king and write a book in ink. The proposal was pending, but Li Qiang went to Shu.

古文：知祥见瑰倨慢。
现代文：孟知祥接见李坏时傲慢无礼。
English: Meng Zhixiang was arrogant and rude when he met Li Badong.

古文：九月，瑰自蜀还，得知祥表，请除赵季良等为五镇节度，其余刺史已下，得自除授。
现代文：九月，李坏从蜀返回，唐明宗得到孟知祥的奏表，表中请求任趟季良等人为五镇节度，其余刺史以下，应让孟知祥自己任命。
English: In September, Li Bad returned from Shu, and Tang Mingzong received a petition from Meng Zhixiang. The petition requested that Ji Liang and others be appointed as the five towns of the festival, and the rest should be appointed by Meng Zhixiang himself.

古文：又请封蜀王，且言福庆公主已卒。
现代文：又请求封自己为蜀王，而且告知福庆公主已死。
English: He also asked to be named the King of Shu and was told that Princess Fuqing had died.

古文：明宗为之发哀，遣阁门使刘政恩为宣谕使。
现代文：唐明宗为她发丧，派合门使刘政恩任宣谕使。
English: Tang Mingzong mourned for her and appointed Liu Zhengrong as the envoy.

古文：政恩复命，知祥始遣其将硃滉来朝。
现代文：刘政恩回复使命时，孟知祥纔派他的将领朱混入朝。
English: When Liu Zhengrong returned from his mission, Meng Zhixiang sent his general Zhu to infiltrate the imperial court.

古文：四年二月癸亥，制以知祥检校太尉兼中书令，行成都尹、剑南东西两川节度，管内观察处置、统押近界诸蛮，兼西山八国云南安抚制置等使。
现代文：四年二月癸亥，唐明宗下制书任孟知祥焉检校太尉兼中书令，行成都尹、剑南东西雨川节度使，管内观察处置、统押近界诸蛮，兼西山八国云南安抚制置等使。
English: In February of the 4th year of Xinghai, Meng Zhi Xiang Yan was appointed as the inspector of the school and the secretary of the middle school under the Tang and Ming Dynasties. He was sent to Chengdu and Yin, to the south of Jian, to the east and west of Yuchuan, to observe and control the barbarians in the vicinity, and to the west of the eight countries of Yunnan to pacify the system.

古文：遣工部尚书卢文纪册封知祥为蜀王，而赵季良等五人皆拜节度使。
现代文：派工部尚书卢文纪册封孟知祥焉蜀王，而趟季良等五人都拜焉节度使。
English: The Ministry of Works sent Shang Shu, Lu Wen Ji, Meng Zhixiang, and Shu Wang, while Wabi Qiliang and five others all bowed to the imperial envoy.

古文：唐兵先在蜀者数万人，知祥皆厚给其衣食，因请送其家属，明宗诏谕不许。十一月，明宗崩。
现代文：以前在蜀的后唐兵有几万人，孟知祥都充分供给他们衣食，这次趁机请求把他们的家属送来，唐明宗下韶明白开导而未准许十一月，唐明宗死。
English: In the past, there were tens of thousands of post-Tang soldiers in Shu. Meng Zhixiang had fully provided them with food and clothing. This time, he took the opportunity to request that their families be sent. Tang Mingzong's subordinates were clearly enlightened and did not grant permission. In November, Tang Mingzong died.

古文：明年闰正月，知祥乃即皇帝位，国号蜀。
现代文：第二年闰正月，孟知祥就即皇帝位，国号蜀。
English: In the leap year of the second year, Meng Zhixiang became the emperor, and the country's name was Shu.

古文：以赵季良为司空、同中书门下平章事，中门使王处回为枢密使，李昊为翰林学士。
现代文：任赵季良为司空、同中书门下平章事，中门使王处回任枢密使，李昊任翰林学士。
English: Zhao Jiliang was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force and the Secretary of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. The Minister of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army was reappointed as the Privy Councilor, and Li Hao was appointed as the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：三月，唐潞王举兵于凤翔，愍帝遣王思同等讨之，思同兵溃，山南西道节度使张虔钊、武定军节度使孙汉韶皆以其地附于蜀。
现代文：三月，后唐潞王在凤翔举兵，唐愍帝派王思囤等人讨伐他，王思回的军队溃败，山南西道节度使张虔钊、武定军节度使孙汉韶都以他们的领地归附后蜀。
English: In March, Emperor Gao of Tang Dynasty raised an army in Fengxiang. Emperor Gao sent Wang Siyu and others to fight against him. Wang Siyu's army was defeated. The Shannan West Road Festival made Zhang Qianjun, and the Wuding Army Festival made Sun Hanjun all attach their territories to Emperor Gao.

古文：四月，知祥改元曰明德。
现代文：四月，孟知祥改年号叫明德。
English: In April, Meng Zhixiang changed his name to Mingde.

古文：六月，虔钊等至成都，知祥宴劳之，虔钊奉觞起为寿，知祥手缓不能举觞，遂病，以其子昶为皇太子监国。
现代文：六月，张虔钊等人到达成都，孟知祥设宴犒劳他们，张虔钊举杯起身祝寿时，孟知祥感到手软不能举杯，于是发病，让他的儿子孟昶做皇太子，代理国事。
English: In June, when Zhang Kisheng and others arrived in Chengdu, Meng Zhixiang held a banquet to reward them. When Zhang Kisheng raised a glass to celebrate his birthday, Meng Zhixiang felt weak and could not raise the glass, so he fell ill and let his son Meng Zhixiang be the crown prince and act as a representative of state affairs.

古文：知祥卒，谥为文武圣德英烈明孝皇帝，庙号高祖，陵曰和陵。
现代文：孟知祥死，谧号为文武圣德英烈明孝皇帝，庙号高祖，陵墓和陵。
English: Meng Zhixiang died. His posthumous name was Emperor Mingxiao, and his temple name was Gao Zu. His tomb and mausoleum are still standing.

古文：昶，知祥第三子也。
现代文：孟昶，是孟知祥的第三个儿子。
English: Meng Wei is the third son of Meng Zhixiang.

古文：知祥为两川节度使，昶为行军司马。
现代文：孟知祥任两川节度使时，孟昶任行军司马。
English: When Meng Zhixiang was appointed as the envoy of the Two Rivers Festival, Meng Yao was appointed as the marshal.

古文：知祥僭号，以昶为东川节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：孟知祥越位称帝，任孟昶为束川节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Meng Zhixiang declared himself emperor while he was off-duty, and Meng Yao was appointed as the Setsudo envoy to Sokawa, and he was promoted to the rank of Shumen in the same year.

古文：知祥病，昶监国。
现代文：孟知祥患病，孟昶代理国事。
English: Meng Zhixiang is ill, Meng Wei is acting for the state affairs.

古文：知祥已卒而秘未发，王处回夜过赵季良，相对泣涕不已，季良正色曰： 今强侯握兵，专伺时变，当速立嗣君以绝非望，泣无益也。 
现代文：盂知祥已死，秘不发丧，王处回晚上拜访趟季良，相对哭泣不止，赵季良严肃地说： 如今强大的诸侯手握重兵，一心伺机作乱，应当赶快拥立继承的君主杜绝他们的非分之想，哭泣没有好处。 
English: Zhao Zhixiang was dead, but there was no mourning. The king's retinue paid a visit to Zhao Jiliang in the evening, and Zhao Jiliang wept more and more. Zhao Jiliang said seriously: Nowadays, the powerful princes are holding heavy soldiers in their hands, and they are waiting for an opportunity to make trouble. They should quickly support the inherited monarchs and put an end to their unreasonable thoughts. There is no benefit in crying.

古文：处回遂与季良立昶，而后发丧。
现代文：王处回于是和趟季良拥立孟昶，然后纔发丧。
English: The king then went back to the palace, where he and Qiliang held Meng Qi in his arms, and then went into mourning.

古文：昶立，不改元，仍称明德，至五年始改元曰庆政。
现代文：孟昶登位，没有改变年号，仍称明德，到明德五年纔改年号焉广政。
English: Meng Wei ascended to the throne, did not change the year, still known as Mingde, to Mingde five years later changed the year to Guangzheng.

古文：明德三年三月，荧惑犯积尸，昶以谓积尸蜀分也，惧，欲禳之，以问司天少监胡韫，韫曰： 按十二次，起井五度至柳八度，为鹑首之次，鹑首，秦分也，蜀虽属秦，乃极南之表尔。
现代文：明德三年三月，荧惑星遮掩积尸星，孟昶认为积尸星指示蜀的分野，因此很害怕，想求福消灾，就这事征询司天少监胡辑的意见，胡租说： 按查十二星纪的位次，从井宿五度到柳宿八度，是鹑首星纪的位次，鹑首，指示秦地的分野，蜀虽然属于秦地，但不过是最南面的外围罢了。
English: In March of the 3rd year of the Ming and Decrees, the fluorescent planet occulted the dead star, and Meng Wei thought that the dead star indicated the field of Shu. Therefore, he was very afraid, and he wanted to seek blessings and eliminate disasters. He consulted the opinion of Sityan Shao Jian Hu Ji on this matter. Hu Jian said: According to the order of the 12 zodiacal constellations, from the 5th degree of Jingju to the 8th degree of Liuju, it is the order of the Dagger Zodiacal Constellation, and the Dagger indicates the field of Qin. Although Shu belongs to Qin, it is only the

古文：前世火入鬼，其应在秦。
现代文：前代荧惑星入鬼宿，报应在秦中。
English: The previous generation of fluorescent planets went to hell, and will be repaid in the middle of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：晋咸和九年三月，火犯积尸，四月，雍州刺史郭权见杀。
现代文：晋咸和九年三月，荧惑星遮掩积尸星，四月，雍州刺史郭权被杀。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Jin and Han dynasties, the fluorescent planet occulted the dead star, and in April, the Yongzhou assassin Guo Quan was killed.

古文：义熙四年，火犯鬼，明年，雍州刺史硃龄石见杀。
现代文：义熙十四年，荧惑星遮掩鬼宿，第二年，雍州刺史朱龄石被杀。
English: In the 14th year of Yixi, a fluorescent planet occulted the haunted house, and in the second year, the Yongzhou assassin Zhu Lingshi was killed.

古文：而蜀皆无事。 
现代文：但蜀中都无事。 
English: But all is well in Shu.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是纔作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：昶好打球走马，又为方士房中之术，多采良家子以充后宫。
现代文：孟昶喜好打球跑马，又好方士、房中之术，挑选很多良家女子充实后宫。
English: Meng Yao liked to play ball and gallop horses, and was also good at fortunetelling and magic in the house. He selected many women from good families to enrich his harem.

古文：枢密副使韩保贞切谏，昶大悟，即日出之，赐保贞金数斤。
现代文：枢密副使韩保贞深切谏阻，孟昶彻底醒悟，当天就放出宫女，赐给韩保贞几斤黄金。
English: The vice-secretary of the privy council made Han Baozhen deeply resist, and Meng Yao was thoroughly awakened. On the same day, he released his concubine and gave Han Baozhen several pounds of gold.

古文：有上书者，言台省官当择清流，昶叹曰： 何不言择其人而任之？ 
现代文：有个上书的人，说应当选择清高廉正的士人做御史台官，孟昶叹息说： 为什么不说选他那样的人加以任用？ 
English: There was a petitioner who said that a person of high integrity should be chosen to be the chief historian. Meng Yu sighed and said: Why not say that a person like him should be chosen and appointed?

古文：左右请以其言诘上书者，昶曰： 吾见唐太宗初即位，狱吏孙伏伽上书言事，皆见嘉纳，奈何劝我拒谏耶！ 
现代文：手下的人请求用这话责问上害的人，孟昶说： 我见庸太宗刚登位时，狱官孙伏伽上书论事，都受到赞赏采纳，怎么劝我拒绝意见呢！ 
English: His subordinates asked him to use these words to reprimand the offender. Meng Yao said, "I saw that when Yong Taizong had just ascended the throne, the prison officer Sun Fuga wrote a book on the matter, which was appreciated and accepted. How can I be persuaded to reject the opinion?

古文：然昶年少不亲政事，而将相大臣皆知祥故人，知祥宽厚，多优纵之，及其事昶，益骄蹇，多逾法度，务广第宅，夺人良田，发其坟墓，而李仁罕、张业尤甚。
现代文：但孟昶年轻，不能亲自管理政事，因为将相大臣都是孟知祥的旧人，孟塑搓宽厚，常常优容放纵他们，到事奉孟昶时，就更加骄横放肆，常常违反法度，一意增大宅第，侵夺良田，挖人坟墓。而李仁罕、张业尤其厉害。
English: However, Meng Xuan was young and could not personally manage the affairs of state, because the ministers of the prime ministers were all old men who knew Meng Xiang. Meng Shuxuan was generous and often indulged them. When he served Meng Xuan, he was more arrogant and presumptuous, often violating the law, determined to increase the size of the mansion, encroach on good fields, and dig graves. And Li Renhan and Zhangye were particularly bad.

古文：昶即位数月，执仁罕杀之，并族其家。
现代文：孟昶即位纔几个月，就抓来李仁罕杀掉，并把他家灭族。
English: A few months after Meng Xuan ascended the throne, he arrested and killed Li Renhan, and wiped out his family.

古文：是时，李肇自镇来朝，杖而入见，称疾不拜，及闻仁罕死，遽释杖而拜。
现代文：这时，李肇从节任上前来朝拜，拄着手杖进见，称病不下拜。当听说李仁罕被杀时，赶忙放下手杖下拜。
English: At this time, Li Zhaohong came to pay homage to the emperor from the top of the throne, carrying a cane, saying that he was too ill to pay homage. When he heard that Li Renhan had been killed, he quickly put down his cane to pay homage.

古文：广政九年，赵季良卒，张业益用事。
现代文：广政九年，赵季良死，张业更加专权。
English: In the ninth year of Guang Zheng, Zhao Jiliang died, and Zhang Ye became even more authoritarian.

古文：业，仁罕甥也。
现代文：张业，是李仁罕的外甥。
English: Zhang Ye is the nephew of Li Renhan.

古文：仁罕被诛时，业方掌禁兵，昶惧其反，乃用以为相，业兼判度支，置狱于家，务以酷法厚敛蜀人，蜀人大怨。
现代文：李仁罕被杀时，张业正掌管禁兵，盂昶怕他造反，于是任他焉宰相，张业兼判度支事，在家设置刑狱，专门用残酷的刑法搜括蜀人，蜀人十分怨恨。
English: When Li Renhan was killed, Zhang Ye was in charge of the ban on soldiers, fearing that he would rebel, so he appointed him as the prime minister, Zhang Ye also served as the judge, set up a prison at home, and specially used the cruel criminal law to round up Shu people. Shu people were very resentful.

古文：十一年，昶与匡圣指挥使安思谦谋，执而杀之。
现代文：十一年，孟昶和匡圣指挥使安思谦合谋，将张业抓来杀掉。
English: In the eleventh year, Meng Yu and Commander Kuang Sheng made An Si Qian conspire to capture Zhang Ye and kill him.

古文：王处回、赵廷隐相次致仕，由是故将旧臣殆尽。
现代文：王处回、趟廷隐相继辞官，从此老将旧臣差不多都不在朝了。
English: Since then, almost all veteran and former ministers have left the imperial court.

古文：昶始亲政事，于朝堂置匦以通下情。
现代文：孟昶纔开始亲理政事，在朝堂上设置举报箱以便了解下情。
English: Meng Xuan began to take personal charge of government affairs, setting up a reporting box in the morning hall in order to understand the situation.

古文：是时，契丹灭晋，汉高祖起于太原，中国多故，雄武军节度使何建以秦、成、阶三州附于蜀，昶因遣孙汉韶攻下凤州，于是悉有王衍故地。
现代文：这时，契丹消灭后晋，漠高祖在太原起兵，中原多变故，雄武军节度使何建以秦、成、阶三州归附后蜀，孟昶因而派孙漠韶攻克凤州，于是全部占据王衍的旧地。
English: At this time, after the elimination of the Khitans in the Later Jin Dynasty, the ancestors of the Mongols raised an army in Taiyuan. Due to the changes in the Central Plains, the strong armed forces of the Qing Dynasty caused He Jian to annex the three states of Qin, Cheng and Jia to the Later Shu, and Meng Hui sent the grandson of the Mongols to conquer Fengzhou, thus occupying all the old land of Wang Yan.

古文：汉将赵思绾据永兴、王景崇据凤翔反，皆送款于昶。
现代文：后汉将赵思绾占据永兴、王景崇占据凤翔府反叛，都与蜀殷勤应酬。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty occupied Yongxing with Zhao Sijun and Fengxiangfu with Wang Jingsong, both of which were accompanied by Shu Yin.

古文：昶遣张虔钊出大散关，何建出陇右，李廷珪出子午谷，以应思绾。
现代文：孟昶派张虔钊出大散关，何建出陇右，李廷珪出子午谷，接应趟思绾。
English: Meng Qi dispatched Zhang Qianqian to the Great Sankuan, He Jian to the Zhihu, Li Tingqian to the Zihu Valley, and Zhiqian to the Wuchang.

古文：昶相母昭裔切谏，以为不可，然昶志欲窥关中甚锐，乃遣安思谦益兵以东。
现代文：孟昶的宰相毋昭裔深切谏阻，认为不行，但孟昶决意要谋取关中，于是派安思谦增兵柬去。
English: Meng Xi's prime minister, Zhu Yaobiao, was deeply opposed to the idea and thought it would not work, but Meng Xi was determined to win Guanzhong, so he sent An Sichen to increase the number of troops.

古文：已而汉诛思绾、景崇，虔钊等皆罢归，而思谦耻于无功，多杀士卒以威众。
现代文：不久后汉诛杀趟思绾、壬景崇，张虔钊等人都罢兵返回，而安思谦因无战功感到耻辱，杀死很多士兵以压服众人。
English: Not long after, Han Xizhi killed Simao, Renjing Chong, Zhang Qianxuan and others, and they all returned from the war, while An Siqian felt humiliated because of his lack of war exploits, and killed many soldiers to subdue the people.

古文：昶与翰林使王藻谋杀思谦，而边吏有急奏，藻不以时闻，辄启其封，昶怒之。
现代文：孟昶和翰林使王藻策谋杀掉安思谦，而边吏有紧急奏章，王藻不及时上报，就擅自拆封，孟昶对此大怒。
English: Meng Xi and Han Lin ordered Wang Cao to murder An Siqian, and the border official had an emergency record. Wang Cao did not report it in time, so he opened the seal without authorization. Meng Xi was very angry about this.

古文：其杀思谦也，藻方侍侧，因并擒藻斩之。
现代文：孟昶杀安思谦时，王藻正在旁边侍立，因而把王藻一并擒拿杀掉了。
English: When Meng Xuan killed An Siqian, Wang Cao was standing next to him, so he took Wang Cao and killed him together.

古文：十二年，置吏部三铨、礼部贡举。
现代文：十二年，设置吏部三铨曹，礼部举行贡举。
English: In the 12th year, the Ministry of Personnel was set up, and the Ministry of Ceremonies held a tribute.

古文：十三年，昶加号睿文英武仁圣明孝皇帝。
现代文：十三年，孟昶加封荨号为睿文英武仁圣明孝皇帝。
English: In the thirteenth year, Meng Rong was given the title of Emperor Rui, Wen Ying, Wu Ren and Sheng Ming Xiao.

古文：封子玄喆秦王，判六军事；次子玄珏褒王；弟仁毅夔王，仁贽雅王，仁裕嘉王。
现代文：封儿子孟玄喆为秦王，判六军事；次子孟玄珏为褒王；弟弟孟仁毅焉夔王，孟仁赘为雅王，孟仁裕焉彭王，孟仁操为嘉王。
English: Feng's son, Meng Xuanqian, was the king of Qin, and was given six military titles; his second son, Meng Xuanqian, was the king of Bao; his brother, Meng Renyi, was the king of Yan, Meng Renyi was the king of Ya, Meng Renyi Yu was the king of Peng, and Meng Renyu was the king of Jia.

古文：十八年，周世宗伐蜀，攻自秦州。
现代文：十八年，周世宗伐蜀，从秦州开始进攻。
English: In the 18th year, Zhou Shizong started to attack Qinzhou.

古文：昶以韩继勋为雄武军节度，闻周师来伐，叹曰： 继勋岂足以当周兵邪！ 
现代文：孟昶任韩继勋为雄武军节度使，获知萱屋军前来讨伐，叹息说： 韩继勋哪能抵挡周兵呢！ 
English: Meng Rong appointed Han Jixun as the military commander of the armed forces, and when he learned that the Shuya army came to fight, he sighed and said: How can Han Jixun resist Zhou soldiers!

古文：客省使赵季札请行，乃以季札为秦州监军使。
现代文：客省使趟季札请求前去，于是任趟季札焉秦州监军使。
English: The guest provincial envoy went to the Qizha to request, so he appointed the Qizha Qizhan Qinzhou monitoring envoy.

古文：季札行至德阳，闻周兵至，遽驰还奏事。
现代文：趟季札到达德阳，获知后周兵到了，就急忙驰马回来奏报。
English: After arriving in Deyang, he was informed that Zhou Bing had arrived, so he hurriedly rode back to report.

古文：昶问之，季札惶惧不能道一言，昶怒杀之，乃遣高彦俦、李廷珪出堂仓以拒周师。
现代文：孟昶询问他，赵季札惶恐不安说不出一句话，孟昶发怒杀了他，于是派高彦俦、李廷珪出堂仓抗拒后周军。
English: Meng Yao interrogated him, Zhao Jizhata could not say a word for fear and anxiety, Meng Yao killed him in anger, and then sent Gao Yanyuan and Li Tingyao out of the hall to resist the Zhou army.

古文：彦俦大败，走青泥，于是秦、成、阶、凤复入于周。
现代文：高彦俦大败，逃跑到青泥，于是秦、成、阶、凤四州也落到后周手中。
English: Gao Yanqi was defeated and fled to Qingdi, so Qin, Cheng, Zhu and Feng Shizhou also fell into the hands of Hou Zhou.

古文：昶惧，分遣使者聘于南唐、东汉，以张形势。
现代文：孟昶害怕，分派使臣出访南唐、东汉，以张声势。
English: Meng Xuan was afraid and dispatched envoys to visit Southern Tang and Eastern Han to make a loud noise.

古文：二十年，世宗以所得蜀俘归之，昶亦归所获周将胡立于京师，因寓书于世宗，世宗怒昶无臣礼，不答。
现代文：二十年，周世宗把抓获的后蜀军俘虏送还，孟昶也把抓获的后周将胡立送到京师，因而致信周世宗，周世宗对孟昶不行臣礼很生气，就不答覆他。
English: Twenty years ago, Zhou Shizong sent the captured prisoners of the Later Shu army back, and Meng Xuan also sent the captured Hou Zhou to Beijing Division, so he sent a letter to Zhou Shizong. Zhou Shizong was very angry with Meng Xuan for not performing courtesies, and would not answer him.

古文：二十一年，周兵伐南唐，取淮南十四州，诸国皆惧。
现代文：二十一年，后周兵攻伐南唐，夺取淮南十四个州，各国都害怕了。
English: In the 21st year, Hou Zhou's soldiers invaded Southern Tang and seized fourteen states in Huainan. All countries were afraid.

古文：荆南高保融以书招昶使归周，昶以前尝致书世宗不答，乃止。
现代文：荆南高保融写信给孟昶要他归降后周，孟昶因以前致信周世宗没有得到答复，因而不敢应允。
English: A week after Jing Nan Gao Bao Rong wrote to Meng Xuan asking him to surrender, Meng Xuan did not dare to agree because he had not received a reply to his previous letter to Zhou Shizong.

古文：昶幼子玄宝，生七岁而卒，太常言无服之殇无赠典，昶问李昊，昊曰： 昔唐德宗皇子评生四岁而卒，赠扬州大都督，封肃王，此故事也。 
现代文：孟昶的幼子孟玄宝，七岁就死了，太常官说未成年而死没有赠典，孟昶征询李昊，李昊说： 过去唐德宗的儿子李评，四岁就死了，赠为扬州大都督，封为肃王，这是旧例。 
English: Meng Yu's young son, Meng Xuan Bao, died at the age of seven. The grand marshal said that he was underage and died without a gift certificate. Meng Yu consulted Li Hao. Li Hao said: In the past, Tang Dezong's son, Li You, died at the age of four. He was given the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor and Su Wang. This is the old case.

古文：昶乃赠玄宝青州大都督，追封遂王。
现代文：孟昶于是赠孟玄宝为青州大都督，追封为遂王。
English: Meng Xuan then presented Meng Xuanbao with the title of Qingzhou Grand Governor and Sui Wang.

古文：二十五年，立秦王玄喆为皇太子。
现代文：二十五年，立秦王孟玄喆为皇太子。
English: In 25 years, King Meng Xuanqian of Qin was established as the crown prince.

古文：昶幸晋、汉之际，中国多故，而据险一方，君臣务为奢侈以自娱，至于溺器，皆以七宝装之。
现代文：孟昶侥幸在晋、后汉之际，中原多变故之时，而占据一方天险，君臣一意奢侈自乐，以至于盛小便的用具，都用七实装饰。
English: Meng Xuan was lucky to be in the time of the Jin Dynasty and the Later Han Dynasty, when the Central Plains was in a state of flux, and natural hazards were on the one hand, and the monarchs and ministers were all extravagant and self-indulgent, so much so that the urination utensils were all decorated with seven stars.

古文：宋兴，已下荆、潭，昶益惧，遣大程官孙遇以蜡丸书间行东汉，约出兵以挠中国，遇为边吏所得。
现代文：宋朝兴起，攻克荆、潭二州后，孟昶更加害怕，派大程官孙遇带着蜡丸书从小路去束汉，相约出兵骚扰中原，孙遇被边吏抓获。
English: After the rise of the Song Dynasty and the conquering of the two states of Jing and Tan, Meng Yu was even more afraid. He sent Sun Rong, a high-ranking official, to travel from a small road to Sokhan with a book of wax pills. They agreed to send troops to harass the Central Plains, and Sun Rong was captured by border officials.

古文：太祖皇帝遂诏伐蜀，遣王全斌、崔彦进等出凤州，刘光乂、曹彬等出归州；诏八作司度右掖门南、临汴水为昶治第一区，凡五百余间，供帐什物皆具，以待昶。
现代文：宋太祖于是下诏伐后蜀，派王全斌、崔彦进等人出凤州，刘光父、曹彬等人出归州；下诏八作司测量右掖门南、临汴水处为孟昶修建一处住宅，共五百多问，家具什物都准备好了，等孟昶来住。
English: Therefore, Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty sent Wang Quanbin, Cui Yanjin and others out of Fengzhou, and Liu Guangfu, Cao Bin and others went back and forth from Fengzhou; the eighth emperor ordered the surveyor to build a house for Meng Yao in the south of the Zuoying Gate and the Linyi Water District, with a total of more than 500 rooms, and the furniture was all ready for Meng Yao to live in.

古文：昶遣王昭远、赵彦韬等拒命。
现代文：孟昶派王昭速、趟彦韬等人抗拒宋朝大军。
English: Meng Qi sent Wang Zhaohui, Wabi Yanqi and others to resist the Song Dynasty army.

古文：昭远，成都人也，年十三，事东郭禅师智諲为童子。
现代文：王昭远，成都人，十三岁时，随束郭禅师智趣为童子。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan, a native of Chengdu, became a disciple of Shukoguo Zen Master Zhizhu at the age of thirteen.

古文：知祥尝饭僧于府，昭远执巾履从智諲以入，知祥见之，爱其惠黠。
现代文：孟知祥曾在府中招待和尚吃饭，王昭远手持头巾鞋子随智谨进来，孟知祥见了他，喜爱他的聪慧狡黠。
English: Meng Zhixiang once invited a monk to dinner in the mansion. Wang Zhaoyuan came in with a turban and shoes, and Meng Zhixiang met him and loved his cleverness.

古文：时昶方就学，即命昭远给事左右，而见亲狎。
现代文：当时孟昶正就学，就命令王昭远在孟昶身边办事，因而受到亲近。
English: At that time, Meng Rong was studying, and he ordered Wang Zhaoyuan to work around Meng Rong, and thus he became close to him.

古文：昶立，以为卷帘使。
现代文：孟昶即位，任为卷帘使。
English: Meng Xuan ascended to the throne and was appointed as the minister of the curtain.

古文：枢密使王处回致仕，昶以枢密使权重难制，乃以昭远为通奏使知枢密使事，然事无大小，一以委之，府库金帛恣其所取不问。
现代文：枢密使王处回辞官后，孟昶因枢密使权大难以控制，就任王昭速焉通奏使、知枢密使事，但事情无论大小，都一概交托给他，府库中的金银绸缎任他取用不加过问。
English: After resigning from the king's privy council, Meng Xuan was appointed as Wang Zhaozhen's courier and confidential envoy, because the power of the privy council was very difficult to control. However, all matters, no matter how big or small, were entrusted to him, and the gold, silver and silk in the government treasury were allowed to be used by him without question.

古文：昶母李太后常为昶言昭远不可用，昶不听。
现代文：孟昶的母亲李太后常对孟昶说王昭速不能重用，孟昶不听。
English: Meng Yao's mother, Empress Dowager Li, often told Meng Yao that Wang Zhaohui could not be reused, but Meng Yao did not listen.

古文：昭远好读兵书，以方略自许。
现代文：王昭远好读兵书，以懂军略自翔。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan is good at reading military books, and understands the military strategy.

古文：兵始发成都，昶遣李昊等饯之，昭远手执铁如意，指挥军事，自比诸葛亮，酒酣，谓昊曰： 吾之是行，何止克敌，当领此二三万雕面恶少兒，取中原如反掌尔！ 
现代文：军队刚从成都出发，孟昶派李昊等人为他饯行，王昭速手持铁如意，谈论军事，自比诸葛亮，酒酣耳热，对李昊说： 我这次去，何止攻克敌军？我能率领这两三万脸上刺了字的恶少年，夺取中原易如反掌啊！ 
English: The army had just set out from Chengdu. Meng Yu sent Li Hao and others to accompany him. Wang Zhaohui, holding an iron in his hand, talked about the military, comparing himself to Zhuge Liang, who was fond of wine. He said to Li Hao, "If I go this time, how much more can I conquer the enemy army? I can lead these two or three hundred thousand evil youths with the characters on their faces, and seize Zhongyuan as if it were my own hand!"

古文：昶又遣子玄喆率精兵数万守剑门。
现代文：孟昶又派儿子孟玄喆率领几万精兵把守剑门。
English: Meng Xuan also sent his son Meng Xuan to lead tens of thousands of elite soldiers to guard the Jianmen Gate.

古文：玄喆辇其爱姬，携乐器、伶人数十以从，蜀人见者皆窃笑。
现代文：孟玄喆用车载上他的宠姬，带着乐器，几十个艺人跟随，蜀人见了都暗暗发笑。
English: Meng Xuanqian drove his pet with musical instruments, followed by dozens of entertainers. The people of Shu all secretly laughed when they saw it.

古文：全斌至三泉，遇昭远，击败之。
现代文：王全斌到三泉，碰上王昭远，打败了他。
English: Wang Quanbin went to Sanquan, met Wang Zhaoyuan and defeated him.

古文：昭远焚吉柏江浮桥，退守剑门。
现代文：王昭速焚毁吉柏江浮桥，退守剑门。
English: Wang Zhaohui quickly burned the floating bridge over the Jibai River and retreated to defend Jianmen.

古文：军头向韬得蜀降卒言： 来苏小路，出剑门南清强店，与大路合。 
现代文：军头向韬抓获后蜀的降兵，降兵说： 来苏有条小路，出剑门南清强店，和大路会合。 
English: The military leader said to the soldiers who had come down from Shu after they had been captured: There is a small road coming from Su, and it leads to the South Qingqiang Store at Jianmen, where it meets the main road.

古文：全斌遣偏将史延德分兵出来苏，北击剑门，与全斌夹攻之，昭远、彦韬败走，皆见擒。
现代文：王全斌派副将史延德分兵出来苏，北击剑门，和王全斌夹攻他们，王昭速、赵彦韬败逃，都被抓获。
English: Wang Quanbin sent Vice Admiral Shi Yende's detachment to come out of Su, North Fencing Gate, and Wang Quanbin attacked them. Wang Zhaoyuan and Zhao Yanyuan fled and were all captured.

古文：玄喆闻昭远等败，亦逃归。
现代文：孟玄喆听说王昭速等人战败，也逃回了。
English: Meng Xuanqi heard that Wang Zhaohui and others were defeated and fled back.

古文：刘光乂攻夔州，守将高彦俦战败，闭牙城拒守，判官罗济劝其走，彦俦曰： 吾昔不能守秦川，今又奔北，虽人主不杀我，我何面目见蜀人乎！ 
现代文：刘光火攻打夔州，守将高彦俦战败，关闭牙城抗守，判官罗济劝他逃跑，高彦俦说： 我过去没能守住秦川，现在又逃跑，即使君主不杀我，我还有什么脸见蜀人呢！ 
English: Liu Guanghu attacked Bozhou, defeated the defender Gao Yanqi, closed the city of Fang to resist, the judge Luo Ji advised him to escape, Gao Yanqi said: I failed to defend Qinchuan in the past, and now I'm running away, even if the monarch doesn't kill me, how can I face the people of Shu!

古文：又劝其降，彦俦不许，乃自焚死。
现代文：又劝他投降，高彦俦不同意，于是自焚而死。
English: He also advised him to surrender, but Takahiko did not agree, so he set himself on fire and died.

古文：而蜀兵所在奔溃，将帅多被擒获。
现代文：而后蜀兵到处奔溃，将帅多被抓获。
English: After that, the Shu soldiers were routed everywhere, and most of the generals were captured.

古文：昶问计于左右，老将石頵以谓东兵远来，势不能久，宜聚兵坚守以敝之。
现代文：孟昶向手下人询问计策，老将石头认为束兵远道而来，势必不能持久，应当招聚军队坚守拖垮他们。
English: Meng Yao asked his subordinates about the strategy. Veteran Stone thought that the soldiers came from far away and would not last long. The army should be gathered to persevere and defeat them.

古文：昶叹曰： 吾与先君以温衣美食养士四十年，一旦临敌，不能为吾东向放一箭，虽欲坚壁，谁与吾守者邪！ 
现代文：孟昶叹息说： 我和先帝用暖衣美食养兵四十年，一旦面对敌人，不能为我向东射一箭，即使想坚守堡垒，谁和我坚守呢！ 
English: Meng Yao sighed and said: I and the former emperor have been raising soldiers with warm clothes and delicious food for forty years. Once we face the enemy, we can't shoot an arrow to the east for me. Even if we want to hold on to the fortress, who will hold on with me?

古文：乃命李昊草表以降，时乾德三年正月也。
现代文：于是命令李昊起草降表，这时是干德二年正月。
English: So he ordered Li Hao to draft a withdrawal form. It was the first month of the second year of Gan De.

古文：自兴师至昶降，凡六十六日。
现代文：从出兵到孟昶投降，共六十六天。
English: A total of sixty-six days elapsed between the dispatch of troops and Meng Xi's surrender.

古文：初，昊事王衍为翰林学士，衍之亡也，昊为草降表，至是又草焉，蜀人夜表其门曰 世修降表李家 ，当时传以为笑。
现代文：当初，李昊在王衍那里任翰林学士，王衍灭亡时，李昊为他起草降表，到这时又起草降表，蜀人晚上在他门前写上 专写降表李家 ，当时传焉笑谈。
English: At first, Li Hao was a scholar of Hanlin at Wang Yan's place. When Wang Yan passed away, Li Hao drafted a letter of resignation for him. At this time, he also drafted a letter of resignation. Shu Ren wrote in front of his door in the evening, "Write a letter of resignation to the Li family." At that time, it was a joke.

古文：昶至京师，拜检校太师兼中书令，封秦国公，七日而卒，追封楚王。
现代文：孟昶到京师，被拜为检校太师兼中书令，封为秦国公，七天后就死了，追封焉楚王。
English: Meng Xuan arrived in Beijing as a teacher, was worshipped as a school inspector and middle school teacher, and was given the title of Qin Guogong. Seven days later, he died and was posthumously given the title King of Chu.

古文：其母李氏，为人明辩，甚见优礼，诏书呼为 国母 ，尝召见劳之曰： 母善自爱，无戚戚思蜀，他日当送母归。 
现代文：他的母亲李氏，为人聪明善辩，受到很好的礼遇，诏书称她焉 国母 ，宋太祖曾召见慰劳她说： 国母好好爱惜身体，思蜀不要太过悲伤，以后会送国母回去。 
English: His mother, Ms. Li, was intelligent and eloquent, and was treated with great courtesy. The imperial edict said that she was the mother of the country, and Song Taizu had summoned her for consolation. She said: The mother of the country should take good care of her body, and should not be too sad. She would send the mother of the country back later.

古文：李氏曰： 妾家本太原，倘得归老故乡，不胜大愿。 
现代文：李氏说： 我家本在太原，如果能够归老故乡，就是我最大的愿望了。 
English: Mr. Li said: My family is originally from Taiyuan. If I could return to my hometown, that would be my greatest wish.

古文：是时刘钧尚在。
现代文：逭时刘钧还在。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was still performing.

古文：太祖大喜曰： 俟平刘钧，当如母愿。 
现代文：宋太祖十分高兴地说： 等到平定刘钧，就满足国母的愿望。 
English: Song Taizu was very pleased and said, "Wait until Liu Ye is pacified, and then fulfill the wish of the motherland."

古文：昶之卒也，李氏不哭，以酒酹地祝曰： 汝不能死社稷，苟生以取羞。
现代文：孟昶死时，李氏不哭，把酒洒在地上说： 你不能为国家而死，苟且偷生自取羞辱。
English: When Meng Xuan died, Li did not cry, but spilled wine on the ground and said, "You cannot die for the country. You will only live to be humiliated."

古文：吾所以忍死者，以汝在也。
现代文：我之所以不忍死，是因为你还活着。
English: The reason I can't bear to die is because you're still alive.

古文：吾今何用生为！ 
现代文：现在我还活着做什么！ 
English: What am I going to do now that I'm alive!

古文：因不食而卒。
现代文：因而绝食而死。
English: He died of starvation as a result.

古文：其余事具国史。
现代文：其余的事记载在本朝国史中。
English: The rest is recorded in the history of this dynasty.

