古文：王敦初尚主，如厕，见漆箱盛乾枣，本以塞鼻，王谓厕上亦下果，食遂至尽。
现代文：王敦刚和公主结婚时，有一次上厕所，看见漆箱里装着干枣，这本来是用来堵鼻子的，王敦以为厕所里也摆设果品，便吃起来，竟然吃光了。
English: When Wang Dun was just married to the princess, he once went to the toilet and saw a lacquer box containing dried dates, which was originally used to block the nose. Wang Dun thought that the toilet was also decorated with fruit, so he ate it and actually ate it all.

古文：既还，婢擎金澡盘盛水，琉璃碗盛澡豆，因倒箸水中而饮之，谓是乾饭。
现代文：出来时，侍女端着装水的金澡盘和装澡豆的琉璃碗，王敦便把澡豆倒入水里喝了，以为是干粮。
English: When he came out, the maid brought out a golden bath tray with water and a glass bowl with bath beans. Wang Dun then poured the bath beans into the water and drank it, thinking it was dry food.

古文：群婢莫不掩口而笑之。
现代文：侍女们都捂着嘴笑话他。
English: The maids all covered their mouths and laughed at him.

古文：元皇初见贺司空，言及吴时事，问： 孙皓烧锯截一贺头，是谁？ 
现代文：晋元帝第一次召见司空贺循，谈到吴国的事情，问道： 孙皓用烧烫的锯子截断一个姓贺的头颅，这个人是谁？ 
English: For the first time, Emperor Jin Yuan summoned Siku He Xun, talked about the events in Wu, and asked: Sun Yat-sen used a hot saw to cut off the head of a man named He. Who was this man?

古文：司空未得言，元皇自忆曰： 是贺劭。 
现代文：贺循没能回答，元帝自己想起来，说： 是贺劭。 
English: He Xun couldn't answer, but Yuan Di remembered and said, "It's He Yao."

古文：司空流涕曰： 臣父遭遇无道，创巨痛深，无以仰答明诏。 
现代文：贺循流着泪说： 臣的父亲碰上无道昏君，内心创痛深重，无法回答陛下英明的问话。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, He Xun said, "My father was deeply traumatized when he encountered the mad emperor, and was unable to answer his majesty's wise questions.

古文：元皇愧惭，三日不出。
现代文：元帝听了很羞愧，三天都不好意思上朝。
English: Hearing this, Emperor Yuan was very ashamed, and for three days he was ashamed to go out in the morning.

古文：蔡司徒渡江，见彭蜞，大喜曰： 蟹有八足，加以二螯。 
现代文：司徒蔡谟避乱渡江后见到蟛蜞，非常高兴地说： 螃蟹有八只脚，再加两只大钳子。 
English: When he saw the crabs after fleeing across the river, he was overjoyed and said, "Crabs have eight legs, plus two big pincers.

古文：令烹之。
现代文：命人煮来吃。
English: You have to cook it to eat it.

古文：既食，吐下委顿，方知非蟹。
现代文：吃完以后，上吐下泻，精神疲困，才知道这东西压根不是螃蟹。
English: After eating, vomiting, diarrhea, mental fatigue, only to know that this thing is not a crab.

古文：后向谢仁祖说此事，谢曰： 卿读尔雅不熟，几为劝学死。 
现代文：后来他向谢仁祖说起这件事，谢仁祖说： 你读《尔雅》读得不熟，差点被《劝学害死。 
English: Later, he told Xie Renzhu about it, and Xie Renzhu said: "You are not familiar with "Er Ya," and you were almost killed by "Persuasion."

古文：任育长年少时，甚有令名。
现代文：任育长年轻时，名声很好。
English: Ren Yuchang had a good reputation when he was young.

古文：武帝崩，选百二十挽郎，一时之秀彦，育长亦在其中。
现代文：晋武帝驾崩的时候，要挑选一百二十人做挽郎，这些都是当时才德出众的青年，任育长也在其中。
English: When Emperor Jinmu died, he had to choose one hundred and twenty men to be his groomsmen. These were all young men of outstanding talent at the time, and Ren Yuchang was among them.

古文：王安丰选女婿，从挽郎搜其胜者，且择取四人，任犹在其中。
现代文：安丰侯王戎要挑选女婿，从挽郎里面寻找超群的人，暂且挑出四个人，任育长仍然在其中。
English: Anfeng marquis Wang Rong wants to choose a son-in-law, and he is looking for a superior person among the brothers-in-law. For the time being, he has selected four people, and Ren Yuchang is still among them.

古文：童少时神明可爱，时人谓育长影亦好。
现代文：少年时代，他聪明可爱，当时的人认为他相貌也好。
English: As a boy, he was smart and cute, and people thought he was good-looking.

古文：自过江，便失志。
现代文：可自从过江以后，就头脑糊涂了。
English: But since crossing the river, I've been confused.

古文：王丞相请先度时贤共至石头迎之，犹作畴日相待，一见便觉有异。
现代文：丞相王导请先过江的名士一起到石头城迎接他，仍像原来那样对待他，但一见面就发觉与过去大不相同。
English: The chancellor Wang Du invited the celebrities who had crossed the river first to Stone Town to meet him. They still treated him as before, but when they met, they found that he was very different from before.

古文：坐席竟，下饮，便问人云： 此为茶？为茗？ 
现代文：入座后设茶，任瞻问别人： 这是茶，还是茗？ 
English: After seating, tea is set up, and everyone asks others: Is this tea, or candy?

古文：觉有异色，乃自申明云： 向问饮为热，为冷耳。 
现代文：发觉众人神色不对，就又申明说： 我刚才是问这喝的是冷的还是热的。 
English: Noticing that everyone's expression was not right, he stated again: I just asked if this drink was cold or hot.

古文：尝行从棺邸下度，流涕悲哀。
现代文：任瞻曾经从棺材店经过，悲哀地哭了。
English: Ren Zhan once passed by a coffin shop and cried sadly.

古文：王丞相闻之曰： 此是有情痴。 
现代文：丞相王导听说后，说： 这真是一个有情的痴人。 
English: Upon hearing this, the chancellor Wang Tao said, "This is really a sentimental lunatic."

古文：谢虎子尝上屋熏鼠。
现代文：谢虎子曾经上房顶熏老鼠。
English: Xie Hu Zi once smoked a rat on the roof.

古文：胡儿既无由知父为此事，闻人道 痴人有作此者 。
现代文：他的儿子谢胡儿既无从知道父亲做过这件事，又听人说傻子会这样做，就嘲笑这种人，时常说起这种事，不只说过一遍。
English: His son Shehur, who had no way of knowing that his father had done this, and who had heard people say that a fool would do such a thing, laughed at such people, and often spoke of such things, and not just once.

古文：戏笑之。时道此非复一过。太傅既了己之不知，因其言次，语胡儿曰： 世人以此谤中郎，亦言我共作此。 
现代文：谢安明白谢朗并不知情，于是趁他言谈间再提起这件事的时候，就对他说： 社会上有些人拿这件事来诽谤中郎，也说我一道这样做。 
English: Xie An understood that Xie Lang did not know, so he took the opportunity to mention the matter again during the conversation, and said to him: Some people in the society use this matter to slander Zhong Lang, and also say that I am doing this together.

古文：胡儿懊热，一月日闭斋不出。
现代文：谢朗听后懊恼惭愧，把自己关在屋里一个月不出来。
English: Chagrined and ashamed after hearing this, Xie Lang locked himself in the house for a month and did not come out.

古文：太傅虚托引己之过，以相开悟，可谓德教。
现代文：谢安假托援引自己的过错来引导谢朗，使他醒悟，这称得上是 德教 。
English: Xie Antuo invoked his own fault to guide Xie Lang and awaken him, which can be called moral education.

古文：殷仲堪父病虚悸，闻床下蚁动，谓是牛斗。
现代文：殷仲堪的父亲有病，身体虚弱，心跳，听到床下蚂蚁活动，认为是牛在斗架。
English: Yin Zhongkan's father is ill, his body is weak, his heart is beating, he hears ants moving under the bed and thinks it's a bull in a fight.

古文：孝武不知是殷公，问仲堪 有一殷，病如此不？ 
现代文：晋孝武帝不知道是殷仲堪的父亲， 便问殷仲堪：有一位姓殷的，病情这样这样，是吗？
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu did not know that he was the father of Yin Zhongkan, so he asked Yin Zhongkan: There is a surname Yin, the condition is like this, is it?

古文：仲堪流涕而起曰： 臣进退唯谷。 
现代文：殷仲堪流着泪站起来回答说： 臣不知说什么好。 
English: With tears streaming down her face, Yin Zhongkang stood up and replied: "I don't know what to say.

古文：虞啸父为孝武侍中，帝从容问曰： 卿在门下，初不闻有所献替。 
现代文：虞啸父任晋孝武帝侍中时，孝武帝很和缓地问他： 你在门下省，怎么从来也没有听到献替过什么。 
English: When Yu Xiao's father was serving as an aide-de-camp to Emperor Jin Xiaowu, Emperor Xiaowu asked him very gently: "You were in charge of the province, how come you never heard of any offering?"

古文：虞家富春，近海，谓帝望其意气，对曰： 天时尚暖，鱼虾未可致，寻当有所上献。 
现代文：虞家富有，靠近海边，虞啸父误认为这是孝武帝希望他进贡，就回答说： 现在，节气还暖和，鱼类制品还得不到，不久将会有所奉献。 
English: Yu's family was rich and close to the seaside. Yu Xiao's father mistakenly thought that it was Emperor Xiaowu who wanted him to pay tribute, so he replied: Now, the solar terms are still warm, fish products are not yet available, and there will be a donation soon.

古文：帝抚掌大笑。
现代文：拳武帝听了拍手大笑。
English: The emperor of martial arts heard the applause and burst out laughing.

古文：王大丧后，朝论或云 国宝应作荆州 。
现代文：王大死后，朝廷议论有说王国宝应该出任荆州刺史。
English: After Wang Da's death, the imperial court discussed that Wang Guobao should serve as Jingzhou's chief historian.

古文：国宝主簿夜函白事，云： 荆州事已行。 
现代文：国宝的主簿有一天夜里封好一份报告送上来，说： 荆州的事已经实现了。 
English: One night, the head librarian of the National Treasure sealed up a report and sent it to me, saying: The Jingzhou Incident has been realized.

古文：国宝大喜，而夜开合，唤纲纪话势，虽不及作荆州，而意色甚恬。
现代文：王国宝非常高兴，当夜打开侧门叫主簿进来谈论情势问题，虽然没有说到出任荆州刺史的事，可是神情态度很安适。
English: Wang Guobao was very happy. That night, he opened the side door and asked the chief clerk to come in to discuss the situation. Although he did not mention the matter of serving as the chief clerk of Jingzhou, his facial expression was very comfortable.

古文：晓遣参问，都无此事。
现代文：到天亮，派人去验证打探，完全没有这回事。
English: There is no such thing as sending someone out at dawn to check on the explorers.

古文：即唤主簿数之曰： 卿何以误人事邪？ 
现代文：王国宝立即叫主簿来并数落他，说： 你怎么耽误人家的事情呢！ 
English: Wang Guobao immediately called the chief clerk to come and count him down, saying: "How dare you delay other people's business!

