古文：高皇帝八男：吕后生孝惠帝，曹夫人生齐悼惠王肥，薄姬生孝文帝，戚夫人生赵隐王如意，赵姬生淮南厉王长，诸姬生赵幽王友、赵共王恢、燕灵王建。
现代文：汉高祖有八个儿子：吕后生孝惠帝，曹夫人生齐悼惠王刘肥，薄姬生孝文帝，戚夫人生赵屋王刘如意，圭巡生淮南厉王型昼，其他姬妾生赵幽王塑区、赵共王刘越、基玺王刘建。
English: Han Gao Zu had eight sons: Lu Wugu was born as Xiao Hui Di, Cao Madam was born as Hui Wang Liu Fei, Bo Ji was born as Xiaowen Di, Qian Madam was born as Zhao Yao Wang Liu Ruyi, Gui Jue was born as Huainan Li Wang Qi Rong, and other concubines were born as Zhao You Wang Shuxiao Qu, Zhao Gong Wang Liu Yue, and Keelung Wang Liu Jian.

古文：淮南厉王长自有传。
现代文：淮南厉王型昼另自有传。
English: Huainan Li Wang type day is also self-taught.

古文：齐倬惠王肥，其母高祖微时外妇也。
现代文：齐悼惠王刘肥的母亲是高祖为平民时的情妇。
English: Liu Hui's mother was Gao Zu's mistress when he was a commoner.

古文：高祖六年立，食七十余城。
现代文：高祖六年立刘肥为王，食邑七十余城。
English: In the sixth year of Gaozu's reign, Liu Fei became the king of more than 70 cities.

古文：诸民能齐言者皆与齐。
现代文：老百姓中能讲齐地语言的都给了齐国。
English: All the people who could speak the Qi language were given to Qi.

古文：孝惠二年，入朝。
现代文：汉惠帝二年，齐王到京城朝见惠帝。
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Hui, King Qi went to Beijing to meet Emperor Hui.

古文：帝与齐王燕饮太后前，置齐王上坐，如家人礼。
现代文：惠帝在吕太后面前设筵招待齐王，按家庭的礼节，惠帝请长兄齐王坐在上首。
English: Emperor Hui set up a table in front of Empress Dowager Lü to invite King Qi. According to family etiquette, Emperor Hui invited the eldest brother, King Qi, to sit at the head of the table.

古文：太后怒，乃令人酌两卮鸩酒置前，令齐王为寿。
现代文：吕太后大为震怒，就令人倒了两杯毒酒摆在面前，并让齐王献酒祝寿。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was so furious that she had two cups of poisoned wine poured out in front of her, and asked King Qi to make a toast.

古文：齐王起，帝亦起，欲俱为寿。
现代文：齐王站了起来，惠帝也站了起来，想一同献酒祝寿。
English: Qi Wang stood up, Hui Di also stood up, wanting to drink together to celebrate his birthday.

古文：太后恐，自起反卮。
现代文：太后害怕了，就站起来把酒杯弄倒了。
English: Frightened, the Queen Mother stood up and knocked the glass over.

古文：齐王怪之，因不敢饮，阳醉去。
现代文：齐王感到奇怪，因而不敢再饮，假装喝醉离去。
English: King Qi felt strange, so he didn't dare to drink any more and left pretending to be drunk.

古文：问，知其鸩，乃忧，自以为不得脱长安。
现代文：后打听到酒裹有毒，很是忧虑，自以为不得离长安脱身返国了。
English: Later, when I heard that the wine was poisoned, I was very worried. I thought I had to leave Chang'an and return to China.

古文：内史士曰： 太后独有帝与鲁元公主，今王有七十余城，而公主乃食数城。
现代文：其内史士说： 太后衹生了惠帝与鲁元公主工人。如今您国内有七十余城，而公主的食邑祇有数城之地。
English: The historian said: The Empress Dowager gave birth to Hui Di and Princess Lu Yuan, a worker. Today, there are more than seventy cities in your country, but only a few cities are the princess's hometown.

古文：王诚以一郡上太后为公主汤沐邑，太后必喜，王无患矣。 
现代文：您不如拿出一个郡献给太后，用作增加公主食邑之地。这样，太后必然高兴，大王也就没有灾祸了。 
English: You might as well dedicate a county to the empress dowager to be used as a place to increase the princess's food. In this way, the empress dowager will certainly be happy, and there will be no disaster for the great king.

古文：于是齐王献城阳郡以尊公主为王太后。
现代文：于是，齐王就献出城阳郡，并尊称鲁元公主为王太后。
English: As a result, King Qi offered up Chengyang County, and honored Princess Luyuan as the Queen Mother.

古文：吕太后喜而许之。
现代文：吕太后非常高兴地允许了。
English: Empress Dowager Lv allowed it with great pleasure.

古文：乃置酒齐邸，乐饮，遣王归国。
现代文：因而在京城的齐邸设酒宴，一起喝酒同乐，送齐王回国。
English: Therefore, a banquet was held at Qi's residence in Beijing to drink and have fun together and send Qi Wang back to China.

古文：后十三年薨，子襄嗣。
现代文：十三年后，齐王刘肥死，其长子刘襄继承王位。
English: Thirteen years later, King Liu Hui of Qi died, and his eldest son Liu Xiang succeeded to the throne.

古文：赵隐王如意，九年位。
现代文：赵隐王刘如意，高祖九年立为赵王。
English: Zhao Yin Wang Liu Ruyi, Gaozu nine years as Zhao Wang.

古文：四年，高祖崩，吕太后征王到长安，鸩杀之。
现代文：四年后，高祖死，吕太后将赵王如意征召到长安鸩杀之。
English: Four years later, Gao Zu died, and Empress Dowager Lv conscripted Zhao Wang Rongyi to Chang'an to kill him.

古文：无子，绝。
现代文：他没有儿子，国绝。
English: He had no son, no heir.

古文：赵幽王友，十一年立为淮阳王。
现代文：赵幽王刘友，高祖十一年立为淮阳王。
English: Zhao Yu Wang Liu You, Gao Zu, was enthroned as King of Huaiyang in the eleventh year of his reign.

古文：赵隐王如意死，孝惠元年，徙友王赵，凡立十四年。
现代文：赵隐王刘如意死的那一年，即汉惠帝元年徙封为赵王，在位十四年。
English: In the year of the death of Liu Ruyi, King Zhao Yin, that is, in the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hui was enthroned as King Zhao, and he reigned for fourteen years.

古文：友以诸吕女为后，不爱，爱它姬。
现代文：刘友以吕氏家族之女为王后，他不爱王后，而爱其他的姬妾。
English: Liu You took the daughter of the Lu family as his queen. He did not love the queen, but loved other concubines.

古文：诸吕女怒去，谗之于太后曰： 王曰 吕氏安得王？
现代文：吕氏之女气恼而走，向吕太后进谗言说： 赵王说 吕氏成员凭什么得充王位?
English: Annoyed, the daughter of the Lv clan went to the Empress Dowager Lv and said, "King Zhao said, 'On what basis should a member of the Lv clan ascend the throne?'

古文：太后百岁后，吾必击之。  太后怒，以故召赵王。
现代文：太后死后，我一定要杀他们， 太后大怒，因此征召赵王。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager, I must kill them. The Empress Dowager was furious, so she conscripted Zhao Wang.

古文：赵王至，置邸不见，令卫国守之，不得食。
现代文：赵王进京后，弃置邸舍而不接见，又命卫士围困，还不给吃的东西。
English: After King Zhao entered Beijing, he abandoned his residence and did not receive visitors. He ordered his guards to besiege the palace and did not give them anything to eat.

古文：其群臣或窃馈之，辄捕论之。
现代文：赵国群臣有时私下给他送吃的，就立即被逮捕责罚。
English: Zhao Guo's ministers sometimes sent him food in private, and they were immediately arrested and punished.

古文：赵王饿，乃歌曰： 诸吕用事兮，刘氏微；迫胁王侯兮，强授我妃。
现代文：赵王饿了，哀歌道： 吕氏家族专权啊，刘氏微弱；胁迫王侯啊，强行给我以后妃。
English: Zhao Wang was hungry, and wailed: The Lv family has absolute power, and the Liu family is weak; the prince has coerced me and forced me to marry his daughter.

古文：我妃既妒兮，诬我以恶；谗女乱国兮，上曾不寤。
现代文：后妃妒嫉心重啊，诬告我有罪恶；女人谗言亡乱国家啊，皇上却不能知晓。
English: The empress dowager is so jealous that she falsely accuses me of a crime; a woman speaks ill of a ruined country, but the emperor does not know about it.

古文：我无忠臣兮，何故弃国？
现代文：我没有忠臣啊，何故应召弃国?
English: I have no loyal vassal, why should I abandon my country?

古文：自快中野兮，苍天与直！
现代文：我快意在田野之中啊，希望苍天临监以评我理之直!
English: I'm eager to be out in the field, and I hope that heaven's inspector will judge me fairly!

古文：于嗟不可悔兮，宁早自贼！
现代文：后悔已不可能丫啊，宁可早些自杀!
English: Regret is no longer possible, I'd rather commit suicide sooner!

古文：为王饿死兮，谁者怜之？
现代文：身为王而要饿死啊，谁来可怜?
English: To starve to death as a king, who can pity him?

古文：吕氏绝理兮，托天报仇！ 遂幽死。
现代文：吕氏违天理啊，我衹能请苍天报仇厂于是，就在被幽禁中死去。
English: Lv's act was against the laws of heaven. We can only ask the heavens to take revenge. Therefore, he died in captivity.

古文：以民礼葬之长安。
现代文：朝廷以平民之礼将他安葬在长安。
English: The imperial court buried him in Chang'an as a commoner.

古文：高后崩，孝文即位，立幽王子遂为赵王。
现代文：吕太后死后，汉文帝即位，将幽王的儿子刘遂立为赵王。
English: After Empress Dowager Lv's death, Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne and appointed Liu Sui, the son of King Yu, as King Zhao.

古文：二年，有司请立皇子为王。
现代文：次年，主管官吏请立皇子为王。
English: The following year, the officials in charge asked the crown prince to become king.

古文：上曰： 赵幽王幽死，朕甚怜之。
现代文：汉文帝说： 赵幽王被幽禁而死，我十分可怜他。
English: Emperor Hanwen said, "I feel very sorry for Zhao Youwang, who died under confinement.

古文：已立其长子遂为赵王。
现代文：已将其大儿子刘遂立为赵王。
English: He has appointed his eldest son Liu Sui as Zhao Wang.

古文：遂弟辟强及齐悼惠王子朱虚侯章、东牟侯兴居有功，皆可王。 
现代文：刘遂的弟弟刘辟彊、齐悼惠王的儿子朱虚侯刘章、束牟侯刘兴居均有功劳，都可以立为王。 
English: Liu Sui's younger brother, Liu Bijie, and Zhu Xuchang, the son of Zhu Xuchang, and Liu Xingju, the son of Zhu Xuchang and Liu Xuchang, the son of Zhu Xuchang and Liu Xuchang, both had merits and could be made kings.

古文：于是取赵之河间立辟强，是为河间文王。
现代文：于是，从赵国中分取河间郡，立刘辟彊为河间文王。
English: As a result, Kawama County was separated from Zhao Province, and Liu Biyao was appointed as the King of Kawama Literature.

古文：文王立十三年薨，子哀王福嗣。
现代文：十三年后，刘辟彊死，其子哀王刘福继位。
English: Thirteen years later, Liu Pi Rong died and was succeeded by his son, Liu Fu.

古文：一年薨，无子，国除。
现代文：刘福为王一年即死，没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: Liu Fu died a year after becoming king, without a son, and the state was abolished.

古文：赵王遂立二十六年，孝景时晁错以过削赵常山郡，诸侯怨，吴、楚反，遂与合谋起兵。
现代文：赵王刘遂为王二十六年，至漠景帝时，晁错认为赵王有过错，将赵国的常山郡削去。诸侯不满，吴、楚等国反叛，刘遂也参与阴谋并起兵攻汉。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Zhao Wang Liu's reign, when he became the Emperor of the Desert Scene, he mistakenly thought that Zhao Wang was at fault and removed Changshan County from Zhao. The princes were dissatisfied, Wu, Chu and other countries rebelled, and Liu Sui also participated in the conspiracy and raised an army to attack Han.

古文：其想建德、内史王悍谏，不听。遂烧杀德，悍，兵发住其西界，欲待吴、楚俱进，北使匈奴与连和。
现代文：赵国丞相建德、内史王悍规劝，刘遂不仅不听，而且用火烧死了建德、王悍二人，发兵屯驻赵国西面边界，企图等待与吴、楚两国之兵会合后西进。又派人北去匈奴，与之联络。
English: Liu Sui not only did not listen to the advice of Zhao Guozheng's ministers Jian De and Neishi Wang Han, but also burned Jian De and Wang Han with fire, sent troops to the western border of Zhao, and attempted to wait for the soldiers of Wu and Chu to meet before advancing westward. He also sent people to the north to contact the Xiongnu.

古文：汉使曲周侯郦寄击之，赵王城守邯郸，相距七月。
现代文：汉朝派遣曲周侯郦寄攻打赵，赵王驻守邯郸，与汉兵相拒达七个月。
English: The Han Dynasty dispatched Qu Zhou Hou Ying to attack Zhao, and Zhao Wang stayed in Ying, resisting the Chinese soldiers for seven months.

古文：吴、楚败，匈奴闻之，亦不肯入边。
现代文：吴、楚兵败，匈奴听到后，也不肯派兵入境相助。
English: After hearing that Wu and Chu were defeated, the Xiongnu refused to send troops to help them enter the country.

古文：栾布自破齐还，并兵引水灌赵城。
现代文：时!醯打败蛮智后引兵回还，与郦昼等联合攻赵，引水灌鲣竖城。
English: At that time, after defeating Brute Intelligence, Zhai led the troops back, and jointly attacked Zhao with Zhai Rong and others, and led the water to flood the fortified city.

古文：城坏，王遂自杀，国除。
现代文：城破后，赵王室隧自杀，赵厘被废除。
English: After the city was defeated, the Zhao royal family committed suicide, and Zhao Li was abolished.

古文：景帝怜赵相、内史守正死，皆封其子为列侯。
现代文：连垦童哀怜赵墨相与内史为坚持尊选廷的立场而死，将二人的儿子均封为列侯。
English: Lian Xingdong mourned the death of Zhao Mo Xiang and Neishi for adhering to the position of respecting the imperial court, and both of their sons were made princes.

古文：赵共王恢。
现代文：赵共王刘恢。
English: Zhao Gongwang Liu Wei.

古文：十一年，梁王彭越诛，立恢为梁王。
现代文：高祖十一年诛梁王彭越后，立刘恢为梁王。
English: In the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, Liu Guo became the King of Liang after defeating Liang Wang Peng Yue.

古文：十六年，赵幽王死，吕后徙恢王赵，恢心不乐。
现代文：十六年，吕太后害死赵幽王，将刘恢徙为赵王，刘恢心里不快。
English: Sixteen years later, Empress Dowager Lv killed Zhao Yu Wang and reinstated Liu Huai as Zhao Wang. Liu Huai was not happy.

古文：太后以吕产女为赵王后，王后从官皆诸吕也，内擅权，微司赵王，王不得自恣。
现代文：吕太后将吕产的女儿嫁给赵王作王后，王后的侍从宫都是吕家的人，在宫内独揽权力，暗中察视赵王，赵王不能随心所欲。
English: Empress Dowager Lyu married the daughter of Prince Lyu to King Zhao to make her queen. The queen's attendants in the palace were all from the Lyu family. They monopolized power in the palace and secretly watched King Zhao. King Zhao could not do whatever he wanted.

古文：王有爱姬，王后鸩杀之。
现代文：赵王有个宠爱的姬妾，被王后用酒毒死。
English: King Zhao had a favorite concubine, who was poisoned to death with wine by the queen.

古文：王乃为歌诗四章，令乐人歌之。
现代文：赵王自编成四章歌曲，命乐师们歌唱。
English: So Zhao Wang composed four chapters of poetry and asked the musicians to sing.

古文：王悲思，六月自杀。
现代文：赵王悲思过度，六个月后自杀而死。
English: Zhao Wang was overwhelmed with grief and died by suicide six months later.

古文：太后闻之，以为用妇人故自杀，无思奉宗庙礼，废其嗣。燕灵王建。
现代文：吕太后听说后，认为为一个女人自杀，而不思供奉宗庙祭祀，遂废其国，绝其王位的继承。燕灵王刘建。
English: After hearing of this, Empress Dowager Lv considered that she had committed suicide as a woman, and did not think to offer the sacrifice at the ancestral temple. She then renounced her country and renounced her succession to the throne.

古文：十一年，燕王卢绾亡入匈奴，明年，立建为燕王。
现代文：漠高祖十一年，燕王卢绾叛逃匈奴。次年，封刘建为燕王。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, the king of Yan, Lu Wei, defected to the Xiongnu. The following year, Liu Jian became the king of Yan.

古文：十五年薨，有美人子，太后使人杀之，绝后。
现代文：十五年，刘建死，其美人所生儿子被旦立丘派人杀死，绝嗣而国被废除。
English: Fifteen years later, Liu Jian died, and his son, who was born to a beautiful woman, was killed by a man sent by Tang Lixiu. He was disinherited, and the country was abolished.

古文：齐悼惠王子，前后凡九人为王：太子襄为齐哀王，次子章为城阳景王，兴居为济北王，将闾为齐王，志为济北王，辟光为济南王，贤为菑川王，卬为胶西王，雄渠为胶东王。
现代文：齐悼惠王的儿子，前后有九个被立为王：太子圣烬为齐塞王，次子型童为城阳景王，刘兴昼为济动逗，刘挝翅为变王，窒烬为渣韭兰，塑必光为渣亩王，型童为蓝丛王，型生为坠酉王，刘雄基为麸王。
English: In the collective mourning for Hui Wang's son, there were nine emperors before and after him: Prince Shengyan was the king of Qi Xi, the second son Qian Tong was the king of Chengyangjing, Liu Xinglun was the king of Jie Diao, Liu Lao Rong was the king of Zhengyang, Qian Ember was the king of Jian Lan, Pu Biguang was the king of Jian Mu, Qian Tong was the king of the Blue Cong, Qian Sheng was the king of the Falling Dragonfly, and Liu Xiongji was the king of the Dragonfly.

古文：齐哀王襄，孝惠六年嗣立。明年，惠帝崩，吕太后称制。
现代文：齐哀王刘襄，于汉惠帝六年继立为王：翌年，惠帝死去，吕太后临朝称制。
English: Liu Xiang, the king of Qi Lai, became king in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Hui of the Han Dynasty: the following year, Emperor Hui died, and Empress Dowager Lyu ascended to the throne.

古文：元年，以其兄子鄜侯吕台为吕王，割齐之济南郡为吕王奉邑。
现代文：高后元年，封吕后哥哥的儿子鄘侯吕台为吕王，分割脑齐的济南郡为其国邑。
English: In the first year after graduating from high school, the son of the elder brother of Empress Lu, Prince Lu Tai, was named King Lu, and Jinan County, which had been divided into several counties, was named as his provincial capital.

古文：明年，哀王弟章入宿卫于汉，高后封为朱虚侯，以吕禄女妻之。
现代文：第二年，召哀王之弟刘章入京侍卫汉廷，封为朱虚侯，并将吕禄的女儿嫁给他。
English: In the following year, Liu Zhang, the brother of the king of lamentation, was called to enter Beijing to guard Hanting, named Zhu Xiu, and married Lu Lu's daughter to him.

古文：后四年，封章弟兴居为东牟侯，皆宿卫长安。
现代文：四年后，又封刘章的弟弟刘兴居为柬牟侯，都在长安侍卫汉廷。
English: Four years later, Liu Zhang's younger brother, Liu Xingju, was also made a prince of Cambodia. Both of them were stationed in Chang'an to guard Hanting.

古文：高后七年，割齐琅邪郡，立营陵侯刘泽为琅邪王。
现代文：高后七年，分割齐的琅邪郡，封营陵侯刘泽为琅邪王。
English: Seven years after he graduated from high school, he was awarded the title of "King of Evil" by Liu Ze.

古文：是岁，赵王友幽死于邸。
现代文：同年，赵王刘友被囚禁死在京城王邸。
English: In the same year, Zhao Wang Liuyou was imprisoned and died in the imperial residence in Beijing.

古文：三赵王既废，高后立诸吕为三王，擅权用事。
现代文：三位赵王既被废除，高后就从吕氏家族中选封三位为王，独揽权力处理事务。
English: Since the three Zhao kings were abolished, Gao selected three kings from the Lu family to handle affairs independently.

古文：章年二十，有气力，忿刘氏不得职。
现代文：当时刘章二十岁，力气很大，不满刘氏得不到职权。
English: At that time, Liu Zhang was 20 years old and very strong. He was dissatisfied that Liu was not given any authority.

古文：尝入侍燕饮，高后令章为酒吏。
现代文：他曾经入宫侍候吕太后饮宴，吕太后令刘章为酒令官。
English: He once entered the palace to wait on the Empress Dowager Lv for a banquet, and the Empress Dowager Lv appointed Liu Zhang as the wine steward.

古文：章自请曰： 臣，将种也，请得以军法行酒。 
现代文：刘章要求说： 我是武将的后代，请以军法行酒令。 
English: Liu Zhang demanded: I am a descendant of a military commander, please use military law to make wine.

古文：高后曰： 可。 
现代文：吕太后说： 可以。 
English: Empress Dowager Lv said, "Yes."

古文：酒酣，章进歌舞，已而曰： 请为太后言耕田。 
现代文：正当饮得高兴的时候，刘章献上供饮酒时欣赏的歌舞。过一会儿说： 请允许臣给太后讲一讲种田的事。 
English: Just when he was happy to drink, Liu Zhang presented a song and dance to enjoy while drinking. After a while, he said: Please allow the minister to tell the empress dowager about farming.

古文：高后儿子畜之，笑曰： 顾乃父知田耳，若生而为王子，安知田乎？ 章曰： 臣知之。 
现代文：吕太后将刘章看作小孩子，笑道： 我想，你的父亲懂耕田的事，你生出来时就已是王子了，怎么能懂耕田的事呢? 刘章说： 臣知道。 
English: Empress Dowager Lv regarded Liu Zhang as a child and laughed, "I think your father knows about farming. When you were born, you were already a prince. How can you know about farming?" Liu Zhang said, "My father knows."

古文：太后曰： 试为我言田意。 
现代文：太后说： 试着为我说说耕田之事。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Try to tell me about the farmland."

古文：章曰： 深耕穊种，立苗欲疏；非其种者，鉏而去之。
现代文：刘章说： 深耕密种，留苗要疏；非同类苗，锄而去之。 
English: Liu Zhang said, "If you do intensive planting, you should keep the seedlings sparsely; if the seedlings are not of the same kind, you should remove them.

古文：太后默然。
现代文：太后听了，沉默不作声。
English: The empress dowager listened in silence.

古文：顷之，诸吕有一人醉，亡酒，章追，拔剑斩之而还报曰： 有亡酒一人，臣谨行军法斩之。 
现代文：一会儿，吕氏子弟中一人醉了，逃离酒席，刘章追上去，拔出剑就把他杀了。回来报告太后说： 有一个人逃避喝酒，臣按照军法将他斩首了。 
English: After a while, one of Lü's sons got drunk and ran away from the banquet. Liu Zhang chased him and killed him with his sword. He came back to report to the Empress Dowager: "There was a man who ran away from drinking, and the minister beheaded him in accordance with military law."

古文：太后左右大惊。
现代文：太后与左右人都大为吃惊。
English: The empress dowager and everyone around her were taken aback.

古文：业已许其军法，亡以罪也。因罢酒。
现代文：因为已经同意他按军法行酒，故无法治他罪，酒宴因此作罢。
English: Because he had already agreed to drink in accordance with military law, he could not be punished, and the banquet was therefore cancelled.

古文：自是后，诸吕惮章，虽大臣皆依朱虚侯。
现代文：自此以后，吕氏子弟都怕刘章，即使是大臣也都依从刘章。
English: Since then, Lu's sons have been afraid of Liu Zhang, and even ministers have obeyed Liu Zhang.

古文：刘氏为强。
现代文：刘氏也就强大起来了。
English: Mr. Liu also became powerful.

古文：其明年，高后崩。
现代文：次年，吕太后死。
English: The following year, Gao Po passed away.

古文：赵王吕禄为上将军，吕王产为相国，皆居长安中，聚兵以威大臣，欲为乱。
现代文：赵王吕禄为上将军，吕王吕产任相国，都住在京城长安，集结兵力以威胁大臣，企图谋反作乱。
English: Zhao Wang Lulu was appointed as a general, and Lu Wang Lussang was appointed as a minister of state. Both of them lived in Chang'an City. They gathered an army to threaten the minister and wanted to start a rebellion.

古文：章以吕禄女为妇，知其谋，乃使人阴出告其兄齐玉，欲令发兵西，朱虚侯、东牟侯欲从中与大臣为内应，以诛诸吕，因立齐王为帝。
现代文：刘章的妻子是吕禄的女儿，因而知道他们的阴谋。刘章于是暗中派人告诉他的哥哥齐王，想让他出兵直到京城，朱虚侯、东牟侯与汉大臣作内应，以便诛灭吕氏子弟，而立齐王为皇帝。
English: Liu Zhang's wife was the daughter of Lü Lu, and therefore knew of their plot. Liu Zhang then secretly sent someone to tell his brother, King Qi, that he wanted him to send troops to the capital, and that Zhu Hulou, Dong Mou Hou and Han ministers should act as his inner circle, in order to exterminate the sons of the Lü clan, and establish King Qi as emperor.

古文：齐王闻此计，与其舅驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃阴谋发兵。
现代文：齐王听到这个计划，便与他的舅舅驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃暗中准备起兵。
English: When King Qi heard of this plan, he secretly prepared to raise an army with his uncle Zou, his second-in-command Zhu Miao, and his lieutenant Wei Bo.

古文：齐相召平闻之，乃发兵入卫王宫。
现代文：齐国相召平听说后，就发兵围住王宫。
English: When he heard that he had been summoned by the king of Qi, he sent troops to surround the royal palace.

古文：魏勃给平曰： 王欲发兵，非有汉虎符验也。
现代文：魏勃骗召平道： 齐王想起兵，没有汉朝虎符验证。
English: Wei Bo cheated Ping Dao: King Qi recalled his soldiers, but there was no verification of the Han Dynasty tiger emblem.

古文：而相君围王，固善。
现代文：而相兵围王宫保卫齐王，这很好。
English: Now the crown prince has surrounded the royal palace, which is actually a good thing.

古文：勃请为君将兵卫卫王。 
现代文：我请求为您领兵士保卫齐王。 
English: I request you to lead an army to escort King Qi.

古文：召平信之，乃使魏勃将。
现代文：召平相信了他，就派魏勃为将带兵。
English: Zhao Ping believed him and sent Wei Bo to lead the troops.

古文：勃既将，以兵围相府。
现代文：魏勃既为将领，就派兵包围了相府。
English: Even though Wei Bo was a general, he sent troops to surround the imperial palace.

古文：召平曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：召平说： 唉!
English: Zhao Ping said: Alas!

古文：道家之言 当断不断，反受其乱 。 
现代文：道家的格言说 应当机立断而不能决断，则反受其害 。 
English: The Taoist maxim says that one should be quick to make a decision, but if one cannot make a decision, one will be harmed by it.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：即自杀而死。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：于是齐王以驷钧为相，魏勃为将军，祝午为内史，悉发国中兵。使祝午给琅邪王曰： 吕氏为乱，齐王发兵欲西诛之。
现代文：于是，齐王任驷钩为相，魏勃为将军，祝午为内史，征集国内全部兵卒，并派祝午去骗琅邪王说： 吕氏作乱，齐王想向西出兵讨伐。
English: As a result, the king of Qi appointed Zhaohua as the minister, Wei Bo as the general, and Zhuo as the internal historian, recruited all the soldiers in the country, and sent Zhuo to deceive the evil king and said: Lv's rebellion, the king of Qi wants to send troops to the west to fight.

古文：齐王自以儿子，年少，不习兵革之事，愿举国委大王。
现代文：齐王自认为是晚辈，年龄小，不熟悉军事，愿意将全国的军队交给大王统辖。
English: King Qi considered himself to be a younger generation, young, unfamiliar with military affairs, and willing to hand over the national army to the great king.

古文：大王自高帝将也，习战事。
现代文：大王在高帝时就是将军，熟悉军事。
English: The great king was a general from the time of Emperor Gao, and was familiar with warfare.

古文：齐王不敢离兵，使臣请大王幸之临菑见齐王计事，并将齐兵以西平关中之乱。 
现代文：现在齐王不敢离开军队，因而派我来请大王到临苗去与齐王共同商议，并带领齐国的兵士向西进军，以平息关中之乱。 
English: King Qi did not dare to leave the army, so he sent a vassal to invite the great king to Linyi to meet with King Qi to discuss important matters, and together lead the troops westward to quell the Guanzhong Rebellion.

古文：琅邪王信之，以为然，乃驰见齐王。
现代文：琅邪王相信了，以为确实如此，于是就骑马去见齐王。
English: He believed it and thought it was true, so he rode to see King Qi.

古文：齐王与魏勃等因留琅邪王，而使祝午尽发琅邪国而并将其兵。
现代文：齐王与魏勃等人乘机扣留了琅邪王，而派祝午全部调发琅邪国的军队，并由祝午统领。
English: King Qi and Wei Bo took advantage of the opportunity to detain the evil king, and sent Zhu Miao to send out the entire army of the evil kingdom and command these armies.

古文：琅邪王刘泽既欺，不得反国，乃说齐王曰： 齐悼惠王，高皇帝长子也，推本言之，大王高皇帝適长孙也，当立。
现代文：琅邪王刘泽既被欺骗，不能回到自己的国家，便劝说齐王道： 齐悼惠王是高帝的大儿子，溯本而言之，大王是高帝的嫡亲长孙，应当立为皇帝。
English: Since Liu Ze, the evil king, was deceived and could not return to his own country, he persuaded Qi Wang to say: Qi Wei Wang Hui is the eldest son of Gao Di, in other words, the great king is the legitimate eldest grandson of Gao Di, and should be established as emperor.

古文：今诸大臣狐疑未有所定，而泽于刘氏最为长年，大臣固待泽决计。
现代文：如今各位大臣犹疑不决，未确定立。而我刘泽是刘氏子弟中年龄最大者，大臣们一定等待我去参与决策。
English: Now, the ministers are hesitant and undecided, and I, Liu Ze, am the oldest of Liu's children, and the ministers are definitely waiting for me to participate in decision-making.

古文：今大王留臣无为也，不如使我入关计事。 
现代文：现在，大王留我没有什么作用，不如派我入关去，商议迎立之事。 
English: Now that the great king has detained me here, I can't do anything, so it's better to let me enter the customs to discuss the important matter of establishing a new emperor.

古文：齐王以为然，乃益具车送琅邪王。
现代文：齐王认为此话是对的，于是多备车马，送走了琅邪王。
English: King Qi thought it was right and prepared many cars to take the evil king to the imperial court.

古文：琅邪王既行，齐遂举兵西攻吕国之济南。
现代文：琅邪王走后，齐国就出兵向西攻打吕国的济南郡。
English: After the Evil King Xie had left, King Qi raised an army to attack Jinan in Lv Province to the west.

古文：于是齐王遗诸侯王书曰： 高帝平定天下，王诸子弟。
现代文：于是，齐王派人给各个诸侯送去书信，信中说： 高皇帝平定天下，封宗室诸子弟为王。
English: As a result, King Qi sent people to send letters to various princes, saying in the letter: Emperor Gao has pacified the world and made his sons the kings.

古文：悼惠王薨，惠帝使留侯张良立臣为齐王。
现代文：齐阵惠王死后，惠帝派留侯张良立臣为齐王。
English: After mourning the death of King Hui, Emperor Hui sent Zhang Liang, a retainer, to install a vassal as King Qi.

古文：惠帝崩，高后用事，春秋高，听诸吕擅废帝更立，又杀三赵王，灭梁、赵、燕，以王诸吕，分齐国为四。
现代文：惠帝死，高后当权，因为年龄大了，听任吕氏子弟擅自废高帝所立诸侯王而封诸吕为王，又杀死隐王如意、幽王刘友、梁王刘恢三位赵王，灭掉刘氏的梁、赵、燕三国，并以其属地分吕氏兄弟为王，又将原齐国一分为四。
English: After Emperor Hui's death, Gao took power. Because he was too old, he allowed the sons of the Lv clan to depose the princes established by Emperor Gao without permission and made Zhu Lv king. He also killed the three Zhao kings, King Ruyi, King Yu, and King Liang, eliminated the three states of Liang, Zhao, and Yan of the Liu clan, and made the brothers of the Lv clan the kings of their territories, and divided the original Qi kingdom into four.

古文：忠臣进谏，上或乱不听。
现代文：忠臣进言规劝，主上迷惑不听。
English: The loyal vassal gives advice and exhortation, but the master is puzzled and does not listen.

古文：今高后崩，皇帝春秋富，未能治天下，固待大臣诸侯。
现代文：如今高后已死，皇帝年龄还小，没有能力治理国家，必须依靠朝内大臣及各路诸侯。
English: Now Gao Hou has died, the emperor is still young and unable to govern the country. He must rely on the Minister of the Interior and various princes.

古文：今诸吕又擅自尊官，聚兵严威，劫列侯忠臣，挢制以令天下，宗庙以危。
现代文：现在吕氏子弟又擅居高官，集聚军队以显威严，威胁列侯与忠臣，假托天子的诏令号令天下，刘氏处于危险之中。
English: Now, the sons of the Lü clan have become high-ranking officials, amassed an army to show their authority, threatened princes and loyal subjects, and issued imperial edicts pretending to be from heaven. The Liu clan is in danger.

古文：寡人帅兵入诛不当为王者。 
现代文：我现在带兵入京，诛灭那些不应当为王的人。 
English: I am now leading soldiers into the capital to destroy those who should not be king.

古文：汉闻之，相国吕产等遣大将军颍阴侯灌婴将兵击之。
现代文：汉朝廷听到齐发兵西进的消息，相国吕产等人派大将军颖阴侯灌婴带兵束出迎击。
English: When the Han imperial court heard the news that Qi sent soldiers to the west, the neighboring country of Lushan and others sent the general Yingyin Hou Guanzhong with a bunch of soldiers to meet the attack.

古文：婴至荥阳，乃谋曰： 诸吕举兵关中，欲危刘氏而自立，今我破齐还报，是益吕氏资也。 
现代文：灌婴到了荣阳，与众将进行谋划道： 吕氏子弟统兵驻守关中，想危害刘氏而自立为帝，如今我们打败齐国而回去报捷，是增加了吕氏子弟的势力啊! 
English: When Guan Yu arrived in Rongyang, he and his generals plotted as follows: Lu's sons and their soldiers were stationed in Guanzhong, and they wanted to endanger the Liu clan, so they set themselves up as emperors. Now that we have defeated Qi and returned to report our success, we have increased the power of Lu's sons and brothers!

古文：乃留兵屯荧阳，使人谕齐王及诸侯，与连和，以待吕氏之变而共诛之。
现代文：于是按兵不动，将军队驻扎在荣阳，并派人告诉齐王及各诸侯，与之联络友好，以待吕氏子弟兵变而共同讨伐。
English: As a result, he stationed his army in Rongyang, and sent someone to tell King Qi and all the lords, to make contact and friendship with them, and to wait for the mutiny of the sons of Lü to fight together.

古文：齐王闻之，乃屯兵西界待约。
现代文：齐王听了，就屯兵于齐国西面边界等待约定。
English: When King Qi heard this, he stationed troops on the western border of Qi to wait for an agreement.

古文：吕禄、吕产欲作乱，朱虚侯章与太尉勃、丞相平等诛之。
现代文：吕禄、吕产正想作乱，朱虚侯刘章与太尉周勃、丞相陈平等诛灭吕氏。
English: Lu Lu and Lu Shanzhong wanted to start a riot, and Zhu Xuchang, Liu Zhang, Lieutenant Zhou Bo, and Minister Chen all tried to exterminate the Lu clan.

古文：章首先斩吕产，太尉勃等乃尽诛诸吕。
现代文：刘章首先杀死了吕产，太尉周勃等人就将吕氏子弟全部杀了。
English: Liu Zhang first killed Liusang, and then Lieutenant Zhou Bo and others killed all of Lv's sons and brothers.

古文：而琅邪王亦从齐至长安。
现代文：琅邪王也从齐国到了长安。
English: The Evil King also happened to come to Chang'an from Qi.

古文：大臣议欲立齐王，皆曰： 母家驷钧恶戾，虎而冠者也。
现代文：大臣们商议想立齐王为帝，都说： 齐王母亲娘家的驷钧很凶暴，是个最大的老虎。
English: When the ministers were discussing whether to make King Qi the emperor, they all said, "King Qi's mother's family's donkey is very fierce and is the biggest tiger.

古文：访以吕氏故，几乱天下，今又立齐王，是欲复为吕氏也。
现代文：方今因为吕氏擅权而几乎乱了天下，现在又要立齐王为帝，是想再扶植一个吕氏集团。
English: Fang now, because of the Lv's abuse of power, has almost brought chaos to the world, and now he wants to establish Qi Wang as emperor, he wants to re-establish a Lv group.

古文：代王母家薄氏，君子长者，且代王，高帝子，于今见在，最为长。
现代文：代王的母亲家薄氏。
English: The queen's mother's family is the Bo clan.

古文：以子则顺，以善人则大臣安。 
现代文：是善良又厚道的人家。况且代王是高帝的儿子，今健在又年龄最大。
English: In the case of parents and children, the name is justified; in the case of good people, the ministers will be relieved.

古文：于是大臣乃谋迎代王，而遣章以诛吕氏事告齐王，今罢兵。
现代文：作为高帝的儿子而继承皇位是顺理成章的，以好人为皇帝则大臣们安心。 于是大臣们就谋划迎立代王，而派刘章去将已诛灭吕氏的事告诉齐王，命令他罢兵。
English: As the son of Emperor Gao, it was only natural that he should succeed to the throne, and as the emperor was a good man, the ministers felt at ease. Therefore, the ministers planned to install an acting king, and sent Liu Zhang to tell King Qi that the Lü Clan had been exterminated, and ordered him to disband his army.

古文：灌婴在荥阳，闻魏勃本教齐王反，既诛吕氏，罢齐兵，使使召责问魏勃。
现代文：灌婴在荣阳，听说魏勃本来是教齐王谋反的，既诛吕氏，齐兵又罢归，便派使者召来魏勃责问。
English: Guan Yu was in Shenyang. He had heard that Wei Bo had instigated the rebellion against King Qi. After the destruction of the Lv clan, the State of Qi had also conscripted soldiers. Guan Yu sent someone to summon Wei Bo and interrogate him.

古文：勃曰： 失火之家，岂暇先言丈人后救火乎！ 
现代文：魏勃说： 家裹着火了，哪裹有时间先告诉家长后去救火的! 
English: Wei Bo said: When the house is on fire, who has time to tell the parents first and then go to put out the fire!

古文：因退立，股战而栗。恐不能言者，终无他语。
现代文：因而退后站着，浑身发抖，恐惧得不能再说出话来，一直没有别的话说。
English: So I stood back, trembling, too scared to speak, with nothing else to say.

古文：灌将军孰视，笑曰： 人谓魏勃勇，妄庸人耳，何能为乎！ 
现代文：灌婴看了好久，笑着说： 人们说魏勃骁勇，实不过是个狂妄的平庸之人，哪有什么作为! 
English: He looked at the baby for a long time and said with a smile: People say that Wei Burguangyong is really just an arrogant mediocre person, what is there to do!

古文：乃罢勃勃父以善鼓琴见秦皇帝。
现代文：于是就革了魏勃的职。魏勃的父亲因为弹琴弹得好曾见过秦始皇。
English: As a result, he fired Wei Bo. Wei Bo's father once met the First Emperor of China because he played the piano well.

古文：及勃少时，欲求见齐相曹参，家贫无以自通，乃常独早扫齐相舍人门外。
现代文：等到魏勃少年时，试图求见齐国的丞相曹参，因家贫没有办法打通关节，因而经常独自于清早时分前往齐国相府舍人的门外扫地。
English: When Wei Bo was a young boy, he tried to see Cao San, the prime minister of Qi, but because of his family's poverty, he was unable to open the joint, so he often went alone in the early morning to sweep the ground outside the door of the prime minister of Qi.

古文：舍人怪之，以为物而司之，得勃。
现代文：舍人奇怪，以为是鬼怪而在暗中察看，发现是魏勃。
English: Oddly enough, he thought it was a ghost, but when he looked at it in secret, he found it was Wei Bo.

古文：勃曰： 愿见相君无因，故为子扫，欲以求见。 
现代文：魏勃说： 想见丞相大人而没有机会，所以为您打扫大门，想以此得机会求见丞相。 
English: Wei Bo said, "I wanted to see the prime minister, but I didn't have a chance, so I cleaned the gate for you. I wanted to use this as an opportunity to see the prime minister."

古文：于是舍人见勃，曹参因以为舍人。
现代文：于是这位舍人把他引见给丞相曹参，曹参让他也做了舍人。
English: So the donor introduced him to the chancellor, Cao San, who asked him to become a donor as well.

古文：壹为参御言事，以为贤，言之悼惠王。
现代文：一次他为曹参驾车，途中提了些建议，曹参认为他有才能，将他推荐给齐悼惠王。
English: Once he drove a car for Cao San and made some suggestions on the way. Cao San thought he was talented and recommended him to Qi Yi Hui Wang.

古文：王召见，拜为内史。
现代文：齐王召见了他，任命为内史。
English: King Qi summoned him and appointed him as an internal historian.

古文：始悼惠王得自置二千石。
现代文：从此，齐悼惠王得到了自置二千石官吏的权力。
English: From then on, Qi Mui Hui Wang gained the power to appoint officials of 2,000 koku.

古文：及悼惠王薨，哀王嗣，勃用事重于相。
现代文：到齐悼惠王死后，哀王继位，魏勃当政，权力重于齐丞相。
English: After the death of King Hui of Qi, King Ai succeeded to the throne, and Wei Bo took office, with more power than Prime Minister Qi.

古文：齐王既罢兵归，而代王立，是为孝文帝。
现代文：齐王既已罢兵回国，而代王被立为帝，是为汉文帝。
English: King Qi had already resigned and returned to China, and the acting king was made emperor, the Han Emperor.

古文：文帝元年，尽以高后时所割齐之城阳、琅邪、济南郡复予齐，而徙琅邪王王燕。
现代文：文帝元年，将高后当政时期从齐国分割出来的城阳郡、琅邪郡和济南郡再归还给齐国，而徙琅邪王至燕国为王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wen's reign, the counties of Chengyang, Guye and Jinan, which had been separated from Qi during the reign of Emperor Gao, were returned to Qi, and the king of Guye became the king of Yan.

古文：益封朱虚侯、东牟侯各二千户，黄金千斤。
现代文：加封朱虚侯、束牟侯封地各二千户。黄金千斤。
English: In addition, 2,000 households were added to the fiefs of Zhuxuo and Sokumuo. The total amount of gold was 1,000 kg.

古文：是岁，齐哀王薨，子文王则嗣。
现代文：就在这一年，齐哀王死，其子塞王塞恻即位。
English: In the same year, King Qi'ai died, and his son, King Sai, ascended to the throne.

古文：十四年薨，无子，国除。
现代文：十四年死去，没有儿子继承，变迩被废，属地归龃。
English: He died at the age of fourteen, without a son to succeed him, and his title was abolished, and his territory reverted to the emperor.

古文：城阳景王章，孝文二年以朱虚侯与东牟侯兴居俱立，二年薨。
现代文：城阳景王刘章，于汉文帝二年，以朱虚侯的身份与束牟侯刘兴居一起被立为王，二年死去。
English: Liu Zhang, the king of Chengyangjing, was made king together with Liu Xingju, the prince of Sokmou, in the second year of the Han Dynasty, and died two years later.

古文：子共王喜嗣。
现代文：儿子共王刘喜继位。
English: His son, King Liu Xi, succeeded to the throne.

古文：孝文十二年，徙王淮南，五年，复还王城阳，凡立三十三年薨。
现代文：汉文帝十二年徙封为淮南王，五年后，复为城阳王，共在位三十三年死去。
English: Emperor Hanwen was enthroned as the King of Huainan in the 12th year of his reign. Five years later, he was reinstated as the King of Chengyang. He died after reigning for 33 years.

古文：子顷王延嗣，二十六年薨。
现代文：其子刘延继位为顷王，刘延在位二十六年而死。
English: His son Liu Yan succeeded to the throne as He Wang. Liu Yan died after 26 years on the throne.

古文：子敬王义嗣，九年薨。
现代文：其子刘义继位为敬王，刘义在位九年死去。
English: His son, Liu Yi, succeeded to the throne as King Jing. Liu Yi died nine years into his reign.

古文：子惠王武嗣，十一年薨。
现代文：其子刘武继位为惠王，刘武为王十一年死。
English: His son Liu Wu succeeded to the throne as King Hui. Liu Wu Wei Wang died eleven years later.

古文：子荒王顺嗣，四十六年薨。
现代文：儿子刘顺继位为荒王，刘顺在位四十六年死去。
English: His son Liu Shun succeeded to the throne as the King of Chaos. Liu Shun died in the 46th year of his reign.

古文：子戴王恢嗣，八年薨。
现代文：其子刘恢继位为戴王，刘恢为王八年死去。
English: His son Liu Huai succeeded to the throne as King Dai. Liu Huai died eight years after becoming king.

古文：子孝王景嗣，二十四年薨。
现代文：其子刘景继位为孝王，刘景在位二十四年死去。
English: His son Liu Jing succeeded to the throne as Prince Xiao. Liu Jing died in the twenty-fourth year of his reign.

古文：子哀王云嗣，一年薨，无子，国绝。
现代文：其子刘云继位为哀王，刘云在位一年而死，没有儿子，国家绝灭，属地归入汉朝廷。
English: His son Liu Yun succeeded to the throne as the King of Lamentation. Liu Yun died one year into his reign, without a son, the country was extinguished, and its territory was incorporated into the Han Dynasty.

古文：成帝复立云兄俚为城阳王，王莽时绝。
现代文：到了汉成帝时期，又立刘云的哥哥刘俚为城阳王。王莽时，封国被废除。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han, Liu Yun's brother, Liu Ye, was appointed the King of Chengyang. When Wang Mang, the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：济北王兴居初以东牟倨与大臣共立文帝于代邸，曰： 诛吕氏，臣无功，请与太仆滕公俱入清宫。 
现代文：济北王刘兴居，最初是以束牟侯的身份与各大臣一起迎立文帝于代国官邸的。他说： 诛灭吕氏，臣没有什么功劳，我请求和太仆滕公夏侯婴一起去清理宫殿。 
English: Liu Xingju, King of Jibei, initially welcomed Emperor Wen to the official residence of the state together with the ministers in the capacity of Sokumuo. He said: "To exterminate the Lv clan, the minister has no merit. I request that I go with the eunuch Tenggong Xia Houying to clean up the palace."

古文：遂将少帝出，迎皇帝入宫。
现代文：于是带出吕氏所立少帝，迎接汉文帝进宫主政。
English: So he brought out the young emperor established by the Lü clan to welcome Emperor Hanwen into the palace to govern.

古文：始诛诸吕时，朱虚侯章功尤大，大臣许尽以赵地王章，尽以梁地王兴居。
现代文：在开始讨伐吕氏时，以朱虚侯刘章的功劳最大。各大臣商议，答应将赵国的全部属地封刘章为王，梁国的全部属地封刘兴居为王。
English: At the beginning of the crusade against the Lv clan, Liu Zhang, the prince of Zhuxu, was given the greatest credit. The ministers discussed and agreed to make Liu Zhang the king of all the territories of Zhao, and Liu Xingju the king of all the territories of Liang.

古文：及文帝立，闻朱虚、东牟之初欲立齐王，故黜其功。
现代文：到文帝即位后，听说宋虚侯与东牟侯当初曾想立齐王为帝，因而废黜其减吕氏的功劳。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, it was heard that Song Wuhou and Dongwuhou had originally wanted to make King Qi the emperor, thus depriving him of the credit of reducing the Lü clan.

古文：二年，王诸子，乃割齐二郡以王章、兴居。
现代文：第二年，文帝封诸皇子为王，才分割齐国的两个郡以封刘章与刘兴居为诸侯王。
English: In the second year, Emperor Wen made the princes kings, and only then divided the two counties of Qi to make Liu Zhang and Liu Xingju princes.

古文：章、兴居意自以失职夺功。
现代文：刘章与兴居二人则认为是自己失职而失去了功劳。
English: Liu Zhang and Xingju believed that they had failed in their duties and lost their merits.

古文：岁余，章薨，而匈奴大入边，汉多兵发，丞相灌婴将击之，文帝亲幸太原。
现代文：一年多以后，刘章死。当时匈奴大举侵入边境，汉朝发兵很多，由丞相灌婴领兵出击，文帝亲自到太原督战。
English: More than a year later, Liu Zhang died. At that time, the Huns invaded the border in a big way, and the Han Dynasty sent a lot of troops. Emperor Wen personally went to Taiyuan to supervise the battle.

古文：兴居以为天子自击胡，遂发兵反，上闻之，罢兵归长安，使棘蒲侯柴将军击破，虏济北王。
现代文：刘兴居认为天子要亲自讨伐匈奴，就起兵造反。文帝听说了，罢兵回到长安，派棘蒲侯柴武将军打败叛军，俘虏济北王。
English: Liu Xingju thought that the Son of Heaven wanted to personally fight the Xiongnu, so he raised an army and rebelled. When Emperor Wen heard of this, he sent his troops back to Chang'an, dispatched General Caiwu to defeat the rebels, and captured King Jibei.

古文：王自杀，国除。
现代文：济北王自杀，国废除。
English: The king of Jibei committed suicide and the country was abolished.

古文：文帝悯济北王逆乱以自灭，明年，尽封悼惠王诸子罢军等七人为列侯。
现代文：文帝怜悯济北王反叛作乱而自取灭亡，第二年，将齐悼惠王的七个儿子刘罢军等人全封为列侯。
English: Emperor Wen took pity on King Jibei's rebellion and self-destruction, and in the following year, the seven sons of the mourning King Hui, including Liu Zaijun, were all made princes.

古文：至十五年，齐文王又薨，无子。
现代文：到了汉文帝十五年，齐文王刘则死，他没有儿子。
English: In the fifteenth year of Emperor Hanwen, King Liu of Qiwen died, and he had no son.

古文：时悼惠王后尚有城阳王在，文帝怜悼惠王適嗣之绝，于是乃分齐为六国，尽立前所封悼惠王子列侯见在者六人为王。齐孝王将闾以杨虚侯立，济北王志以安都侯立，菑川王贤以武成侯立，胶东王雄渠以白石侯立，胶西王卬以平昌侯立，济南王辟光以扐侯立。
现代文：但当时齐悼惠王的后代还有城阳王在，文帝可怜齐悼惠王没有嫡子继位而绝，于是把齐国一分为六，将以前封为列侯的悼惠王儿子中还活着的六个人立为王：杨虚侯刘将闾为齐孝王，安都侯刘志为济北王，武成侯刘贤为苗王，白石侯刘雄渠为胶束王，平昌侯刘印为胶西王，劫侯刘辟光为济南王。
English: However, at that time, the descendants of King Qi Rong Hui also included King Chengyang. Emperor Wen was sorry that King Qi Rong Hui did not have a legitimate son to succeed to the throne, so he divided Qi into six and made the six living sons of King Qi Rong Hui, who had previously been made princes, the kings: Yang Xiu Hou Liu Zhe as King Qi Xiao, An Du Hou Liu Zhi as King Jibei, Wucheng Hou Liu Xian as King Miao, Baishi Hou Liu Xiong Qu as King Jiaozuo, PyeongChang Hou Liu Yin as King Jiaoxi, and Khao Hou Liu Biigu

古文：孝文十六年，六王同日俱立。
现代文：文帝十六年，六王在同一天被立为王。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Wen, the Six Kings were enthroned on the same day.

古文：立十一年，孝景三年，吴、楚反，胶东、胶西、菑川、济南王皆发兵应吴、楚。
现代文：上列六王在位十一年，即汉景帝三年，吴、楚反叛，胶束、胶西、蕾!、济南四王都发兵响应，一起反汉。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of the above-mentioned six kings, that is, three years of Han Jingdi, Wu and Chu rebelled, and the four kings of Micellar, Jiaoxi, Lei! and Jinan all sent troops in response, together against Han.

古文：欲与齐，齐孝王狐疑，城守不听。
现代文：他们想约齐王一起反汉，齐孝王犹疑不决，故坚守城池而不反。
English: They wanted to rebel against Han together with King Jochi, but King Jochi hesitated, so he held fast to the castle and did not rebel.

古文：三国兵共围齐，齐王使路中大夫告于天子。天子复令路中大夫还报，告齐王坚守，汉兵今破吴、楚矣。
现代文：胶束、苗川、济南三国发兵包围了齐国，齐王派使臣路中大夫向漠天子报告，天子又命路中大夫回齐国报告齐王，要齐王守住城池，漠兵现已攻破了吴、楚。
English: The three countries of Micellar bunch, Miaochuan and Jinan sent troops to encircle Qi. The king of Qi sent an envoy, Lu Zhongfu, to report to the king of the desert. The king also ordered Lu Zhongfu to return to Qi to report to the king of Qi. He wanted the king of Qi to stay in the city. The soldiers of the desert have now broken through Wu and Chu.

古文：路中大夫至，三国兵围临菑数重，无从之。
现代文：路中大夫返齐，三国的士兵包围临苗城有好几圈，没法进城。
English: The three countries' soldiers encircled Linmiao Town several times and were unable to enter the city.

古文：三国将与路中大夫盟曰： 若反言汉已破矣，齐趣下三国，不且见屠。 
现代文：三国的将领与路中大夫盟誓： 你如果反过来说汉朝已被攻破，齐国赶快投降三国，不投降就将屠城。 
English: The generals of the three countries and Dr. Lu Zhong swore: If you say that the Han Dynasty has been defeated, Qi will quickly surrender to the three countries, and if you do not surrender, you will slaughter the city.

古文：路中大夫既许，至城下，望见齐王，曰： 汉已发兵百万，使太尉亚夫击破吴、楚，方引兵救齐，齐必坚守无下！ 
现代文：路中大夫虽答应了，但走到城下，抬头看见了齐王，便说： 汉朝已发兵百万，派太尉周亚夫打败了吴、楚，正领兵来救援齐国，齐国一定要坚守而不投降! 
English: Although the middle-of-the-road doctor agreed, when he got to the foot of the city and looked up and saw King Qi, he said, "The Han Dynasty has dispatched a million soldiers, sent Lieutenant Zhou Yafu to defeat Wu and Chu, and is leading soldiers to rescue Qi. Qi must stand firm and not surrender!"

古文：三国将诛路中大夫。
现代文：三国将领就把路中大夫杀了。
English: The generals of the three countries killed Dr. Tong.

古文：齐初围急，阴与三国通谋，约未定，会路中大夫从汉来，其大臣乃复劝王无下三国。
现代文：在此之前，齐国被围困而十分危急，曾暗中与三国谈判，盟约未订时，正好路中大夫从汉朝来，齐国的大臣们再次劝齐王不要投降三国。
English: Prior to this, the state of Qi was besieged and very critical. There had been secret negotiations with the three countries. When the treaty was not signed, just as the doctor on his way from the Han Dynasty arrived, the ministers of the state of Qi once again advised the king of Qi not to surrender the three countries.

古文：会汉将栾布、平阳侯等兵至齐，击破三国兵，解围。
现代文：恰逢汉朝将领乐布、平阳侯曹襄等人领兵到了齐国，打败了三国的军队，解除了围困。
English: Coincidentally, the Han Dynasty generals Le Bu, Pingyang Hou Cao Xiang and others led troops to Qi Province, defeated the armies of the three countries, and lifted the siege.

古文：已后闻齐初与三国有谋将欲移兵伐齐。
现代文：以后，听说齐王原先与三国有过阴谋，就想调兵讨伐齐国。
English: Later, when he heard that King Qi had plotted with the three countries, he wanted to send troops to fight against Qi.

古文：齐孝王惧，饮药自杀。
现代文：齐孝王恐惧了，喝毒药自杀。
English: Qi Xiaowang was terrified and committed suicide by drinking poison.

古文：而胶东、胶西、济南、菑川王皆伏诛，国除。独济北王在。
现代文：胶东、胶西、济南、苗川四王都被斩首。他们的封国也被废除，衹留下了济北王。
English: The four kings of Jiaodong, Jiaoxi, Jinan and Miaochuan were all beheaded. Their fiefdoms were also abolished, leaving only the king of Jibei.

古文：齐孝王之自杀也，景帝闻之，以为齐首善，以迫劫有谋，非其罪也，召立孝王太子寿，是为懿王。
现代文：汉景帝听了齐孝王自杀的消息，认为齐王原先没有反叛之心，是因为胁迫才另有图谋，这不是他的罪遇。景帝便下韶立孝王的太子刘寿为齐懿王。
English: When Emperor Han Jing heard the news of Prince Qi Xiaowang's suicide, he thought that Prince Qi did not originally have a rebellious heart, but only had other plans because of coercion, which was not his crime. Emperor Jing then crowned Prince Liu Shou, Prince Xiaowang's son, as the Prince of Qi.

古文：二十三年薨，子厉王次昌嗣。
现代文：懿王在位二十三年死去，其子厉王刘次员继位。
English: Shao Wang died in the 23rd year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son, Li Wang Liu Zijian.

古文：其母曰纪太后。
现代文：齐厉王的母亲是纪太后。
English: King Qili's mother was Empress Dowager Ji.

古文：太后取其弟纪氏女为王后，王不爱。
现代文：太后将她弟弟的女儿作为王后，齐王不爱纪王后。
English: The empress dowager made her brother's daughter the queen. King Qi did not like Queen Ji.

古文：纪太后欲其家重宠，令其长女纪翁主入王宫正其后宫无令得近王，欲令爱纪氏女。
现代文：纪太后想让纪家世代宠贵，令她的大女儿纪翁主进入王宫，管制后宫，不让后宫的姬妾接近齐王，想使齐王专爱纪氏王后。
English: Empress Dowager Ji wanted to make the Ji family generation a favorite, so she had her eldest daughter, Ji Weng, enter the royal palace, control the harem, and prevent the harem's concubines from approaching King Qi. She wanted King Qi to exclusively love the Queen of the Ji family.

古文：王因与其姊翁主奸。
现代文：齐王因而与其姊翁主通奸。
English: King Li, however, took the opportunity to commit adultery with his sister.

古文：齐有宦者徐甲，入事汉皇太后。
现代文：齐国有个宦官叫徐甲，入宫侍候汉朝的皇太后。
English: There was a eunuch named Xu Jia in the State of Qi who entered the imperial court to serve the Empress Dowager of Han.

古文：皇太后有爱女曰修成君，修成君非刘氏子，太后怜之。
现代文：皇太后有个心爱的女儿叫脩成君，她不是刘氏所生，太后十分怜爱。
English: The empress dowager had a beloved daughter named Hao Chengjun. She was not born to the Liu family, and the empress dowager was very fond of her.

古文：修成君有女娥，太后欲嫁之于诸侯。
现代文：脩成君有个女儿叫蛾，太后想让她嫁给诸侯王。
English: Rongcheng has a daughter named Moth, and the empress dowager wants her to marry the prince.

古文：宦者甲乃请使齐，必令王上书请娥。
现代文：徐甲便请求出使齐国，说一定让齐王上书请求娶娥。
English: Xu Jia then requested the envoy of Qi, saying that he must let the king of Qi write a letter to request the marriage.

古文：皇太后大喜，使甲之齐。
现代文：皇太后大喜，就派徐甲到齐国。
English: The Empress Dowager was overjoyed and sent Xu Jia to Qi Province.

古文：时主父偃知甲之使齐以取后事，亦因谓甲： 即事成，幸言偃女愿得充王后宫。 
现代文：当时，主父偃知道了徐甲到齐国是让齐王娶王后一事，也乘机跟徐甲说： 如果事情成功，希望说一下我女儿愿意充实到齐王的宫中。 
English: At that time, the master father Zou knew that Xu Jia came to Qi to let King Qi marry the queen, and also took the opportunity to say to Xu Jia: If things succeed, I hope to say that my daughter is willing to enrich the palace of King Qi.

古文：甲至齐，风以此事。
现代文：徐甲到了齐国，向齐王暗示这件事。
English: When Xu Jia arrived in Qi, he hinted this to the King of Qi.

古文：纪太后怒曰： 王有后，后宫备具。
现代文：纪太后大怒，说： 齐王有王后，后宫都已备齐。
English: Empress Dowager Ji was furious and said: King Qi has a queen, and the harem is ready.

古文：且甲，齐贫人，及为宦者入事汉，初无补益，乃欲乱吾王家！
现代文：而且徐甲是齐穷人，无出路而为宦官，到宫廷去做事，原没有做什么有益于齐的事，却又想扰乱我王家!
English: Moreover, Xu Jia is a poor man of Qi, a eunuch with no way out, who went to the court to do things. He had not done anything beneficial to Qi, but he wanted to disturb my royal family!

古文：且主父偃何为者？
现代文：再说，主父偃想干什么?
English: As for the main father, what kind of person is he?

古文：乃欲以女充后宫！ 
现代文：也想把女儿充实到我后宫! 
English: I also want to enrich my harem with a daughter!

古文：甲大穷，还报皇太后曰： 王已愿尚娥，然事有所害，恐如燕王。 
现代文：徐甲大为受窘，回来报告皇太后说： 齐王已愿意娶娥，然而事情恐怕有祸害，我担心会像燕王那样。 
English: Embarrassed, Xu Jia came back and reported to the Empress Dowager: "Qi Wang is willing to marry Ee, but I'm afraid there will be a disaster. I'm afraid it will be like Yan Wang."

古文：燕王者，与其子昆弟奸，坐死。
现代文：燕王这个人，和他女儿及姐妹通奸，获罪而死。
English: This man, King Yan, committed adultery with his daughter and her sisters and was condemned to death.

古文：故以燕感太后。
现代文：徐甲因而用燕王的事来动摇太后。
English: As a result, Xu Jia used the matter of Yan Wang to shake the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后曰： 毋复言嫁女齐事！ 
现代文：太后说： 不要再谈把女儿嫁给齐王的事了! 
English: The empress dowager said, "Don't talk about marrying your daughter to King Qi anymore!"

古文：事浸淫闻于上。
现代文：后这事渐渐被天子知道了。
English: After that, this matter gradually became known to the Son of Heaven.

古文：主父偃由此与齐有隙。
现代文：主父偃由此与齐国有了嫌隙。
English: As a result, the headman, Zhai, had a rift with Qi.

古文：偃方幸用事，因言： 齐临菑十万户，市租千金，人众殷富，巨于长安，非天子亲弟爱子不得王此。
现代文：在主父偃得到武帝宠幸而当权之时，他乘机说： 齐国的临苗有十万户人家，一天所收市场交易税黄金千斤，人多而且富足，超过长安。不是天子的亲弟弟及爱子不会得到这个王位。
English: When Emperor Wu was fortunate enough to be favored by his father, he took the opportunity to say, "There are 100,000 households in Linmiao, Qi Province, and the market transaction tax collected in one day is one thousand kilograms of gold. There are more people and more wealth than in Chang'an. If you are not the son of Heaven, your brother and beloved son will not get this throne.

古文：今齐王于亲属益疏。 
现代文：现在的齐王与皇族已是更疏远了! 
English: The current King Qi has become even more estranged from the royal family!

古文：乃从容言吕太后时齐欲反，及吴、楚时孝王几为乱。
现代文：于是，就从头至尾地讲给武帝听，说吕太后时齐国就想造，到吴、楚谋反时齐孝王几乎也起来作乱。
English: As a result, he told Emperor Wu from beginning to end, saying that when Empress Lv became Empress, the State of Qi wanted to be created, and when Wu and Chu plotted to rebel, King Qi Xiao almost started a riot.

古文：今闻齐王与其姊乱。
现代文：现在听说齐王和她的姐姐在通奸。
English: Now we hear that Qi and his sister are having an affair.

古文：于是武帝拜偃为齐相，且正其事。
现代文：于是，汉武帝就拜主父偃为齐国丞相，要他去主持审理此事。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu asked his father, the Prime Minister of Qi, to preside over the trial of the matter.

古文：偃至齐，急治王后宫宦者为王通于姊翁主所者，辞及王。
现代文：主父偃到了齐国，迅速审讯齐王后宫中帮助齐王通畅其姊翁主住所的宦者，言辞中也涉及齐王。
English: His father arrived in Qi Province and quickly interrogated the eunuchs in the queen's harem who had helped King Qi clear out his sister's main residence. He also mentioned King Qi in his speech.

古文：王年少，惧以罪为吏所执诛，乃饮药自杀。
现代文：齐王年轻，怕因此有罪而被官吏逮捕处死，于是就喝毒药自杀了。
English: King Qi was young, and he was afraid of being arrested and executed by officials for being guilty, so he drank poison and committed suicide.

古文：是时，赵王惧主父偃壹出败齐，恐其渐疏骨肉，乃上书言偃受金及轻重之短，天子亦因囚偃。
现代文：这时，赵王刘遂害怕主父偃一出皇宫就败了齐国，担心他会逐渐离间刘氏骨肉，便上书说主父偃收受贿赂及其用心不公的事。天子也趁此把主父偃囚禁起来。
English: At this time, Zhao Wang Liu was afraid that Master Zou would defeat Qi as soon as he left the palace, and worried that he would gradually alienate the Liu family, he wrote a letter saying that Master Zou had accepted bribes and that his intentions were unfair. Tianzi also took advantage of this to imprison Master Zou.

古文：公孙弘曰： 齐王以忧死，无后，非诛偃无以塞天下之望。 
现代文：公孙弘说： 齐王因忧虑而死，而且没有后代，不杀主父偃无法满足天下人的愿望。 
English: Gongsun Hong said: King Qi died of anxiety, and there are no descendants. If you do not kill your father, you will not be able to satisfy the wishes of the world.

古文：偃遂坐诛。
现代文：主父偃就坐法被杀了。
English: The main father, Zou, was killed for following the law.

古文：厉王立五年，国除。
现代文：厉王在位五年而死，无后代，其国被废除。
English: After five years on the throne, King Li died without issue, and his kingdom was abolished.

古文：济北王志，吴、楚反时初亦与通谋，后坚守不发兵，故得不诛，徙王菑川。
现代文：济北王刘志，吴、楚谋反时，起初也曾与他们合谋，但后来坚守城池，没有出兵，因而未被处死，迁徙为蕾川王。
English: When Liu Zhi, Wu and Chu, the kings of Jibei, plotted a rebellion, he also conspired with them at first, but later he held fast to the city and did not send out troops. As a result, he was not executed and moved to become the king of Lechuan.

古文：元朔中，齐国绝。
现代文：汉武帝元朔年间，齐国绝后嗣，其属地归汉朝廷。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo, Qi became the sole heir to the throne, and its territory was transferred to the Han Dynasty.

古文：悼惠王后唯有二国：城阳、菑川。
现代文：齐悼惠王的后代还有城阳、菑川两国。
English: The descendants of Hui Wang, as well as the two countries of Chengyang and Beichuan, also paid tribute.

古文：菑川地比齐，武帝为悼惠王冢园在齐，乃割临菑东圜悼惠王冢园邑尽以予菑川，今奉祭祀。
现代文：菑川靠近齐国，汉武帝因悼惠王的墓冢园陵在齐地，就将临苗以束环绕悼惠王陵园的园邑全部给了菑川国，以让其按时供奉祭祀。
English: Lugu River is close to Qi Province, and Emperor Hanwu, because Hui Wang's tomb and mausoleum were in Qi, gave all the garden villages surrounding the tomb and mausoleum to Lugu River Province, so that they could offer sacrifices on time.

古文：志立三十五年薨，是为懿王。
现代文：刘志为王三十五年而死，谧号懿王。
English: Liu Zhi died for the king for thirty-five years, and was nicknamed the King of the Dragonflies.

古文：子靖王建嗣，二十年薨。
现代文：其子靖王刘建继位，二十年死去。
English: His son Jing Wang Liu Jian succeeded to the throne and died twenty years later.

古文：子顷王遗嗣，三十五年薨。
现代文：其子顷王刘遣继位，三十五年死去。
English: He was succeeded by his son, King Liu Qian, who died 35 years later.

古文：子思王终古嗣。
现代文：其子思王刘终古继位。
English: His son, Si Wang Liu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：五凤中，青州刺史奏终古使所爱奴与八子及诸御婢奸，终古或参与被席，或白昼使裸伏，犬马交接，终古亲临观。
现代文：漠宣帝五凤年问，青州刺史上奏宣帝，说刘终古让爱奴与其妾及侍候他的许多婢女通奸，自己或是与他们睡在一起，或是白天让他们赤身裸体，似禽兽交媾，终古亲自观看。
English: In the year of the five phoenixes, Mu Xuan Di, the most famous emperor in the history of Qingzhou, said that Liu Zenkong let his slave commit adultery with his concubine and the many maids who served him. He either slept with them, or let them be naked during the day, like animals, and watched them for a long time.

古文：产子，辄曰： 乱不可知，使去其子。 
现代文：生了孩子，就说： 乱而不知其父，将孩子弄死。 
English: And when she had brought forth her firstborn son, she said, I have sinned, for I knew not that I had fathered him.

古文：事下丞相、御史，奏： 终古位诸侯王，以今置八子，秩比六百石，所以广嗣重祖也。
现代文：宣帝将此事交丞相、御史大夫议处。丞相、御史大夫上奏，终古位为诸侯王，让他设置八子之号的姬妾，其俸秩比照六百石，目的是让他多生子嗣以尊敬祖宗。
English: Emperor Xuan submitted the matter to the deliberation office of the chancellor and the chief historian. The chancellor and the chief historian reported to the emperor, who was ultimately the prince, and asked him to set up a concubine with the title of the eighth son, whose salary was equal to 600 koku, with the aim of having more children to honor his ancestors.

古文：而终古禽兽行，乱君臣夫妇之别，悖逆人伦，请逮捕。 
现代文：而终古的行为如同禽兽，搞乱了君臣、夫妇的关系，违悖了人伦，请予以逮捕。
English: However, his behavior is like that of an animal. He has disrupted the relationship between monarchs, ministers, and couples, and violated human ethics. Please arrest him.

古文：有诏： 削四县。 
现代文：天子乃下韶书，削去他所辖的四个县。
English: The Son of Heaven is the next to be written off, and the four counties under his jurisdiction are eliminated.

古文：二十八年薨。
现代文：二十八年后死去。
English: He died twenty-eight years later.

古文：子考王尚嗣，五年薨。
现代文：其子考王刘尚继位，五年死去。
English: His son, King Khao Liu Shang, succeeded to the throne, but died five years later.

古文：子孝王横嗣，三十一年薨。
现代文：其子孝王刘横继位，三十一年死去。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Prince Xiaowang Liu, who died at the age of 31.

古文：子怀王交嗣，六年薨。
现代文：其子怀王刘交继位，六年死去。
English: His son, Huai Wang Liu Jia, succeeded to the throne, but died six years later.

古文：子永嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：其子刘永继位，到王莽时，封国绝灭。
English: His son Liu Yong succeeded to the throne, and when Wang Mang came to the throne, the state was abolished.

古文：赞曰：悼惠之王齐，最为大国。
现代文：赞曰：齐悼惠王的齐国，是诸侯国中最大的。
English: Zang said: "Qi Province, which mourns King Hui, is the largest among the provinces.

古文：以海内初定，子弟少，激秦孤立亡藩辅，故大封同姓，以填天下。
现代文：由于远初立国，天一平定，皇上子弟年少，有感于羞翅没有诸侯作为辅翼致使孤立而败，因而大封同姓子弟为诸侯王，以镇抚天下。
English: Since the country was founded at a very early time, the sky was leveled, and the emperor's children were young, they were isolated and defeated due to the fact that they did not have princes as auxiliary wings. Therefore, the daifu's children with the same surname were princes, and they ruled the world.

古文：时诸侯得自除御史大夫群卿以下众官，如汉朝，汉独为置丞相。
现代文：当时，诸侯可以自行拜授御史大夫以下的各级官吏，设官与汉朝相同，汉廷衹为其任命丞相。
English: At that time, the lords could themselves appoint officials at all levels below goshi daifu, and the appointment of officials was the same as in the Han Dynasty, with Han Tingyu appointing chancellors for them.

古文：自吴、楚诛后，稍夺诸侯权，左官附益阿党之法设。
现代文：平定吴、楚七国之乱后，诸侯的权力有所削弱。针对傅、相美化诸侯王、诸侯王有罪不举等行为，制定了《左官律》、《附益阿党之法》等法规。
English: After the suppression of the Seven Kingdoms of Wu and Chu, the power of the lords was weakened. In response to the actions of Fu and Soma beautifying the lords, and the lords not being held guilty, regulations such as the "Law of the Plasterer" and the "Law of the Accomplished Party" were formulated.

古文：其后诸侯唯得衣食租税，贫者或乘牛车。
现代文：自此以后，诸侯衹能得到衣食封邑租税收入，有的贫穷的衹能乘坐牛车。
English: Since then, the vassals of the lords have been able to obtain clothing and food from the tax revenue of the fiefs, and some poor vassals have been able to ride the ox cart.

