古文：屈突通，其先盖昌黎徒何人，后家长安。
现代文：屈突通，其祖先是昌黎徒何人，后来徙居长安。
English: Qu Jutong, whose ancestors were members of the Changli sect, later moved to Chang'an.

古文：仕隋为虎贲郎将。
现代文：隋时任职为虎贲郎将。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he served as the general of the Tiger Clan.

古文：文帝命覆陇西牧簿，得隐马二万匹，帝怒，收太仆卿慕容悉达、监牧官史千五百人，将悉殊死。
现代文：隋文帝命他复核陇西郡牧场簿籍，查出隐报的马二万多匹，文帝发怒，逮捕太仆卿慕容悉达及监牧官员一千五百人，将全数处决。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty ordered him to review the book of records of the ranches in Shaanxi County, and found more than 20,000 horses that had been reported as hidden. Emperor Wen became angry and arrested the eunuch Mu Rong Sida and 1,500 pastoral supervisors. All of them were to be executed.

古文：通曰： 人命至重，死不复生。
现代文：屈突通说 ：人命至重，死不复生。
English: "Human life is the most important thing, there is no coming back from death," said Qu Zhutong.

古文：陛下以至仁育四海，岂容以畜产一日而戮千五百士？ 
现代文：陛下以至仁化育四海，怎能因畜产之故，一天杀戮一千五百人呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, who has nurtured the four seas with the utmost kindness, how can you kill 1,500 people a day for the sake of animal husbandry?

古文：帝叱之，通进顿首曰： 臣愿身就戮，以延众死。 
现代文：文帝怒目喝斥，屈突通叩头进言说： 臣愿舍身就死，以代替众人死罪。 
English: Emperor Wen angrily rebuked him, and Qu Tsurong kowtowed and said: "If you are willing to give up your life, you can die in place of everyone else.

古文：帝寤，曰： 朕不明，乃至是。
现代文：文帝醒悟说 ：我办事不明，竟至于此。
English: Emperor Wen wakes up and says, "I don't know what to do, but how about this?"

古文：今当免悉达等，旌尔善言。 
现代文：现在可免悉达等人死罪，以旌表你的善言。 
English: Now spare Siddhartha and the others the death penalty as a token of your kind words.

古文：遂皆以减论。
现代文：于是全都减刑论处。
English: As a result, all sentences were reduced.

古文：擢左武卫将军。
现代文：其后升任左武卫将军。
English: He was later promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：莅官劲正，有犯法者，虽亲无所回纵。
现代文：为官正直奉公，遇有犯法者，虽亲朋好友无所纵舍。
English: Officials serve the public with integrity, and in the event of a violation of the law, although relatives and friends do not give up anything.

古文：其弟盖为长安令，亦以方严显。
现代文：其弟屈突盖任长安县令，也以方正严整而知名。
English: His younger brother, Qu Zhuge, was appointed as the county magistrate of Chang'an County. He was also known for his strictness.

古文：时为语曰： 宁食三斗艾，不见屈突盖；宁食三斗葱，不逢屈突通。 
现代文：时人为此编出谚语说 ：宁食三斗艾，不见屈突盖；宁食三斗葱，不逢屈突通。 
English: For this reason, people at the time made up a proverb saying: "It is better to eat three acorns than to have a protruding lid; it is better to eat three scallions than to have a protruding lid."

古文：炀帝即位，遣持诏召汉王谅。
现代文：隋炀帝即位时，派他持诏征召汉王杨谅。
English: When Emperor Sui and Qian ascended to the throne, they sent him with an imperial edict to conscript the Han King Yang Tong.

古文：先是，文帝与谅约，若玺书召，验视敕字加点，又与玉麟符合，则就道。
现代文：从前，文帝与杨谅约定，若用玺书召还，验视敕字帝加一点，又与玉麟符合，则就征返回。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen and Yang Peng agreed that if they were called back with the imperial rescript, and if the imperial rescript plus one point was found to be consistent with the imperial rescript, then they would be conscripted to return.

古文：及是，书无验，谅觉变，诘通，通占对无屈，竟得归长安。
现代文：到这时，发诏书而无验证，杨谅觉察情况有变，盘问屈突通，通回答无所屈服，最终得以返归长安。
English: At this time, the imperial edict was issued without verification, and Yang Peng sensed that the situation had changed. He was interrogated and answered without giving in, and was eventually able to return to Chang'an.

古文：大业中，与宇文述共破杨玄感，以功迁左骁卫大将军。
现代文：大业年间，与宇文述一道共破杨玄感，因军功迁任左骁卫将军。
English: During his great career, together with Yu Wenshu, he broke through the Yang Xuan sensibility and was transferred to General Zuo Wei due to his military service.

古文：秦、陇盗起，授关内讨捕大使。
现代文：秦陇一带盗贼起事之后，授职为关内讨捕大使。
English: After the rise of thieves in the Qinhuangdao area, he was appointed as the ambassador to investigate the arrest of Guanai.

古文：安定人刘迦论反，众十余万据雕阴。
现代文：安定县人刘迦论造反，聚众十多万人占据雕阴郡。
English: Liu Jia, a resident of Anding County, revolted and gathered more than 100,000 people to occupy Zheyin County.

古文：通发关中兵击之，次安定，初不与战，军中意其怯。
现代文：屈突通调发关中兵马进击。驻军安定县之后，起初不与贼寇交战，军中认为他胆怯。
English: After the troops were stationed in Anding County, he did not fight against the bandits at first, and the soldiers thought he was cowardly.

古文：通阳言旋师，而潜入上郡。
现代文：屈突通扬言撤军，而暗地潜入上郡。
English: Qu suddenly threatened to withdraw the troops, but secretly sneaked into Shang County.

古文：贼未之觉，引而南，去通七十里舍，分兵徇地。
现代文：贼寇没有察觉，进兵南犯，距屈突通七十里扎营，分兵巡略其地。
English: The bandits did not notice that the soldiers had entered the southern part of the country, camped seventy miles away from Qudutong, and divided the soldiers to patrol the area.

古文：通候其无备，夜简精甲袭破之，斩迦论并首级万余，筑京观于上郡南山，虏老弱数万口。
现代文：屈突通趁其不备，夜选精兵袭破其众，斩刘迦论等首级万余，筑起京观于上郡南山，俘获老弱数万人而还。
English: Qu Zhutong took advantage of their unpreparedness. At night, the elite soldiers of the Guzheng broke through the crowd, cut off more than 10,000 heads such as Liu Jia's, built the Beijing Outlook in the Nanshan of Shangguan County, captured tens of thousands of old and weak people and survived.

古文：后隋政益乱，盗贼多，士无斗志，诸将多覆。
现代文：其后隋政日益紊乱，盗贼多有，士无斗志，诸将往往覆军败亡。
English: After that, the Sui government became increasingly chaotic, with many thieves, no fighting spirit, and generals often overthrowing the army.

古文：通每向必持重，虽不大克，亦不败负。
现代文：屈突通所向必定持重而行，虽不大胜，也未战败过。
English: Ketsutsu-tsu is determined to go forward with a heavy heart. Although he hasn't won, he hasn't been defeated.

古文：帝南幸，使镇长安。
现代文：炀帝南巡江都，派他镇守长安。
English: Emperor Qian toured the southern part of Jiangdu and sent him to guard Chang'an.

古文：高祖起，代王遣通守河东，战久不下，高祖留兵围之，遂济河，破其将桑显和于饮马泉。
现代文：高祖起兵后，代王派遣屈突通防守河东。高祖数战不克，留兵围城，于是渡过黄河，攻破其部将桑显和于饮马泉。
English: After Gao Zu raised an army, the king sent Qu Jutong to defend the east of the river. Gao Zu lost several battles and besieged the city, so he crossed the Yellow River and defeated his generals, Sang Xian and Yu Binmaquan.

古文：通大惧，乃留鹰扬郎将尧君素守蒲，将自武关趋蓝田以援长安。
现代文：屈突通大惧，便留下鹰扬郎将尧君素防守河东，打算从武关前往蓝田以援救长安。
English: He was very afraid of Qu Jutong, so he left Ying Yang Lang to defend Hedong and planned to go from Wuguan to Lantian to rescue Chang'an.

古文：至潼关，阻刘文静兵不得进，相持月余。
现代文：到潼关时，受刘文静兵马阻拦，相持一月有余。
English: When he arrived at Shaoguan, he was blocked by Liu Wenzhing's soldiers and horses and held out for more than a month.

古文：通令显和夜袭文静，诘朝大战，显和纵兵破二壁，唯文静一壁独完，然数入壁，短兵接，文静中流矢，军垂败，显和以士疲，乃传餐食，文静因得分兵实二壁。
现代文：屈突通命令桑显和夜袭刘文静，天明大战，显和纵兵连破两座营垒，仅剩文静一座营垒独存，且兵马数次入垒，短兵相接，文静又被流矢所伤，唐军即将败亡，但桑显和因军士疲惫，传令做饭会食，刘文静因而趁机分兵以充实另外两座营垒。
English: Qu Jutong ordered Sang Hsien Ho to attack Liu Wenzhing at night. During the Battle of Tianming, Hsien Ho's column broke through two camps in a row, leaving only one camp for Wenzhing, and soldiers and horses entered the camp several times. Short soldiers joined, and Wenzhing was injured by a stray arrow. The Tang army was about to be defeated, but Sang Hsien Ho was tired and ordered to cook and eat, so Liu Wenzhing took the opportunity to divide the troops to enrich the other two camps.

古文：会游军数百骑自南山还，击其背，三壁兵大呼，奋而出，显和遂溃，尽得其众。
现代文：时逢游军数百骑自南山返还，袭击其背后，三座营垒之兵大声呼叫，奋力出击，桑显和兵马溃败而逃，尽数虏获其众。
English: At that time, when hundreds of cavalry from Nanshan returned and attacked behind him, the soldiers of the three camps shouted loudly and fought hard. Sangxian and the soldiers and horses were routed and fled, and they captured as many as they could.

古文：通势蹙，或说之降，曰： 吾蒙国厚恩，事二主，安可逃难？
现代文：屈突通势急，有人劝他归降，他说： 我受国家厚恩，历事二帝，怎可逃难？
English: Qu suddenly felt a sense of urgency. Someone advised him to surrender. He said, "I have been favored by the state, I have experienced two emperors, how can I escape?

古文：独有死报尔！ 
现代文：只能以死报答了！ 
English: I can only repay you with my death!

古文：每自摩其颈曰： 要当为国家受人一刀！ 
现代文：常抚摸自己的脖子说： 看来只好为国家受人一刀了！ 
English: He often stroked his neck and said: It looks like I have to be knifed for my country!

古文：其训勉士卒必流涕，故力虽穷，而人尚为之感奋。
现代文：他训勉士卒必定流泪感叹，所以虽处穷途末路，而部下仍然受他影响而不叛离。
English: His drill sergeant must have shed tears and sighed, so although he was at the end of his rope, his subordinates were still influenced by him and did not defect.

古文：帝遣其家僮往召，通趋斩之。
现代文：高祖派他的家僮往召，他立即下令斩决。
English: Gao Zu sent his emissary to summon him, and he immediately ordered a showdown.

古文：俄闻京师平，家尽没，乃留显和保潼关，率兵将如洛。
现代文：不久得知京师平定，家属全都陷没，便留桑显和镇守潼关，率领兵马前往洛阳。
English: Soon after learning that the Beijing division had been pacified and that all of his family members were trapped, he left Sang Hsien and the town guards at Shaoguan and led the soldiers and horses to Luoyang.

古文：既行，而显和来降。
现代文：既行之后，桑显和前来归降。
English: After that, Sang Hsien Ho came to surrender.

古文：文静遣窦琮、段志玄精骑追及于稠桑，通结阵拒之。
现代文：刘文静派遣窦琮、段志玄率精骑追击，在稠桑相遇，屈突通结阵抵御。
English: Liu Wenjing dispatched Dou Qi and Duan Zhixuan to pursue the attack on horseback, met in the thick mulberry, and resisted through the knot formation.

古文：琮纵其子寿往谕使降，通大呼曰： 昔与汝父子，今则仇也！ 
现代文：窦琮放其子屈突寿往谕使降，屈突通大叫道： 从前和你是父子，今天却是仇敌！ 
English: Dou Xuan sent his son Qu Tu Shou to ask for a surrender, and Qu Tu Tong shouted: Once you were father and son, but today you are enemies!

古文：命左右射之，显和呼其众曰： 京师陷，诸君皆家关西，何为复东？ 
现代文：命令左右射击。桑显和大呼其众说： 京师陷没，各位家属都在关西，为何要往东行呢？ 
English: Sang Hsien shouted to the crowd: "Kyong division is trapped, all your families are in Kansai, why do you want to go east?

古文：众皆舍兵。
现代文：部下全都放下兵器不战。
English: All his men laid down their weapons and left without a fight.

古文：通知不免，遂下马东南向，再拜号哭曰： 臣力屈兵败，不负陛下。 
现代文：屈突通知道逃脱不了，便下马朝东南方向叩头两次，并哭着说： 臣力尽兵败，对得起陛下。 
English: Knowing that he could not escape, Qu Xuntong dismounted his horse and bowed twice in the southeast direction, and said with tears: "I have done my best to defeat the enemy, and I am worthy of Your Majesty."

古文：遂被禽，送长安。
现代文：于是被擒获并送往长安。
English: He was caught and sent to Chang'an.

古文：帝劳曰： 何相见晚邪？ 
现代文：高祖宽慰他说： 怎么相见得这么晚？ 
English: Gao Zu was relieved and said, "How did we see each other so late?

古文：泣曰： 通不能尽人臣之节，故至此，为本朝羞。 
现代文：他哭着说： 屈突通不能殉人臣之节，故至此地步，成为本朝的羞辱。 
English: Crying, he said, "It is not possible for Qu Xu Tong to be martyred on the Day of the Martyrs, so it has come to this, and it has become a humiliation for this dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 忠臣也！ 
现代文：高祖说 ：忠臣啊！ 
English: Gaozu said, "Come on, loyal vassal!

古文：释之，授兵部尚书、蒋国公，为秦王行军元帅长史。
现代文：放了他，并授职兵部尚书，封为蒋国公，担任秦王行军元帅长史。
English: He was released and given the post of Hyobusho Shangshu, named Jiang Guogong, and served as Marshal Changshi of the Qin King's Marching Army.

古文：从平薛仁杲，时贼珍用山积，诸将争得之，通独无所取。
现代文：随同平定薛仁杲，当时缴获的珍宝器物堆积如山，诸将都争先恐后拿取其物，惟有屈突通一无所取。
English: Along with the pacification of Xue Renzhen, the treasures seized at that time piled up like a mountain, and all generals scrambled to get their things, but Qu Jutong did not get anything.

古文：帝闻，曰： 清以奉国，名定不虚。 
现代文：高祖闻知，说 ：清正以奉国，真是名不虚传。 
English: Gaozhu Wenzhi said, "The Qing Dynasty was famous for its devotion to the country.

古文：特赉金银六百两、彩千段。
现代文：特别赐予金银六百两、缎一千匹。
English: He was specially given six hundred taels of gold and silver and one thousand camels.

古文：判陕东道行台左仆射，从讨王世充。
现代文：不久担任陕东道左仆射，随同征讨王世充。
English: Soon he served as the Shaanxi host Zuofu shot, accompanied by the conquest of Wang Shicheng.

古文：时通二子在洛，帝曰： 今以东略属公，如二子何？ 
现代文：当时屈突通有两个儿子在洛阳，高祖说： 现在把东征之事交付你，两个儿子怎么办？ 
English: At that time, Qu Jutong had two sons in Luoyang. Gao Zu said: Now I entrust the Eastern Expedition to you. What about my two sons?

古文：通曰： 臣老矣，不足当重任。
现代文：屈突通说： 臣已老了，本不能承担重任。
English: Qu Jutong said, "The minister is old and cannot take on such a heavy responsibility.

古文：然畴昔陛下释俘累，加恩礼，以蒙更生，是时口与心誓，以死许国。
现代文：但从前陛下释放俘虏，加以恩礼，使臣再生，当时口与心都发誓，要以身许国。
English: But once upon a time, when His Majesty released a captive, bestowed a favor, and restored an envoy to life, he swore with his mouth and heart that he would serve his country with his body.

古文：今日之行，正当先驱，二儿死自其分，终不以私害义。 
现代文：今日之行，愿为先驱，两儿如果遇害，本是其命如此，我不会以私情妨碍公义。 
English: On today's trip, I would like to be a pioneer. If my two sons are killed, it is their own lives. I will not obstruct justice with my personal feelings.

古文：帝太息曰： 烈士徇节，吾今见之。 
现代文：高祖感叹道： 守义之士，竟至如此！ 
English: Gao Zu exclaimed, "A man of righteousness, how could he do such a thing!

古文：及窦建德来援贼，秦王分麾下半以属通，俾与齐王围洛。
现代文：到大军围攻洛阳时，窦建德援兵将至，太宗分拨部下的一半交付屈突通，命他与齐王李元吉一道围攻洛阳。
English: When the great army besieged Luoyang, Dou Jiande's reinforcements arrived. Taizong assigned half of his subordinates to Qu Jutong and ordered him to besiege Luoyang together with the king of Qi, Li Yuanji.

古文：世充平，论功第一，拜陕东道大行台右仆射，镇东都。
现代文：王世充被平定，屈突通战功为第一，不久就任陕东大行台右仆射，镇守东都。
English: Wang Shichong was subdued, Qu Jutong's war service was the first, and soon he took office as the right-hand man of the Eastern Shaanxi Province, and guarded the eastern capital.

古文：数岁，召为刑部尚书。
现代文：几年后，招还任刑部尚书。
English: A few years later, he was recruited back to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：自以不习文，固辞，改工部。
现代文：他自认为不熟悉法律条文，一再推辞，于是改任工部尚书。
English: He thought that he was not familiar with the provisions of the law and repeatedly declined, so he was reassigned to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：建成之变，复检校行台仆射，驰镇洛。
现代文：李建成事变过后，重任检校行台仆射，驰赴洛阳镇守。
English: After the Jiancheng Incident, Li Jiancheng was given the important task of inspecting the school, and he went to Luoyang to guard the town.

古文：贞观初，行台废，为洛州都督，进左光禄大夫。
现代文：贞观初年，行台撤销，任职洛州都督，晋爵左光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, the trip to Taiwan was revoked, he served as the governor of Lozhou, and he was promoted to the peerage as the doctor of Zaganglu.

古文：卒，年七十二，赠尚书左仆射，谥曰忠。
现代文：第二年去世，时年七十二岁，赠官尚书左仆射，谥号为忠。
English: He died the following year, at the age of seventy-two, with the posthumous title of Shangshu Zuopu Ya, and the posthumous title of Zhong.

古文：后诏配飨太宗庙廷。
现代文：后来下诏配飨太宗庙廷。
English: Later, the imperial edict was issued to the court of Emperor Taizong.

古文：永徽中，赠司空。
现代文：永徽年间，再赠司空官爵。
English: During the Yonghui era, he was awarded the official title of Sikuo.

古文：二子寿、诠，寿袭爵。
现代文：二子屈突寿、屈突诠。屈突寿承袭爵位。
English: His second son, Qu Tu Shou, inherited the peerage.

古文：太宗幸洛，思通忠节，故诠以少子拜果毅都尉，赐粟帛恤其家，终瀛州刺史。
现代文：太宗临幸洛阳，想念屈突通忠节，故任命其少子屈突诠为果毅都尉，赐予粮食丝帛以抚恤其家，后来官至瀛州刺史。
English: Emperor Taizong, who was in Luoyang at the time, missed Qu Jutong's loyal festival, so he appointed his young son Qu Jutong as the captain of Guoyi, and gave him grain silks to support his family. Later, the official went to Zhangzhou to make history.

古文：诠子仲翔，神龙中，复守瀛州。
现代文：诠子屈突仲翔，神龙年间，也任职为瀛州刺史。
English: The interpreter, Qu Jiu Zhong Xiang, also served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou during the reign of the divine dragon.

古文：初，桂州都督李弘节亦以清慎显。
现代文：起初，桂州都督李弘节也以清廉谨慎知名。
English: At the beginning, Li Hongjie, the governor of Guizhou, was also known for his cleanliness and prudence.

古文：既殁，其家卖珠。
现代文：去世后，其家出卖珍珠。
English: After his death, his family sold the pearl.

古文：太宗疑弘节实贪，欲追坐举者。
现代文：太宗怀疑李弘节实为贪官，想追坐推举者罪过。
English: Taizong suspected that Li Hongjie was indeed a corrupt official and wanted to pursue the culprit.

古文：魏徵曰： 陛下过矣！
现代文：魏征说 ：陛下错了！
English: Wei Zheng said: Your Majesty is wrong!

古文：且今号清白死不变者，屈突通、张道源。
现代文：当今号称清白至死不变者，惟有屈突通与张道源。
English: Today, the only ones who claim to be innocent until death are Qu Ducheng and Zhang Dogen.

古文：通二子来调，共一马；道源子不能自存。
现代文：屈突通二子应调前来，共骑一马，张道源之子不能谋生。
English: The two sons of Qu Jutong should be transferred to come and ride a horse together. The son of Zhang Doyuan cannot make a living.

古文：对曰： 夺槊难。 试使与齐王戏，少选，王三失槊，遂大愧服。
现代文：审查其清者不予抚恤，怀疑其贪者加罪于所举之人，这也是好善而不笃厚啊！ 太宗说 ：我没想这一点。 
English: It is also good, but not too generous, that those who scrutinize his purity do not grant him mercy, and those who suspect his greed add guilt to those who are cited. Taizong said, "I didn't think of that."

古文：张公谨，字弘慎，魏州繁水人。
现代文：于是置之不问。由于这个缘故，屈突通的清廉更为知名。张公谨字弘慎，是魏州繁水县人。
English: As a result, it was not questioned. For this reason, Qu Jutong's incorruptibility is more well-known. Zhang Gongji is called Hong Sheng, and he is from Shengshui County, Weizhou.

古文：为王世充洧州长史，与刺史崔枢挈城归天子，授检校邹州别驾，迁累右武候长史，未知名。
现代文：初任王世充洧州长史，与刺史崔枢一道举城归附朝廷，授职检校邹州别驾，历任右武侯长史，未为知名。
English: The first governor Wang Shizhong, together with Zhang Shizhong and Cui Zu, raised the city to be annexed to the imperial court, and the successive governors of the Right Wu and Long Shi were not well known.

古文：李勣、尉迟敬德数启秦王，乃引入府。
现代文：李责力、尉迟敬德多次启奏秦王，方才用为秦王府官员。
English: Li Zheili and his subordinate, Jingde, were used as officials of the Qin royal court after they repeatedly performed for the Qin king.

古文：王将讨隐、巢乱，使卜人占之，公谨自外至，投龟于地曰： 凡卜以定犹豫，决嫌疑。
现代文：秦王准备讨伐隐太子与巢王之乱，命卜筮占卦，公谨自外而入，投龟于地说 ：占卦是为了定犹豫，决嫌疑。
English: King Qin was preparing to fight against the rebellion of the Hidden Prince and the Nest King, and he wanted to know the secret of life. Gongyi came in from the outside and said, "To know the secret of life is to determine hesitation and resolve suspicion."

古文：今事无疑，何卜之为？
现代文：现在事已无疑何必占卜？
English: Now that there is no doubt, why do we need divination?

古文：卜而不吉，其可已乎？ 王曰： 善。 
现代文：如占卦结果不吉，其事能停止吗？ 秦王说： 对。 
English: If the result of the divination is not good, can the matter be stopped? Qin Wang said: Yes.

古文：隐太子死，其徒攻玄武门，锐甚，公谨独闭关拒之。
现代文：隐太子死后，其徒攻打玄武门，兵锋甚锐，公谨独自关上大门抵御。
English: After the death of Prince Yin, his followers attacked the Xuanwu Gate. The battle was fierce, and Gongyi closed the gate to defend himself.

古文：以功授左武候将军，封定远郡公，实封一千户。
现代文：因功授职左武侯将军，封为定远郡公，赐实封一千户。
English: For his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of General of the Left Wu County, the title of County Governor of Dingyuan County, and the title of Chief of a thousand households.

古文：贞观初，为代州都督，置屯田以省馈运。
现代文：贞观初年，出任代州都督，设置屯田以节省运粮之费。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan's reign, he was appointed acting governor of the state and set up military camps to save the cost of transporting grain.

古文：数言时政得失，太宗多所采纳。
现代文：多次上言时政得失，太宗多采用。
English: When it comes to political gains and losses, too much is said, too much is adopted.

古文：后副李靖经略突厥，条可取状于帝曰： 颉利纵欲肆凶，诛害善良，昵近小人，此主昏于上，可取一也。
现代文：后来作为李靖的副手规取突厥，条奏突厥可取之状于太宗说： 颉利放纵嗜欲肆其凶暴，诛害善良之士，亲近奸邪小人，君主昏庸于上，这是头一条可攻之处。
English: Later, as the deputy of Li Jing, he said to Taizong: "The first thing that can be attacked is the indulgence of greed, the indulgence of lust, the indulgence of violence, the abuse of good people, the intimacy of evil villains, and the arrogance of the monarch.

古文：别部同罗、仆骨、回纥、延陀之属，皆自立君长，图为反噬，此众叛于下，可取二也。
现代文：别部同罗、仆骨、回纥、薛延陀之徒，全都自立君长，谋图反攻，众叛于下，这是第二条可攻之处。
English: This is the second place that can be attacked. The other parts of Tongluo, the servants, the Uighurs, and the followers of Xueyantuo are all self-reliant monarchs, plotting a counterattack, and the people are rebelling.

古文：突利被疑，以轻骑免，拓设出讨，众败无余，欲谷丧师，无托足之地，此兵挫将败，可取三也。
现代文：突利被疑，以轻骑逃跑，拓设出兵征讨，众败不归，欲谷丧失军队，无立足之地，兵挫将败，这是第三条可攻之处。
English: Turi was suspected, fled with light cavalry, expanded the army to solicit soldiers, defeated, lost the army, lost the army, had no foothold, and the defeat would be defeated. This is the third attackable point.

古文：北方霜旱，禀粮乏绝，可取四也。
现代文：北方霜旱为灾，粮草缺乏，这是第四条可攻之处。
English: The frost and drought in the north is a disaster, and there is a lack of grain and grass. This is the fourth point that can be attacked.

古文：颉利疏突厥，亲诸胡，胡性翻覆，大军临之，内必生变，可取五也。
现代文：颉利疏远突厥族人，亲近诸胡，胡人性喜反叛，大军一到，必生内变，这是第五条可攻之处。
English: Xili is estranged from the Turkic people and is close to the Hu people. The Hu people like to rebel. As soon as the great army arrives, there will be internal changes. This is the fifth point that can be attacked.

古文：华人在北者甚众，比闻屯聚，保据山险，王师之出，当有应者，可取六也。 
现代文：华人在北边者很多，近来闻知自相屯聚，保据险阻，大军一出，必有响应之人，这是第六条可攻之处。 
English: There are a lot of Chinese in the north, and recently we have heard that they have been gathering in large numbers, that they are in a precarious position, and that as soon as a large army comes out, there are bound to be people who will respond. This is where Article 6 can be attacked.

古文：帝然所谋。
现代文：太宗赞同其议。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed with his suggestion.

古文：及破定襄，败颉利，玺诏慰劳，进封邹国公，改襄州都督，以惠政闻。
现代文：到攻破定襄，打败颉利后，下达诏书慰劳公谨，进封他为邹国公，改任襄州都督，在任期间有惠政上闻。
English: After conquering Dingxiang and defeating Qili, he issued an imperial edict to commend his hard work and diligence. He was given the title of Duke of Qin and appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou. During his term of office, he was known for his favorable policies.

古文：卒官下，年四十九。
现代文：去世时正在任上，时年四十九岁。
English: He died in office at the age of forty-nine.

古文：帝将出次哭之，有司奏： 日在辰，不可。 
现代文：太宗要出行临哭，有关官员说： 时日在辰，不可哭泣。 
English: When Taizong was about to cry, the officials said, "The time is now, don't cry."

古文：帝曰： 君臣犹父子也，情感于内，安有所避。 遂哭之。
现代文：太宗说 ：君臣如父子，情动于内，怎能避开辰日呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Monarchs and ministers, like father and son, are moved by their inner feelings. How can they avoid the Hour of the Sun?

古文：诏赠左骁卫大将军，谥曰襄。
现代文：照样哭泣。下诏赠予左骁卫大将军，谥为襄。
English: He was still crying. The following edict was presented to General Zuo Bingwei, and he was released.

古文：十三年，追改郯国公。
现代文：贞观十三年，追改郯国公。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to the post of governor of Shandong Province.

古文：永徽中，加赠荆州都督。
现代文：永徽年间，加赠荆州都督。
English: During the Yonghui era, he was given the title of Jingzhou governor.

古文：子大素，龙朔中，历东台舍人，兼修国史，著书百余篇，终怀州长史。
现代文：其子大素，龙朔年间历任东台舍人，兼修国史，著书百余篇，死于怀州长史任上。
English: His son Daxu, who served as governor of East Taiwan during the Long Shuo era, also studied national history and wrote more than 100 books. He died while serving as governor of Huai Province.

古文：次子大安，上元中，同中书门下三品。
现代文：次子大安，上元年间任同中书门下三品。
English: Daian, the second son, was appointed to the third grade of the same middle school during the first year of the year.

古文：章怀太子令与刘讷言等共注范晔《汉书》。
现代文：章怀太子命他与刘纳言等人共注范晔的《后汉书》。
English: Zhang Huai was ordered by the crown prince to jointly annotate Fan Qi's "Post-Han Shu" with Liu Nagan and others.

古文：太子废，故贬为普州刺史，终横州司马。
现代文：太子废后，被贬为普州刺史，死于横州司马任上。
English: After the abolition of the crown prince, he was relegated to the position of the governor of Puzhou and died in the position of the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：子悱，仕玄宗时为集贤院判官，诏以其家所著《魏书》、《说林》入院，缀修所阙，累擢知图书、括访异书使，进国子司业，以累免官。
现代文：其子张悱，玄宗时任职集贤院判官，下诏将其家所著《魏书》、《说林》收入院内，修补缺失，历任知图书、括访异书使、国子监司业，因受连累罢官。
English: His son Zhang Qian, who served as a judge of Shixian Academy when Xuanzong was in office, had his family's books "Weishu" and "Shalin" brought into the academy, and the defects were repaired. His successors, who were in charge of knowing books, supervising foreign books, and supervising the son of the state, were removed from office for being involved in the scandal.

古文：秦琼，字叔宝，以字显，齐州历城人。
现代文：秦琼字叔宝，以其字扬名，齐州历城人。
English: Qin Qiong Zi Shubao, famous for his character, is a resident of Licheng, Qizhou.

古文：始为隋将来护儿帐内，母丧，护儿遣使襚吊之。吏怪曰： 士卒死丧，将军未有所问，今独吊叔宝何也？ 
现代文：起初在隋朝将领来护儿帐下听差。他母亲去世，来护儿派专人送丧服吊唁，吏属不解地说： 士卒有丧事，将军您从不馈赠，如今为何独去叔宝家慰问？ 
English: At first, he served as an attendant under the account of the Sui Dynasty general who came to take care of his son. When his mother died, the general sent a special person to take care of the funeral clothes and condolences. The official said, puzzled: "A soldier has a funeral, you never give gifts to generals. Why did you go to Uncle Bao's house to offer condolences?

古文：护儿曰： 是子才而武，志节完整，岂久处卑贱邪？ 
现代文：来护儿说 ：他有才能而又勇猛，心志节操完美无缺，哪会久处卑贱的地位呢？ 
English: The nanny said, "He is talented and brave, and his determination and discipline are perfect. How can he stay in a lowly position for so long?"

古文：俄从通守张须陀击贼卢明月下邳，贼众十余万，须陀所统才十之一，坚壁水敢进，粮尽，欲引去。
现代文：不久，秦琼随通守张须陀去下邳攻打贼寇卢明月，贼军十余万人，张须陀所领兵马仅敌方的十分之一，坚守壁垒不敢进击，粮草耗尽，打算撤兵。
English: Not long after, Qin Qiong accompanied Zhang Suda, the general-in-charge of the garrison, to attack the bandits of Koulu Mingyue. There were more than 100,000 bandits, and Zhang Suda led only one-tenth of the enemy's soldiers and horses. They held fast to the barrier and did not dare to attack. The grain and grass were exhausted, and they planned to withdraw.

古文：须陀曰： 贼见兵却，必悉众追我，得锐士袭其营，且有利，谁为吾行者？ 
现代文：张须陀说 ：贼军见我退兵，势必倾巢追击，能有精锐士卒偷袭敌营，必将有利，有谁为我去偷袭？ 
English: Zhang Suta said, "When the bandits see me retreating, they are bound to pursue me. If they can get some elite soldiers to sneak into the enemy camp, it will be beneficial. Who will sneak in for me?"

古文：众莫对。
现代文：众人都不回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：惟叔宝与罗士信奋行。
现代文：惟有秦琼与罗士信奋然承命。
English: Only Qin Qiong and Luo Shixin bravely accepted the order.

古文：乃分劲兵千人伏莽间，须陀委营遁，明月悉兵追蹑。
现代文：于是分给一千精兵埋伏草木丛中，张须陀弃营佯逃，卢明月率全军紧追。
English: As a result, a thousand elite soldiers were assigned to ambush in the bushes, Zhang Suda abandoned the camp and fled, and Lu Mingyue led the whole army in hot pursuit.

古文：叔宝等驰叩贼营，门闭不得入，乃升楼拔贼旗帜，杀数十人，营中乱，即斩关纳外兵，纵火焚三十余屯。
现代文：秦琼等急攻贼营，堡门关闭无法入内，他便登上城楼拔掉贼军战旗，杀敌数十人，敌营大乱，他迅即破门放进城外伏兵，纵火烧掉贼军兵营三十余处。
English: Qin Qiong and others rushed to attack the bandits' camp. The castle gate was closed and could not be entered. He then climbed the tower to pull down the bandits' battle flag, killed dozens of enemies, and the enemy camp was in chaos. He quickly broke the door and put the ambush outside the city, and set fire to more than 30 bandits' barracks.

古文：明月奔还，须陀回击，大破之。
现代文：卢明月回军奔还，张须陀趁势反击，大败贼军。
English: Lu Mingyue's returning army ran back, Zhang Suda took advantage of the situation to counterattack, and defeated the rebel army.

古文：又与孙宣雅战海曲，先登。
现代文：又与孙宣雅在海曲交战，秦琼率先登城。
English: He also fought with Sun Xuanya in Haiqu, and Qin Qiong took the lead in entering the city.

古文：以前后功擢建节尉。
现代文：他因先后立功被提升为建节尉。
English: He was promoted to Jian Jie Li (建節尉) for his meritorious service.

古文：从须陀击李密荥阳。
现代文：秦琼随张须陀在荥阳攻打李密。
English: Qin Qiong followed Zhang Suda to attack Li Mi in Fenyang.

古文：须陀死，率残兵附裴仁基。
现代文：张须陀阵亡，秦琼率残部依附裴仁基。
English: Zhang Suda was killed in the battle, and the remnants of Qin Qiong supported Pei Renji.

古文：仁基降密，密得叔宝大喜，以为帐内骠骑，待之甚厚。
现代文：裴投降李密，李密得到秦琼极为高兴，委任他为帐内骠骑，对他很优待。
English: Bae surrenders to Li Mi, Li Mi is extremely happy to get Qin Qiong, appoints him as a member of the inner circle, and treats him very well.

古文：密与宇文化及战黎阳，中矢堕马，滨死，追兵至，独叔宝捍卫得免。
现代文：李密与宇文化及在黎阳作战，中箭落马，几乎丧生，敌军追到，仅秦琼一人抗击护卫而得救。
English: Li Mi fought with Yu Wenhua and Li Yang, was hit by an arrow and fell from his horse, almost lost his life, the enemy army chased him, and only Qin Qiong was able to resist the escort and was saved.

古文：后归王世充，署龙骧大将军。
现代文：后来秦琼归属王世充，暂任龙骧大将军。
English: Later, Qin Qiong was assigned to Wang Shichong, temporarily serving as the general of Longjing.

古文：与程咬金计曰： 世充多诈，数与下咒誓，乃巫妪，非拨乱主也。 
现代文：他与程咬金商量，说： 王世充为人多诈，屡屡对下属念叨禁制，是个巫婆，并非治平乱世的明主。 
English: He discussed the matter with Cheng Qijin and said: Wang Shijian is a deceitful person, and has repeatedly forbidden subordinates. She is a witch, and is not the master of the chaotic world.

古文：因约俱西走，策其马谢世充曰： 自顾不能奉事，请从此辞。 
现代文：于是相约西行，飞马辞别王世充说： 在下自省不能效力，请让我就此辞行。 
English: So they made an appointment to go west, and Wang Shichong said, "Self-examination cannot be effective in the future, so please let me resign."

古文：贼不敢逼，于是来降。
现代文：贼军不敢迫近，秦琼从此归顺李渊。
English: The bandits did not dare to approach, and Qin Qiong surrendered to Li Yuan.

古文：高祖俾事秦王府，王尤奖礼。
现代文：高祖李渊派他供职秦王府。秦王李世民对他特别崇敬礼遇。
English: The great ancestor Li Yuan sent him to serve in the Qin royal court. The Qin king Li Shimin treated him with special reverence and courtesy.

古文：从镇长春宫，拜马军总管。
现代文：他随秦王镇守长春宫，授官马军总管。
English: He followed Qin Wang as the town guard of Changchun Palace and was appointed as the head of the horse army.

古文：战美良川，破尉迟敬德，功多，帝赐以黄金瓶，劳曰： 卿不恤妻子而来归我，且又立功，使朕肉可食，当割以啖尔，况子女玉帛乎！ 
现代文：美良川一战，打败尉迟敬德，立大功，高祖赏赐他黄金瓶，慰劳他说： 卿不顾妻室儿女来归附我，今又立功，假如我的肉可食用，定当割下给你吃，何况子女玉帛这类身外之物呢？ 
English: In the First Battle of the Mila River, after defeating the petty officer Jingde, Gao Zu rewarded him with a golden bottle, consoling him and saying, "Sir, you did not care about your wife, children and family when you came to join me, and now you are doing a great service. If my meat is edible, you should cut it off and eat it. What is more, what about my children's jewelry and other belongings?

古文：寻授秦王右三统军，走宋金刚于介休，拜上柱国。
现代文：不久授职秦王右三统军，他在介休打跑了宋金刚，授衔上柱国。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the Qin King's Right Third United Army. He defeated Song King Kong at the Battle of Jieju and was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo.

古文：从讨世充、建德、黑闼三盗，未尝不身先锋鏖阵，前无坚对。
现代文：随秦王讨伐王世充、窦建德、刘黑闼，他没有一次不率先冲锋鏖战，前无强敌。
English: As King Qin fought against Wang Shichong, Dou Jiande, and Liu Heyao, he did not once fail to lead the charge into battle. There was no strong enemy in front of him.

古文：积赐金帛以千万计，进封翼国公。
现代文：累积受赏的金银布匹数以千万计，晋封为翼国公。
English: He was awarded tens of millions of gold, silver, and cloth, and was promoted to the title of Tsubasa no Kuni.

古文：每敌有骁将锐士震耀出入以夸众者，秦王辄命叔宝往取之，跃马挺枪刺于万众中，莫不如志，以是颇自负。
现代文：每逢敌军有骁将精兵出入人前大肆炫耀扬威，秦王就派秦琼前去攻取。他跃马挺枪进击于万众之中，无不遂愿，因此很是自负。
English: Whenever the enemy army had the gall to parade its elite soldiers in front of the people, the King of Qin would send Qin Qiong to attack them. He would charge into the crowd on horseback with a drawn gun, fulfilling his every wish, so he was very proud.

古文：及平隐、巢，功拜左武卫大将军，实封七百户。
现代文：及至平定隐、巢二地，论功授官左武卫大将军，封给实纳贡赋的食邑七百户。
English: As far as Pingdingyin and Jixi, the seven hundred households in the food villages that were given the actual tribute were assigned to General Zuo Wei, the official of the commendation of merit.

古文：后稍移疾，尝曰： 吾少长戎马间，历二百余战，数重创，出血且数斛，安得不病乎？ 
现代文：此后，秦琼渐渐称病告老，曾说 ：我年轻时成长在戎马生涯中，经历二百余战，多次身受重伤，流血将近数斛，哪能不病呢？ 
English: After that, Qin Qiong gradually became ill and died. She once said: "When I was young, I grew up in a military career, experienced more than 200 battles, suffered serious injuries many times, and bled nearly several times. How could I not get sick?

古文：卒，赠徐州都督，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：死后赠封徐州都督，陪葬于昭陵。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Xuzhou governor and was buried in the Zhaolin Mausoleum.

古文：太宗诏有司琢石为人马立墓前，以旌战功。
现代文：太宗李世民诏令官署雕塑石人石马立在他的墓前，以表彰他的战功。
English: Emperor Taizong Li Shimin ordered the government to erect a statue of a stone man and a stone horse in front of his tomb in recognition of his war service.

古文：贞观十三年，改封胡国公。
现代文：贞观十三年，改封他为胡国公。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, he was renamed Hu Guogong.

古文：后四年，诏司徒、赵国公无忌，司空、河间王孝恭，司空、莱国公如晦，司空、太子太师、郑国公徵，司空、梁国公玄龄，开府仪同三司、鄂国公敬德，特进、卫国公靖，特进、宋国公瑀，辅国大将军、褒国公志玄，辅国大将军、夔国公弘基，尚书左仆射、蒋国公通，陕东道行台右仆射、郧国公开山，荆州都督、谯国公绍，荆州都督、邳国公顺德，洛州都督、郧国公亮，吏部尚书、陈国公君集，左骁卫大将玖恽郯国公公谨，左领嵕唵蠼鵩⒙鎷冢癫可惺椤⒂佬丝す滥希Р可惺椤⒂骞幔Р可惺椤④旃螅可惺椤⒂⒐珓蓿⑹灞Γ⑼夹瘟柩谈蟆８咦谟阑樟辏彩怪录烂纪夹瘟柩谈笳叻财呷耍纭⑹苛、志玄、弘基、世南、叔宝，皆始终著名者也。
现代文：此后四年，朝廷诏令将司徒、赵国公长孙无忌，司空、河间王李孝恭，司空、莱国公杜如晦，司空、太子太师郑国公魏征，司空、梁国公房玄龄，开府仪同三司、鄂国公尉迟敬德，特进、卫国公李靖，特进、宋国公萧蠫，辅国大将军、褒国公段志玄，辅国大将军、夔国公刘弘基，尚书左仆射、蒋国公屈突通，陕东道行台右仆射、郧国公殷开山，荆州都督、郧国公张亮，吏部尚书、陈国公侯君集，左骁卫大将军、郯国公张公谨，左领军大将军、卢国公程知节，礼部尚书、永兴郡公虞世南，户部尚书、渝国公刘政会，户部尚书、莒国公唐俭，兵部尚书、英国公李责力以及秦琼，一并绘像在凌烟阁上。高宗永徽六年，派使臣致祭礼、绘像在凌烟阁的名臣共七人：魏征、高士廉、萧蠫、段志玄、刘弘基、虞世南、秦琼，都是始终著名的人物。
English: In the following four years, the imperial court issued the following orders: Sito, Zhao Guogong, Sun Mugu, Siku, King of Kawama, Li Xiaogong, Siku, Laigong, Du Rugao, Siku, Zheng Guogong, Wei Zheng, Siku, Liang Guogong, Xuan Ling, Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, H Guogong, Chi Jing De, Tejin, Wei Guogong, Li Jing, Tejin, Song Guogong, Xiao Xi, Fu Guogong, Bo Guogong, Dan Zhixuan, Fu Guogong, Zheng Guogong, Liu Hongji

古文：唐俭，字茂约，并州晋阳人。
现代文：唐俭字茂约，是并州晋阳县人。
English: Tang Jian, surnamed Mao, was from Jinyang County, Henan Province.

古文：祖邕，北齐尚书左仆射。
现代文：祖父唐邕，任北齐尚书左仆射。
English: His grandfather, Tang Xuan, was the left-hand man of the Northern Qi Emperor.

古文：父鉴，隋戎州刺史；与高祖善，尝偕典军卫，故俭雅与秦王游，同在太原。
现代文：父亲唐鉴，出任隋戎州刺史，与高祖相善，曾同掌禁卫。因此唐俭素与秦王交游，同在太原。
English: His father, Tang Jian, served as the prefect of Sui and Wenzhou, and was good friends with Gao Zu. They were both guards at the same time. Therefore, Tang Jiansu traveled with Qin Wang and was in Taiyuan.

古文：俭爽迈少绳检，然事亲以孝闻。
现代文：唐俭爽直豪迈，不循规矩，但侍奉亲人以孝闻名。
English: Tang Jian is straightforward and courageous, does not follow the rules, but is known for serving relatives with filial piety.

古文：见隋政浸乱，阴说秦王建大计。
现代文：见隋朝政局渐乱，暗地劝说秦王建立大计。
English: Seeing the Sui Dynasty's political situation gradually become chaotic, he secretly persuaded King Qin to establish a grand plan.

古文：高祖尝召访之，俭曰： 公日角龙庭，姓协图谶，系天下望久矣。
现代文：高祖曾招访过他，唐俭说： 您长相有日角龙廷，姓氏又合乎图谶，久系天下人望。
English: Gao Zu once invited him for a visit, and Tang Jian said, "Your appearance is like that of a Japanese dragon, and your surname is like that of a dragon. You have long been popular all over the world.

古文：若外啸豪杰，北招戎狄，右收燕、赵，济河而南，以据秦、雍，汤、武之业也。 
现代文：如果外招豪杰，北连戎狄，右收燕、赵，渡河南下，占据秦、雍之地，这就是汤、武的大业了。 
English: If foreign heroes are recruited, Yong Di will be recruited in the north, Yan and Zhao will be recruited in the right, and they will go to the south of the river to occupy the land of Qin and Yong. This is the great cause of Tang and Wu.

古文：高祖曰： 汤、武之事岂可几？
现代文：高祖说： 汤、武之事，岂可希求？
English: Gao Zu said, "Should we ask for soup or martial arts?"

古文：然丧乱方剡，私当图存，公欲拯溺者，吾方为公思之。 
现代文：但天下正乱，言私应当图谋自全，言公则应拯救天下百姓，我将为您考虑此事。 
English: But the world is in turmoil. I will consider this matter for you. I believe that the private sector should strive for self-improvement, while the public sector should save the people of the world.

古文：及大将军府开，授记室参军、渭北道元帅司马。
现代文：到大将军府开建时，授职为记室参军、渭北道元帅司马。
English: When the construction of the General Staff Headquarters began, Sima, the marshal of North Gyeongsang Province, joined the army as a recorder.

古文：从定京师，为相国府记室，晋昌郡公。
现代文：随从平定京师，任职相国府记室，封为晋昌郡公。
English: He followed the Beijing Division of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, served as the secretary of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and was appointed as the governor of Jinchang County.

古文：武德初，进内史舍人，迁中书侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：武德初年，进职为内史舍人，后迁任中书侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Wudeh, he was promoted to the position of Naishi-shonin, and later he was transferred to the position of Chusho-sajiro (chamberlain) and Sanki-no-jo (regular attendant).

古文：吕崇茂以夏县反，与刘武周连和，诏永安王孝基、独孤怀恩，于筠率兵致讨，俭以使适至军。
现代文：吕崇茂占据夏县造反，与刘武周连兵，下诏永安王孝基、独孤怀恩、于筠率兵进讨，唐俭因出使到达军中。
English: Lv Chongmao led the rebellion in Xia County, and together with Liu Wu and Zhou Lianhe, Yongan Wang, Xiaoji, Du Guo Huai'en, and Yu Yao led the troops into the field, and Tang Jian was sent to the middle of the army.

古文：会孝基等为武周所虏，俭亦见禽。
现代文：恰逢孝基等人被武周擒获，唐俭也被抓。
English: At the same time, Xiaoji and others were captured by Wu Zhou, and Tang Jian was also arrested.

古文：始，怀恩屯蒲州，阴与部将元君实谋反，会俱在贼中，君实私语俭曰： 独孤尚书将举兵图大事，犹豫不发，故及此。
现代文：起初，怀恩屯驻蒲州，暗地与部将元君实谋反，此时一起陷没入贼。君实私下对唐俭说 ：独孤尚书准备起兵图谋大事，犹豫不发，故逢此难。
English: At first, Wynn was stationed in Puzhou, secretly plotting a rebellion with his subordinate Geng Junshi, and at this time they fell into a trap together. Junshi said to Tang Jian in private: "You are the only one who is ready to raise an army and plot big things, and you are hesitant to do so, which is why you are in this predicament."

古文：所谓当断不断而受乱者。 
现代文：这就是古人说的 当断不断、反受其乱 了。 
English: This is what the ancients said about the incessant need for judgment.

古文：俄而怀恩脱归，诏复守蒲。
现代文：不久怀恩逃归朝廷，下诏仍守蒲州。
English: Soon after, Wine fled back to the imperial court, but remained in Puzhou.

古文：君实曰： 独孤拔难归，再戍河上，宁其王者不死乎？ 
现代文：君实说 ：独孤脱难得归，仍旧戍守河东郡，真是王者不死啊！ 
English: Junshi said, "It's hard to return alone, I still hold on to Hedong County, it's true that the king never dies!"

古文：俭恐必乱，密遣刘世让归白发其谋。
现代文：唐俭怕怀恩作乱，密令刘世让归朝告发其谋。
English: Tang Jian was afraid that Wai Yan would make trouble, so he secretly ordered Liu Shijang to return to the court and denounce his plot.

古文：会高祖幸蒲津，舟及中流而世让至，帝惊，曰： 岂非天也！ 
现代文：恰遇高祖驾临蒲津，船到中流而世让赶到，高祖大惊说： 岂非天命佑护啊！ 
English: When Gao Zu happened to arrive in Putuo, the ship was in the middle of the stream and the world was in a hurry to get there. Gao Zu was shocked and said, "Isn't it the providence of heaven!

古文：命趋还舟，捕反者，怀恩自杀，余党皆诛。
现代文：下令返回西岸，收捕谋反之徒，怀恩自杀，余党全被诛杀。
English: The order was given to return to the West Bank and arrest the conspirators. Wine committed suicide and the rest of the party was killed.

古文：俄而武周败，亡入突厥。
现代文：不久武周战败，逃往突厥。
English: Soon after, Wu Zhou was defeated and fled to Turkey.

古文：俭封府库、籍兵甲以待秦王。
现代文：唐俭封存府库财物、登记兵器铠甲，以等待秦王接收。
English: Tang Jian sealed the property of the prefectural treasury and the registered weapons and armor to wait for the Qin King to receive them.

古文：帝嘉俭身幽辱而不忘朝廷，诏复旧官，仍为并州道安抚大使，许以便宜。
现代文：高祖嘉奖唐俭身受幽禁折辱而不忘朝廷，下诏恢复原职，仍任并州道安抚大使，允许他权宜行事。
English: Gao Zu commended Tang Jian for not forgetting the imperial court even though he was banned and humiliated, and ordered him to resume his original post. He was still appointed as the ambassador of pacification of Shandong Province, allowing him to act in an expedient manner.

古文：尽簿怀恩赀产赐俭。
现代文：并将怀恩的家产全都赐予唐俭。
English: and gave all of Wynn's family property to Tang Jian.

古文：还为礼部尚书、天策府长史、检校黄门侍郎、莒国公。
现代文：还京后授职礼部尚书、天策府长史、检校黄门侍郎，封为莒国公。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was appointed to the post of ceremonial secretary, chief historian of Tianchao Prefecture, and attendant of the Huangmen inspection school, and was given the title of prince of Shandong Province.

古文：仍为遂州都督，食绵州六百户。
现代文：仍旧任职为遂州都督，食绵州实封六百户。
English: He still serves as the governor of Suizhou, and 600 households in Mianzhou have been sealed.

古文：贞观初，使突厥还，太宗谓俭曰： 卿观颉利可取乎？ 
现代文：贞观初年，出使突厥返回，太宗对唐俭说 ：您看颉利可以攻取吗？ 
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, when the Turks returned from their mission, Emperor Taizong said to Tang Jian, "Do you think you can capture Ganli?

古文：对曰： 衔国威灵，庶有成功。 
现代文：唐俭回答说 ：依仗国家威灵，其事可望成功。 
English: Tang Jian replied: Relying on the will of the state, the matter can be expected to succeed.

古文：四年，驰传往诱使归款，颉利许之，兵懈弛，李靖因袭破之，俭脱身还。
现代文：贞观四年，乘驿车驰往突厥诱使他们归附，颉利表示同意，因而兵众弛懈，李靖乘势袭破其众，唐俭脱身返回。
English: In four years, Zhenguan took a carriage to the Turks to entice them to join the Tang Dynasty. Geli agreed, and the soldiers relaxed. Li Jing took advantage of the situation to break through the crowd, and Tang Jian escaped and returned.

古文：岁余，为民部尚书。
现代文：一年后，就任民部尚书。
English: A year later, he was appointed to the Ministry of People's Affairs.

古文：从猎洛阳苑，群豕突出于林，帝射四发，辄殪四豕。
现代文：随从太宗在洛阳苑中射猎，一群野猪从林中冲出，太宗射出四支箭，杀死四只野猪。
English: A group of wild boars rushed out of the forest as Taizong was shooting in Luoyang Garden. Taizong shot four arrows and killed four wild boars.

古文：一豕跃及镫，俭投马搏之。帝拔剑断豕，顾笑曰： 天策长史不见上将击贼邪，何惧之甚？ 
现代文：有只野猪跃起触及马镫，唐俭下马搏击，太宗拔剑斩断野猪，回头笑着说： 天策长史没见过上将杀贼吧，为何这样害怕？ 
English: A wild boar jumped up and touched the stallion. Tang Jian dismounted and fought with the boar. Taizong drew his sword and cut off the boar. He looked back and smiled and said, "Tian Zhe Chang Shi has never seen an admiral kill a thief. Why are you so afraid?"

古文：对曰： 汉祖以马上得之，不以马上治之。
现代文：唐俭回说 ：汉高祖在马上得天下，而不在马上治天下。
English: Tang Jian replied: Han Gao Zu immediately won the world, but did not immediately rule the world.

古文：陛下神武定四方，岂复快心于一兽？ 
现代文：陛下以神武平定四海，怎能再逞雄心于一头野兽呢？ 
English: Your majesty conquered the four seas with martial arts, how can you be so ambitious with a beast?

古文：帝为罢猎。
现代文：太宗为此而罢猎。
English: Taizong went on a hunt for it.

古文：诏其子善识尚豫章公主。
现代文：下诏命其子善识娶豫章公主为妻。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering his son, Zenshong, to marry Princess Yuzhang.

古文：悸事，与宾客纵酒为乐。
现代文：唐俭居官不留心事务，常与宾客纵酒为乐。
English: Tang frugal officials did not pay attention to affairs, and often enjoyed drinking with guests.

古文：坐小法，贬光禄大夫。
现代文：曾因犯小法贬授光禄大夫。
English: He was once demoted from doctor to doctor for minor offenses.

古文：永徽初，致仕，加特进。
现代文：永徽初年离休，加爵为特进。
English: Yonghui retired in the first year, and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：节度使杨守亮表为判官，迁副使，终阆、壁二州刺史。
现代文：显庆元年去世，时年七十八岁。赠予开府仪同三司、并州都督，陪葬于昭陵，谥为襄。
English: Hsien Ching died in the first year of the year, at the age of seventy-eight. He was presented with the Kaifu Rite and the three offices, as well as the prefectural governorship, and was buried in the Zhaoling Mausoleum, together with his wife.

古文：段志玄，齐州临淄人。
现代文：少子唐观，任职为河西县令，最为知名。段志玄是齐州临淄县人。
English: The youngest son, Tang Guan, served as the governor of Hexi County, and is the best known. Duan Zhixuan was born in Linyi County, Qi Province.

古文：父偃师，仕隋为太原司法书佐。
现代文：父亲段偃师，仕隋任太原郡司法书佐。
English: His father, Duan Junshi, was appointed as the assistant of the judicial secretary of Taiyuan County.

古文：从义师，官至郢州刺史。
现代文：跟随高祖起兵，任官至郢州刺史。
English: He followed Gao Zu to raise an army and was appointed as an official to Zhangzhou.

古文：志玄姿质伟岸，少无赖，数犯法。
现代文：志玄姿质魁武，少时不务正业，多次触犯法令。
English: Shigen is a martial artist, but when he was young, he did not have a proper job, and he repeatedly violated the law.

古文：大业末，从父客太原，以票果，诸恶少年畏之，为秦王所识。
现代文：大业末年，随父客居太原，因剽勇果决，为群恶少年畏服，受到秦王赏识。
English: At the end of his career, he stayed in Taiyuan with his father, and was praised by the King of Qin for his bravery and determination.

古文：高祖兴，以千人从，授右领大都督府军头。
现代文：高祖起兵时，率千余人随从，授职右领大都督府军头。
English: When Gao Zu raised an army, he led more than a thousand people to follow him, and was appointed the right leader and the military commander of the Grand Duchy.

古文：下霍邑、绛郡，攻永丰仓，椎锋最。
现代文：随同攻下霍邑、绛郡，进攻永丰仓，都做先锋前驱。
English: Along with the capture of Ho-eup, Ye County, and the attack on Yongfeng Cang, they all became pioneers.

古文：历左光禄大夫。
现代文：历任左光禄大夫。
English: Successive Sakoroku doctors.

古文：从刘文静拒屈突通于潼关。
现代文：跟从刘文静抵御屈突通于潼关。
English: Liu Wenzhing's followers resisted the attack and passed through Shaoguan.

古文：文静为桑显和所袭，军且溃，志玄率壮骑驰贼，杀十余人，中流矢，忍不言，突击自如，贼众乱，军乘之，唐兵复振。
现代文：文静遭桑显和袭击，其军即将溃败，志玄率领精骑驰赴敌阵，连杀十余人，身中流矢，忍痛不言，横击自如，敌众混乱，大军乘势进击，唐兵气势重振。
English: Wenzhong was attacked by Sangxian and his army was about to be routed. Zhixuan led the elite cavalry and rode into the enemy lines, killing more than ten people in quick succession. His body was strewn with arrows, he did not say a word in pain, he was free to strike from the side, the enemy was in disarray, the large army was advancing with momentum, and the Tang soldiers were reinvigorated.

古文：通败走，与诸将蹑获于稠桑，以多，授乐游府车骑将军。
现代文：屈突通败走，志玄与诸将跟踪追获于稠桑，因功多，授职为乐游府车骑将军。
English: Qu Jutong lost his way, and Shigen and the generals tracked and caught him in the thick mulberry trees. Because of his great achievement, he was awarded the post of Le Youfu Chariot and Cavalry General.

古文：从讨王世充，深入，马跌，为贼禽。
现代文：随同征讨王世充，深入敌阵，因马跌倒被敌擒获。
English: Accompanied by Wang Shichong, he went deep into the enemy lines and was captured by the enemy when his horse fell.

古文：两骑夹持其髻，将度洛，志玄忽腾而上，二人者俱堕，于是夺其马驰归，尾骑数百不敢近。
现代文：由两贼骑夹持其发髻，将渡洛河时，志玄突然踊身腾起，两骑全都落马，志玄夺其马奔回，追骑数百名不敢逼近。
English: When he was about to cross the Luo River with his hairpin held by two thieves on horseback, Shigen suddenly jumped to his feet. Both riders fell off their horses, and Shigen ran back to get his horse. The hundreds of riders who were chasing him did not dare to approach.

古文：破窦建德，平东都，迁秦王府右二护军。
现代文：攻破窦建德、平定东都后，迁任秦王府右二护军。
English: After defeating Dou Jiande and pacifying Dongdu, he was transferred to the second right guard of Qinwangfu.

古文：隐太子尝以金帛诱之，拒不纳。
现代文：隐太子曾用金帛引诱他，而他拒绝不受。
English: The Hidden Prince had tempted him with a golden scepter, but he refused to be enticed.

古文：秦王即位，累迁左骁卫大将军，封樊国公，实封九百户。
现代文：秦王即位后，历任左骁卫大将军，封为樊国公，享受实封九百户。
English: After the enthronement of King Qin, the successive Zuo Wei generals were given the title of Duke of Xing, and enjoyed the title of nine hundred households.

古文：诏率兵至青海夺吐谷浑牧马，逗留，免。
现代文：下诏派他率兵到青海夺取吐谷浑牧马，因逗留不进，被免官。
English: The emperor sent him and his soldiers to Qinghai to capture the horses of the Tuyun herdsmen, but he was dismissed because he did not enter the capital.

古文：未几复职。
现代文：不久又复职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：文德皇后之葬，与宇文士及勒兵卫章武门，太宗夜遣使至二将军所，士及披户内使，志玄拒曰： 军门不夜开。 
现代文：文德皇后下葬时，志玄与宇文士及领兵守卫章武门。太宗夜间派遣使者到两将军处，士及开门接纳使者，志玄拒绝说 ：军门不可夜开。 
English: When Empress Wende was buried, Shigen, Uwenshi and the leader of the army guarded the Shobu gate. Taizong sent an envoy to the two generals at night. The two generals opened the door to receive the envoy, but Shigen refused, saying, "The military gate must not be opened at night."

古文：使者示手诏，志玄曰： 夜不能辨。 
现代文：使者拿出手诏，志玄说： 夜里不能分辨真假。 
English: The messenger took out his handkerchief, and Shigen said, "At night, you can't tell what's real and what's fake.

古文：不纳。
现代文：不予接纳。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：比曙，帝叹曰： 真将军，周亚夫何以加！ 
现代文：天亮后，太宗感叹道： 这才是真将军，周亚夫怎能与他相比？ 
English: After dawn, Taizong exclaimed: This is a true general. How can Zhou Yafu be compared to him?

古文：改封褒国公，历镇军大将军。
现代文：后来改封为褒国公，历任镇军大将军。
English: Later, he changed his title to Bao Guogong, and successively served as the general of the town army.

古文：贞观十六年疾，帝临视，泣顾曰： 当与卿子五品官。 
现代文：贞观十六年生病，太宗临视，哭着说 ：应给您的儿子五品官衔。 
English: When Zhenguan fell ill at the age of sixteen, Emperor Taizong saw her and wept and said, "Your son should be given a five-rank official title."

古文：顿首谢，请与母弟，乃拜志感左卫郎将。
现代文：志玄叩头道谢，并请求给予同母兄弟，太宗便拜志感为左卫郎将。
English: Shigen bowed his head in thanks and asked to be given a brother of the same mother. Taizong bowed his head in thanks and became the left guard.

古文：及卒，帝哭之恸。
现代文：到去世时，太宗哭得很伤心。
English: By the time of his death, Taizong was crying inconsolably.

古文：赠辅国大将军、扬州都督，陪葬昭陵，谥曰壮肃。
现代文：赠予辅国大将军、扬州都督，陪葬于昭陵，谥为壮肃。
English: It was given to the Vice-General of the State and Yangzhou Governor, and was buried with him in the Zhaolin Mausoleum.

