古文：有始者，有未始有有始者，有未始有夫未始有有始者。
现代文：宇宙有一个开始的时候，有一个未曾 开始 的时候，更有一个尚未有那 未曾开始 的时候。
English: There was a time when the universe had a beginning, a time when it had not yet begun, and a time when it had not yet begun.

古文：有有者，有无者，有未始有有无者，有未始有夫未始有有无者。
现代文：宇宙存在着 有 ，也存在着 无 ，还有未曾产生 有 、 无 的东西，更有尚未有那 未曾产生 有 、 无  的东西。
English: In the universe, there are things that exist, and there are things that do not exist, and there are things that do not exist, and there are things that do not exist, and there are things that do not exist.

古文：所谓有始者：繁愤未发，萌兆牙，未有形埒垠堮，无无蝡蝡，将欲生兴，而未成物类，有未始有有始者：天气始下，地气始上，阴阳错合，相与优游，竞畅于宇宙之间，被德含和，缤纷茏苁，欲与物接而未成兆朕。
现代文：所谓 有始者 ，是指生命积聚盈满而还未迸发开来，如同新芽萌发还没有清晰形体，蠢蠢蠕动，将要生成而未成为物类。所谓 有未始有有始者 ，是指天空的阳气开始下降，地上的阴气开始上升，阴阳二气交错混合，互相流动在宇宙间飘逸游畅，承受着德泽的滋润和蕴育着协和之气，杂糅聚集，将要生成万物但还未出现征兆。
English: The so-called "beginner" refers to the life that has accumulated and has not yet sprouted, just as the sprout has not yet formed a clear shape, but has been creeping, and will be generated without becoming a thing. The so-called "beginner" refers to the yang of the sky beginning to fall, the yin of the earth beginning to rise, and the yin and yang of the two intertwined, flowing smoothly in the universe, bearing the nourishment of virtue and containing the harmony of the air, and the clustering of miscellaneous things, which will generate all things but have not yet appeared.

古文：有未始有夫未始有有始者：天含和而未降，地怀气而未扬，虚无寂寞，萧条霄雿，无有仿佛气遂，而大通冥冥者也。
现代文：所谓 有未始有夫未始有有始者 ，是指天蕴含的阳气还没有下降，地怀藏的阴气还没有上扬，天地间虚无寂寞，萧条幽深，模糊浑混，气只是生成后在幽深昏暗中流通。
English: The so-called "beginner-beginner-beginner" refers to the yang contained in the heavens has not yet fallen, the yin contained in the earth has not yet risen, there is nothingness and loneliness between heaven and earth, the depression is deep, fuzzy and muddy, and the qi is only generated and circulated in the dark.

古文：有有者：言万物掺落，根茎枝叶，青葱苓茏，萑蔰炫煌，蠉飞蠕动，蚑行哙息，可切循耀把握而有数量。
现代文：所谓 有有者 ，是指这时万物生成繁茂、错落杂乱，植物根茎枝叶，青翠斑斓、郁郁葱葱、花儿鲜丽，动物昆虫蠉飞爬行，禽兽用脚行走，用嘴呼吸，这些都可以触摸感觉得到，并可以数量计算。
English: The so-called "having-having" refers to the time when all things are flourishing, disordered and chaotic. The roots, stems, branches and leaves of plants, the verdant, lush, and beautiful flowers, the crawling and flying of animals and insects, the walking of animals with their feet, and the breathing of animals with their mouths can all be touched, felt, and quantified.

古文：有无者：视之不见其形，听之不闻其声，扪之不可得也，望之不可极也，储与扈冶，浩浩瀚瀚，不可隐仪揆度而通光耀者。
现代文：所谓 有无者 ，是指这时的宇宙空间，视之不见它的形状，听之不闻它的声音，触摸不到它的形体，望而难见它的尽头，广大无边，浩浩瀚瀚，难以用仪器测量计算而与光相通。
English: The so-called existence or non-existence refers to the space of the universe at this time, its shape is invisible, its sound is inaudible, its shape cannot be touched, and its end is difficult to see. It is vast and boundless, and it is difficult to measure and calculate with instruments and communicate with light.

古文：有未始有有无者：包裹天地，陶冶万物，大通混冥，深闳广大，不可为外，析豪剖芒，不可为内，无环堵之字，而生有无之根。
现代文：所谓 有未始有有无者 ，是指这时天地包裹阴阳二气化育万物，向上畅通于混沌冥冥的宇宙空间；深远广大，无法弄清它的外部界域，深入微细，无法探明它的内部极限；没有四面八方的界限，但却有生产有形物质和无形事物的根源。
English: The so-called "beyond beginning and without beginning" refers to the time when heaven and earth were enveloped by yin and yang, vaporized and nurtured all things, and flowed upward in the chaotic space of the universe; far and wide, it was impossible to clarify its external boundaries, deep into the fine, it was impossible to explore its internal limits; there was no boundary in all directions, but there was a source for the production of tangible substances and intangible things.

古文：有未始有夫未始有有无者：天地未剖，阴阳未判，四时未分，万物未生，汪然平静，寂然清澄，莫见其形。
现代文：所谓 有未始有夫未始有有无者 ，是指这时天地未开，阴阳未明，四时未分，万物未生，汪然平静，寂寞清澈，没人能见它的形状。
English: The so-called "beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning

古文：若光耀之间于无有，退而自失也，曰：予能有无，而未能无无也。
现代文：就像光耀问 无有 ，过后感到若有所失、神情怅惆地说： 我具有 无 的特点，而不能做到连 无 都不存在。
English: It's as if the radiance asks for nothingness, and then feels like it's lost something, and says with a wistful look: I have the characteristics of nothingness, but I can't even make nothingness exist.

古文：及其为无无，至妙何从及此哉！
现代文：要是能达到连 无 都不存在的境界，再玄妙的东西都不能及得上它啊！ 
English: If it is possible to reach a state in which nothing even exists, then no matter how subtle something is, it will not be able to reach it!

古文：夫大块载我以形，劳我以生，逸我以老，休我以死。
现代文：自然赐我形骸让我生命有所寄舍，用生驱使我劳累，用年老让我悠逸，用死亡让我安息。
English: Nature has endowed me with a skeleton to give my life a home, with life to drive me to exhaustion, with old age to let me relax, with death to let me rest.

古文：善我生者，乃所以善我死也。
现代文：羡慕我活着和羡慕我死去的依据是一样的。
English: Envy me alive and envy me dead on the same basis.

古文：夫藏舟于壑，藏山于泽，人谓之固矣。
现代文：把船藏在深谷里，把山藏在沼泽中，人们会以为藏得牢固隐蔽。
English: If you hide a boat in a deep valley or a mountain in a swamp, people will think it is well hidden.

古文：虽然，夜半有力者负而趋，寐者不知，犹有所遁。若藏天下于天下，则无所遁其形矣。
现代文：虽然如此，半夜里有大力士背起它逃走，睡着的人们还不觉察，这是因为自以为将小物藏于大处是安全的，但最终还是丢失。
English: Nevertheless, in the middle of the night, some Hercules picks it up and runs away, unnoticed by the sleeping people, because they think it is safe to hide small things in large places, but eventually they are lost.

古文：物岂可谓无大扬攉乎？
现代文：假如把天下万物藏存在天下这个大库房，那么就不存在丢失这问题了。
English: If all things in the world were stored in the great storehouse of the world, then the problem of loss would not exist.

古文：一范人之形而犹喜。
现代文：事物哪能说没有一个基本的情形呢？
English: How can things be said to have no fundamental cause?

古文：若人者，千变万化而未始有极也，弊而复新，其为乐也。
现代文：造化只是偶而生成人类，如同造化万物一样，人不必沾沾自喜，天地造化出的物类千变万化不曾穷极，何止人一种。破敝的则更新，人为之高兴，这情形能数清吗？
English: Creation only occasionally produces human beings, just like the creation of all things. People do not have to be complacent. The types of things created by heaven and earth are ever-changing and never-ending, and there are more than one kind of people. Those who break the mold are newer, and people are happy about it. Can this situation be counted?

古文：可胜计邪？譬若梦为鸟而飞于天，梦为鱼而没于渊，方其梦也，不知其梦也，觉而后知其梦也。
现代文：比如说你梦中变成鸟儿在天空飞翔，梦中变成鱼儿沉入深渊，当你处在梦里时不知道是在做梦，醒来才知道是一场梦。
English: For example, in your dream you become a bird flying in the sky, in your dream you become a fish sinking into the abyss, when you are in a dream you do not know you are dreaming, when you wake up you know it is a dream.

古文：今将有大觉，然后知今此之为大梦也。
现代文：如果有一天你能彻底觉醒，你就会发觉今天的一切也就是一场大梦。
English: If one day you can wake up completely, you will find that everything today is also a big dream.

古文：始吾未生之时，焉知生之乐也；今吾未死，又焉知死之不乐也。
现代文：当初我还没降生时，怎么知道生的快乐呢？现在我还没死，又怎么知道死的不快乐呢？
English: In the beginning, when I was not yet born, how did I know the joy of birth? Now that I am not yet dead, how do I know the unhappiness of death?

古文：昔公牛哀转病也，七日化为虎，其兄掩户而入觇之，则虎搏而杀之。
现代文：以前公牛哀患有 转病 ，七天后变成了老虎，他的哥哥推开房门进去探望他，这老虎扑上来将其咬死。
English: Once upon a time, a bull named Sad became ill, and seven days later he turned into a tiger. His brother opened the door to visit him, and the tiger pounced on him and bit him to death.

古文：是故文章成兽，爪牙移易，志与心变，神与形化。
现代文：因此人外表变成了兽类，人的手脚变成了尖爪，人的牙齿变成了利齿，心志、性情、神形均为转变了。
English: As a result, man's appearance changed into that of a beast, his hands and feet became sharp claws, his teeth became sharp teeth, and his will, disposition, and divine form all changed.

古文：方其为虎也，不知其尝为人也；方其为人，不知其且为虎也。
现代文：当公牛哀变为虎的时候，并不知曾经是人；当他还是人的时候，并不知将要变虎。
English: When a bull is transformed into a tiger, he does not know that he was once a man; when he was a man, he did not know that he would become a tiger.

古文：二者代谢舛驰，各乐其成形，狡猾钝愍，是非无端，孰知其所萌？
现代文：两者更换代谢、背道而驰，但各自都喜欢自己既成的形体。所以可见狡猾和愚钝、谁是谁非是讲不清楚的，谁知道它们是怎样产生的。
English: The two change metabolism and go in opposite directions, but each of them likes the form they have already achieved. So you can see cunning and dullness, who is who is not clear, who knows how they are produced.

古文：夫水向冬则凝而为冰，冰迎春则泮而为水，冰水移易于前后，若周员而趋，孰暇知其所苦乐乎？
现代文：这就像水到冬天凝结成冰，冰到春天又融化成水，水和冰前后转易，好像是绕圈转，谁有闲工夫去探究其中的苦和乐。
English: It's like water condenses into ice in the winter, and ice melts into water in the spring. Water and ice go back and forth, as if going around in a circle. Who has the leisure to explore the joys and sorrows within?

古文：是故形伤于寒暑燥湿之虐者，形苑而神壮；神伤乎喜怒思虑之患者，神尽而形有余。
现代文：所以形体被寒暑燥湿之类侵害而受伤的人，身形枯衰但精神健盛；精神被喜怒思虑折磨而受伤的人，精神耗尽但身形尚存。
English: Therefore, a person whose body is injured by cold, heat, dryness and dampness is physically withered but mentally strong; a person whose spirit is tortured by emotions and thoughts is mentally exhausted but physically still exists.

古文：故罢马之死也，剥之若槁；狡狗之死也，割之犹濡。
现代文：因此，疲惫之马死后，剥宰它时就像枯木；健壮之狗死后，割宰它时还很润泽。
English: Therefore, after the death of a tired horse, it is like dead wood when it is stripped; after the death of a strong dog, it is still moist when it is cut.

古文：是故伤死者其鬼娆，时既者其神漠，是皆不得形神俱没也。
现代文：所以受伤夭折而死的人，他的灵魂还不能安宁；天年寿尽而死的人，他的精神宁静空寂。这二种人皆不能做到形神俱没的境地。
English: For this reason, the soul of a person who is injured and dies prematurely cannot be at peace, and the soul of a person who dies of natural causes is quiet and empty.

古文：夫圣人用心，杖性依神，相扶而得终始，是故其寐不梦，其觉不忧。
现代文：而得道的圣人运用心思时依倚性神互相扶持而不分离，所以他睡时不做梦，醒时不犯愁。
English: On the other hand, a saint who has attained the path relies on the sexual gods to support each other without separation when he uses his mind, so he does not dream when he sleeps and does not worry when he wakes up.

古文：古之人有处混冥之中，神气不荡于外，万物恬漠以愉静，搀枪衡杓之气，莫不弥靡而不能为害。
现代文：古代有人处在混沌玄冥之中，精神气志不飘散在外，万物恬漠安静，彗星及妖气也时常有，但从不造成人间的灾害。
English: In ancient times, some people were in the midst of chaos and darkness. Their spirit did not drift and disperse outside. All things were quiet and desolate. Comets and evil spirits also often existed, but they never caused human disasters.

古文：当此之时，万民猖狂，不知东西；含哺而游，鼓腹而熙；交被天和，食于地德；不以曲故是非相尤；茫茫沉沉，是谓大治。
现代文：这个时期，民众肆意而行、自由自在，也不分东和西；一边咀嚼着食物，一边拍打着肚皮游荡嬉戏玩耍；大家一起承受着苍天所赋的中和之气，享受着大地所赐的恩德；不以曲巧、是非互相怨恨，天下浩荡兴盛，这就叫 大治 。
English: During this period, the people were free to go wherever they wanted, regardless of east or west. They munched on food and flapped their bellies as they wandered around, played and had fun. They all shared the atmosphere of harmony that heaven had bestowed upon them and enjoyed the grace that the earth had bestowed upon them. They did not hold grudges against each other based on skill or right and wrong, and the world flourished and prospered. This was called the Great Reform.

古文：于是在上位者，左右而使之，毋淫其性；镇抚而有之，毋迁其德。
现代文：这时处高位的人虽然支配民众，役使他们，但不干扰其恬静的本性；镇定四方占有他们，但不改变其天德。
English: At this time, although the high-ranking people dominate the people and serve them, they do not interfere with their quiet nature; the calm four sides occupy them, but do not change their virtues.

古文：是故仁义不布，而万物蕃殖；赏罚不施，而天下宾服。
现代文：所以不必施仁义而万物自然繁衍，不必行赏罚而天下自然归附。
English: Therefore, it is not necessary to practice benevolence and righteousness for all things to naturally reproduce, and it is not necessary to reward and punish for the world to naturally adhere.

古文：其道可以大美兴，而难以自计举也。
现代文：这种治理的 道术 ，可以像对天地之美那样来颂扬，却难以用具体计算来说明。
English: This way of governing can be praised like the beauty of heaven and earth, but it is difficult to explain with concrete calculations.

古文：是故日计之不足，而岁计之有余。
现代文：因此短时间里看似效果不明显，但从长远来看则效果显著。
English: Therefore, in the short term, the effect may not be obvious, but in the long term, the effect is significant.

古文：夫鱼相忘于江湖，人相忘于道术。
现代文：鱼类处于江湖之中而互相遗忘，人化于大道而互不交往。
English: Fish are in the midst of rivers and lakes and forget each other, humanized in the avenue and do not interact with each other.

古文：古之真人，立于天地之本，中至优游，抱德炀和，而万物杂累焉，孰肯解构人间之事，以物烦其性命乎？
现代文：古代的真人立身于天地根本，中正平和，优游自得，持抱至德，炙于和气，而万物自行积累，谁肯去干预造作人间之事，让外界事物来扰乱自己的本性和生命？
English: The real people of ancient times stood on the foundation of heaven and earth, lived in peace and tranquility, enjoyed self-sufficiency, held on to virtue, and yearned for harmony, while all things accumulated on their own. Who would interfere with the creation of human affairs and allow external things to disrupt their own nature and life?

古文：夫道有经纪条贯，得一之道，连干枝万叶。
现代文：道是有条理脉络的，得到把握这浑然一体之道，就能贯通千枝万叶。
English: The path is well-organized, and if you grasp this path of seamless integration, you will be able to penetrate through thousands of branches and leaves.

古文：是故贵有以行令，贱有以忘卑，贫有以乐业，困有以处危。
现代文：所以只要有了 道 ，尊贵时有行使号令的本领，低贱时有忘掉自卑的办法，贫穷时有乐于本行的途径，困厄时有处理危难的能力。
English: Therefore, as long as there is a Tao, when there is dignity, there is the ability to exercise command, when there is lowliness, there is a way to forget inferiority, when there is poverty, there is a way to enjoy the industry, and when there is distress, there is the ability to deal with danger.

古文：夫大寒至，霜雪降，然后知松柏之茂也；据难履危，利害陈于前，然后知圣人之不失道也。
现代文：严寒来临，霜雪铺地，这才能看出松柏的茂盛不凋；处境困难，面临危险，利害关系呈现眼前，这才能看出圣人不弃 道 的本性。
English: It is only when the bitter cold sets in and the ground is covered with frost and snow that one can see that the conifers are flourishing and not withering away; it is only when one is in a difficult situation, when one is faced with danger, when one's interests are at stake, that one can see the nature of a sage who does not abandon the path.

古文：是故能戴大员者履大方，镜太清者视大明，立太平者处大堂，能游冥冥者与日月同光。
现代文：因此，头顶青天才能脚踏大地，以天道作镜才能明察秋毫，创太平世道才能处坐明堂，与天道同游才能像日月一样光明。
English: Therefore, only when the blue sky is overhead can we tread on the earth, only when we use the heavenly way as a mirror can we see the autumn and winter, only when we create a peaceful world can we sit in the light, and only when we travel with the heavenly way can we be as bright as the sun and the moon.

古文：是故以道为竿，以德为纶，礼乐为钩，仁义为饵，投之于江，浮之于海，万物纷纷，孰非其有？
现代文：所以用道作钓竿，用德当丝线，用礼乐作钓钩，用仁义当钓饵，投放到江中，漂浮在海上，纷杂的鱼虾之类赶来吞食鱼饵，哪个不被他所占有！
English: Therefore, using Tao as a fishing rod, using virtue as a silk thread, using ritual music as a fishing hook, and using benevolence and righteousness as a fishing bait, he cast it into the river, floated on the sea, and a variety of fish and shrimp came to devour the bait, which was not possessed by him!

古文：夫挟依于跂跃之术，提挈人间之际，掸掞挺挏世之风俗，以摸苏牵连物之微妙，犹得肆其志，充其欲，何况怀环玮之道，忘肝胆，遗耳目，独浮游无方之外，不与物相弊镲，中徙倚无形之域，而和以天地者乎！
现代文：倚仗矜持造作之术，提挈人际关系，推动社会风俗，以摸索事物牵联之奥妙，尚可以放松心志，如愿以偿，并能满足其欲望。更何况有人心怀珍贵之道，心智思想不用于外物，独自遨游于无限之外，不与具体事物杂糅，在遨游中凭依着无形的区域，和天地自然相和谐！
English: It is still possible to relax one's mind and fulfill one's wishes and satisfy one's desires by relying on and holding on to the art of fabrication, improving interpersonal relationships, promoting social customs, and exploring the mystery of the connection between things. What's more, there are people who cherish the precious way, do not use mental thoughts for foreign objects, travel alone beyond the infinite, do not mix with concrete things, and are in harmony with nature and heaven and earth by relying on the invisible region during the journey!

古文：若然者，偃其聪明，而抱其太素，以利害为尘垢，以死生为昼夜。
现代文：这种人偃息聪明怀抱质朴，视利害如垃圾尘埃，视死生如昼夜更替。
English: This kind of person is intelligent, embraces simplicity, regards interests as garbage dust, and regards life and death as day and night.

古文：是故目观玉辂瑰象之状，耳听《白雪》《清角》之声，不能以乱其神；登千仞之谿，临蝯眩之岸，不足以滑其和；譬若钟山之玉，炊以炉炭，三日三夜而色泽不变，则至德天地之精也。
现代文：所以他眼见美玉象牙、耳听《白雪》雅乐，是不会扰乱恬静的精神的；登上千仞之溪的山崖，临近蝯都晕眩的峭壁，也不止于会扰乱平和的心志的；就像钟山出产的美玉投炉火中烧炼，三天三夜玉之色泽都不变。这是因为这种人获得了天地之精华。
English: Therefore, when he sees the beautiful ivory and listens to the elegant music of "White Snow," he will not disturb the tranquil spirit; when he climbs the cliffs of the Thousand-Dragon Creek and approaches the dazzling cliffs of the Dragon Capital, he will not only disturb the peaceful mind; just as the beautiful jade produced by the Bell Mountain is burned in the furnace fire, the color of the jade does not change for three days and three nights. This is because this kind of person has obtained the essence of heaven and earth.

古文：是故生不足以使之，利何足以动之？死不足以禁之，害何足以恐之？
现代文：所以生不足以诱惑驱使他，利难以触动他，死又不足以禁锢他，害又无法吓住他！
English: Therefore, life is not enough to tempt him, profit is not enough to touch him, death is not enough to imprison him, and harm is not enough to frighten him!

古文：明于死生之分，达于利害之变，虽以天下之大易骭之一毛，无所概于志也。
现代文：他是明白了生死之分，通晓了利害之变，即使用整个天下来换取他小腿上的一根毫毛，他都不会心动。
English: He understands the difference between life and death, understands the change of interests, even if he uses the whole day to exchange a hair on his calf, he will not be moved.

古文：夫贵贱之于身也，犹条风之时丽也；毁誉之于己，犹蚊虻之一过也。
现代文：贵贱对人来说，就像春风从身边刮过一样；毁誉对自己来说，就像蚊虻叮一下而已。
English: For others, being high-ranking or low-ranking is like a spring breeze passing by; for oneself, being discredited is just like a mosquito bite.

古文：夫秉皓白而不黑，行纯粹而不糅，处玄冥而不暗，休于天钧而不伪，孟门、终隆之山不能禁，唯体道能不败，湍濑、旋渊、吕梁之深不能留也，太行石涧、飞狐、句望之险不能难也。
现代文：秉持皓白而不污黑，奉行纯粹而不杂糅，身处玄冥而不昏暗，顺从自然而不毁败；孟门、终隆这样的高山阻挡不住，急流旋渊、吕梁这样的深水滞留不住，石涧、太行、飞狐、句望这样的险隘难为不倒。
English: Adhering to white and not black, pursuing pure and not mixed, being in the dark and not dark, obeying nature and not destroyed; mountains such as Mengmen and Zhenglong cannot be stopped, rapids such as the whirlpool and deep water such as Luliang cannot be stopped, and dangerous narrow places such as Shijiazhuang, Taihang, Flying Fox and Guwang cannot be overcome.

古文：是故身处江海之上，而神游魏阙之下，非得一原，孰能至于此哉！
现代文：所以真人虽然身处江海之上，但精神却仍然内守于心，如果不是获得了 道 这个本原，谁又能够达到此境界？
English: Therefore, although the true man is on the river, the spirit is still guarded in the heart. If you do not obtain the Way, the original, who can reach this realm?

古文：是故与至人居，使家忘贫，使王公简其富贵而乐卑贱，勇者衰其气，贪者消其欲，坐而不教，立而不议，虚而往者实而归，故不言而能饮人以和。
现代文：因此，与圣人相处，家居贫寒之士会忘掉贫寒，王公贵族会看轻富贵而以卑贱为乐，勇武之人会减弱锐气，贪婪之人会消除欲望。得道真人静坐而不说教、立而不发议论，但可以使那些空手去学习的人满载而归，他不必言说就能使他人感受到祥和气氛。
English: Therefore, in the company of sages, those who are poor at home will forget their poverty, princes and aristocrats will look down on the rich and noble and take pleasure in being lowly, the brave will weaken their spirit, and the greedy will eliminate their desires. The learned person sits quietly without preaching, stands without making arguments, but can make those who go to study empty-handed return with a full load. He can make others feel a peaceful atmosphere without saying a word.

古文：是故至道无为，一龙一蛇；盈缩卷舒，与时变化。
现代文：所以最高之道就是顺应自然无为，像龙似蛇，盈缩卷舒，随时顺势变化；外虽随风而变，内却持守本性，耳目不被声色诱惑、思想不被外物扰乱。
English: Therefore, the best way is to conform to nature and do nothing. Like a dragon and a snake, we are ever-changing. Although the outside changes with the wind, the inside retains its nature. The ears and eyes are not tempted by sounds and colors, and the mind is not disturbed by foreign objects.

古文：外从其风，内守其性；耳目不耀，思虑不营；其所居神者，台简以游太清，引楯万物，群美萌生。是故事其神者神去之，休其神者神居之。道出一原，通九门，散六衙，设于无垓坫之宇，寂寞以虚无。非有为于物也，物以有为于己也。
现代文：他能把握持守自己的精神，掌握道的原则遨游在太空，促使万物发展，使各种新事物萌生。因此，使用精神过度的人，精神也将会远远离开他，而善养神者，神与形必相守。 道 从本原出发，通过九天之门，散布到四面八方，布施到无穷无尽的领域；它静寂而虚无，不刻意干预万物，因而万物会自然而然有所作为。
English: He can grasp and hold his own spirit, grasp the principle of the Tao, travel in space, promote the development of all things, and make all kinds of new things germinate. Therefore, those who use the spirit excessively, the spirit will also be far away from him, and those who are good at cultivating the spirit, the god and the form must be kept together. The Tao starts from the original, passes through the nine-day gate, spreads to all directions, and spreads to an endless field; it is silent and void, does not deliberately interfere with all things, so all things will naturally make a difference.

古文：是故举事而顺于道者，非道之所为也，道之所施也。
现代文：因此，办事举措顺 道 者，并不是说 道 对他做了些什么，而是 道 在布施中无形地影响了他。
English: Therefore, the one who does something for the sake of the Tao does not mean that the Tao has done something for him, but that the Tao has influenced him invisibly in his giving.

古文：夫天之所覆，地之所载，六合所包，阴阳所呴，雨露所濡，道德所扶，此皆生一父母而阅一和也。
现代文：那天所覆盖的、地所承载的、六合所包容的、阴阳二气所孕育的、雨露所滋润的、道德所扶持的，全都产生于一个根源一一天地，并共通着和谐之气。
English: What was covered on that day, what was carried by the earth, what was contained by the hexagon, what was nurtured by the yin and yang, what was nourished by the rain and dew, and what was supported by morality, all originated from one root and one day, and have a common spirit of harmony.

古文：是故槐榆与橘柚合而为兄弟，有苗与三危通为一家。
现代文：所以槐与榆、橘与柚可以结合而成为兄弟，有苗族和三危族可以相通而成为一家。
English: Therefore, the dragonfly and the dragonfly, the tangerine and the pomelo can be combined to become brothers, and the Miao and the Three Dangers can be connected to become a family.

古文：夫目视鸿鹄之飞，耳听琴瑟之声，而心在雁门之间。一身之中，神之分离剖判，六合之内，一举而千万里。
现代文：眼看着鸿鹄飞翔，耳听着琴瑟之音，而心思却飞到了雁门关一带，一个人身形中的精神可以飞散到各处，甚至一下子飞千万里远。
English: Looking at the flight of the great egrets, listening to the sound of the harp, while the mind flies to the area of the Wild Goose Gate, the spirit in a person's body can fly everywhere, even flying thousands of miles away at once.

古文：是故自其异者视之，肝胆胡、越；自其同者视之，万物一圈也。
现代文：所以就事物的差异来说，紧挨着的胆、肝就会像胡地和楚越那么遥远；但就事物的相同来看，万物就如同生存在一个角落里那么亲近。
English: Therefore, as far as the difference of things is concerned, gallbladder and liver, which are next to each other, will be as distant as Hu Di and Chu Yue; but as far as the similarity of things is concerned, all things are as close as if they lived in a corner.

古文：百家异说，各有所出，若夫墨、杨、申、商之于治道，犹盖之无一撩而轮之无一辐，有之可以备数，无之未有害于用也。
现代文：战国时期诸子百家学说歧异，各有其产生的缘由。像那墨翟、杨朱、申不害、商鞅等学说对于治理国家来说，如同伞架上的一根骨子、车轮中的一根辐条那样，有了它可以凑数，没有它也不妨碍使用。
English: During the Warring States period, there were differences in the doctrines of hundreds of schools, each with its own reasons for emergence. For governing the country, doctrines such as Na Mokou, Yang Zhu, Shen Nihong, and Shang Xuan are like a bone on an umbrella stand or a spoke in a wheel. If you have it, you can make up the number, and if you don't have it, it won't hinder your use.

古文：己自以为独擅之，不通之于天地之情也。
现代文：如果自以为离开自己的学说主张就不行，那就太不通天地之常情了。
English: If you think that you can't get away from your own doctrines, then you don't understand the world.

古文：今夫冶工之铸器，金踊跃于炉中，必有波溢而播弃者，其中地而凝滞，亦有以象于物者矣。
现代文：那些冶炼金属的工匠在铸造器物时，金属在熔炉中翻滚熔化，也必定会有熔液翻腾流溢出来，溅落到地下，凝固后也有些和某种器物形状相似。
English: When the craftsmen who smelt metals are casting objects, the metal is rolled and melted in the furnace, and there must also be a molten liquid flowing out, splashing down to the ground, and after solidifying, it is also somewhat similar to the shape of a certain object.

古文：其形虽有所小用哉，然未可以保于周室之九鼎也，又况比于规形者乎？
现代文：这些器物虽然有点小用处，然而不可能像周王室的九鼎那样贵重，又何况同原型器物的用处相比呢？
English: Although these utensils are of little use, they cannot possibly be as valuable as the Jiu Ding of the Zhou royal family, let alone compared to the usefulness of the prototype utensils.

古文：其与道相去亦远矣。
现代文：这些都与 道 相去甚远。
English: This is far from the Way.

古文：今夫万物之疏跃枝举，百事之茎叶条蘖，皆本于一根而条循千万也。
现代文：万物如同树枝那样舒展散布，百事就像茎叶枝芽那样繁衍枝蔓，实际都是出自一个根源而有条不紊变化出千姿百态来。
English: Everything is spread out like a branch, and Pepsi is like a stem, leaf, and bud. In fact, they all come from one source and change in an orderly manner.

古文：若此，则有所受之矣，而非所授者。所受者，无授也，而无不受也。
现代文：如此说来，蓬勃的万物是承受了什么后得以发展的，但其实没有谁有意授给它们什么：万物所承受到的，是没有谁有意授予的，可是没有什么物类不被授予的。
English: In this way, the vigorous things of the universe have been developed through what they have received, but no one has intentionally given them anything. What the things of the universe have received, no one has intentionally granted, but there is no kind of thing that has not been granted.

古文：无不受也者，譬若周云之茏苁，辽巢彭濞而为雨，沈溺万物而不与为湿焉。
现代文：所谓没有什么物类不被授予的，打个比方说，就像那浓云密布，翻滚蕴蓄聚集而化成大雨，洒遍大地，淋湿万物，而云本身并没有直接参与淋湿万物这一过程。
English: The so-called "nothing" that is not granted is, for example, like that thick cloud, tumbling and accumulating to form a heavy rain, sprinkling the earth and drenching everything, while the cloud itself does not directly participate in the process of drenching everything.

古文：今夫善射者，有仪表之度，如工匠有规矩之数，此皆所得以至于妙。
现代文：善于射箭的人有仪表作为尺度，就像工匠有规矩作法度一样，他们都是用了一定的尺度标准方达到技艺神妙的境界的。
English: People who are good at archery have instruments as a yardstick, just as craftsmen have rules and regulations. They all use a certain yardstick to reach the realm of skill.

古文：然而奚仲不能为逢蒙，造父不能为伯乐者，是曰谕于一曲，而不通于万方之际也。
现代文：然而造车的奚仲却不能像逢蒙那样善射，善御的造父也不能像伯乐那样会相马，这只是说他们只掌握某一领域里的知识技能，而不能通晓四面八方无穷无尽的奥妙。
English: However, the car-maker Shanzhong can't shoot as well as Feng Meng, and the car-maker's father can't shoot as well as Bo Le. This just means that they only master the knowledge and skills in a certain field, but can't understand the inexhaustible mysteries in all directions.

古文：今以涅染缁，则黑于涅；以蓝染青，则青于蓝，涅非缁也，青非蓝也，兹虽遇其母，而无能复化已。
现代文：现在用涅石做成黑色染料，这染料的黑色程度比原涅石更深；用蓼蓝制成靛青，这靛青的青色程度比原蓼蓝更深。黑染料已不是涅石，靛青也不是蓼蓝，它们就是再遇到涅石和蓼蓝也不可能变回去。
English: Now the black dye is made of nixie stone, and the blackness of the dye is deeper than the original nixie stone; the indigo is made of indigo, and the indigo's blueness is deeper than the original indigo. The black dye is no longer nixie stone, and the indigo is no longer indigo, and they cannot be changed back even if they encounter nixie stone and indigo again.

古文：是何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：以谕其转而益薄也。何况夫未始有涅蓝造化之者乎！
现代文：因为它们经过制作加工后其质量比原体更稀薄了，更何况那些不曾有过涅石、蓼蓝变为黑色青色染料关系的事物呢？
English: Because after they have been produced and processed, their quality is thinner than that of the original, let alone those things that have never had the relationship of Nirvana stone, indigo to black cyan dye?

古文：其为化也，虽镂金石、书竹帛，何足以举其数？
现代文：它们这些变化，即使用金石刻镂、竹帛书写，也难以记得清楚。
English: It is difficult to remember these changes clearly, even if they are written with a chisel or bamboo stick.

古文：由此观之，物莫不生于有也，小大优游矣，夫秋毫之末，沦于无间，而复归于大矣。
现代文：由此看来，事物间的变化，新的物体莫不是从已有的原体事物中产生出来的，这样的事物大小繁多。
English: From this point of view, the changes between things, the new objects are not produced from the existing original things, such things come in many sizes.

古文：芦符之厚，通于无垠而复反于敦庞，若夫无秋豪之微，芦苻之原，四达无镜，通于无圻，而莫之要御夭遏者，其袭微重妙，挺挏万物，揣丸变化，天地之间，何足以论之！
现代文：秋天兽类新生的毫毛末端，尽管细小得能插进没有空隙的东西里，但与无形的 道 相比，又显得太大了；芦苇杆里的一层膜，薄到能飘飞到天空中，但与无形的 道 相比，又显得太厚了。所以既无秋毫之末又无芦苇之厚的 道 能够畅通于四面八方而无止境，又没有什么能遏制伤害它；它能生成精微奇妙事物，能促使万物生长、支配万物变化。天地之间没有什么能和它相提并论的！
English: The thin end of the hairs of the new-born animals of autumn, though small enough to be inserted into something without a gap, is too large compared to the invisible way; a film in the reed rod, thin enough to fly into the sky, is too thick compared to the invisible way. Therefore, the way that has neither the end of the autumn nor the thickness of the reed, can flow smoothly in all directions without end, and nothing can restrain it; it can produce subtle and wonderful things, can promote the growth of all things, and control the changes of all things. There is nothing comparable to it between heaven and earth!

古文：夫疾风教木，而不能拔毛发；云台之高，堕者折脊碎脑，而蚊虻适足以翱翔，夫与跂蛲同乘天机，夫受形于一圈，飞轻微细者犹足以脱其命，又况未有类也？
现代文：疾风能将大树刮倒，却不能吹掉长着的毛发；人从高耸入云的高台上摔下来会折断脊骨迸裂脑壳，但蚊虻却能适足飞翔。这些轻微小虫靠着造化的作用，在同一个角落内获得了形体；轻微小虫尚可以靠这造化所赋予的形体寄托生命，更何况没有形体的东西呢？
English: A gust of wind can knock down a tree, but it cannot blow away the long hair; a man falling from a towering platform can break his spine and split his skull, but a gnat can fly adequately. These light little insects rely on the role of creation to obtain a body in the same corner; light little insects can still rely on the form given by this creation to support life, let alone things without a body?

古文：由此观之，无形而生有形亦明矣。
现代文：由此看来，无形产生有形的事物这一道理是再明白不过的了。
English: From this point of view, the principle that intangibles produce tangible things could not be clearer.

古文：是故圣人托其神于灵府，而归于万物之初；视于冥冥，听于无声，冥冥之中，独见晓焉；寂漠之中，独有照焉；其用之也以不用，其不用也而后能用之；其知也乃不知，其不知也而后能知之也。
现代文：所以，圣人将精神寄托于内心，而复归到万物初始时的境界。这种境界，看上去幽冥昏暗，听上去寂静虚无；但就是在这幽冥昏暗中能看到光明，在寂静虚无中能听到声音。他的 用 在于 不用 ，而正因为 不用 才能 用 ；他的 知 在于 不知 ，也正因为 不知 然后能 知 。
English: Therefore, the sage places his spirit in his heart and returns to the realm of the beginning of all things. This realm looks dark and gloomy, and sounds like silence and nothingness; but it is in this dark and gloomy darkness that light can be seen, and sound can be heard in silence and nothingness. His use is in not using, and it is precisely because of not using that he can use it; his knowledge is in not knowing, and it is precisely because of not knowing that he can know.

古文：夫天不定，日月无所载；地不定，草木无所植；所立于身者不宁，是非无所形。
现代文：天如不定则日月没有承载的依托，地如不定则草木没有生根的基础；人如安身立命的精神不安定，则是非标准就无法辨明。
English: If the sky is uncertain, then the sun and moon have no bearing support, if the land is uncertain, then the plants and trees have no foundation for rooting; if the spirit of a person is unstable, then the right and wrong standards cannot be distinguished.

古文：是故有真人然后有真知。其所持者不明，庸讵知吾所谓知之非不知欤？
现代文：因此有了 真人 然后才有 真知 ，你所持守的东西都不明确，那么怎么知道自己所认为的 知 不是 不知 呢？
English: Therefore, there is a real person and then there is true knowledge, what you hold is not clear, so how do you know what you think you know is not unknown?

古文：今夫积惠重厚，累爱袭恩，以声华呕符妪掩万民百姓，使知之欣欣亟然，人乐其性者，仁也。举大功，立显名，体君臣，正上下，明亲疏，等贵贱，存危国，继绝世，决挐治烦，兴毁宗，立无后者，义也。闭九窍，藏心志，弃聪明，反无识，芒然仿佯于尘埃之外，而消摇于无事之业，含阴吐阳，而万物和同者，德也。
现代文：积累宽厚的恩惠，将慈爱恩惠披及民众，用声誉和荣耀去爱抚百姓，使他们欣欣然而乐于保全应有的本性，这就叫 仁 ；建立丰功伟绩，树立显赫名望，确立君臣关系，端正上下之礼，明确亲疏远近，规定贵贱等级，挽救危难的国家，恢复灭绝的朝代，决断纷乱治理忧烦，振兴被毁的宗庙，择立绝后者的继承人，这就叫 义 ；闭绝情欲，匿藏心机，抛弃智慧，返朴归真，茫然游荡在尘世之外，逍遥于无为初始界域，呼吸阴阳之气，和万物融为一体，这就叫 德 。
English: It is called benevolence to amass bountiful bounties, to bestow benevolence on the people, to caress the people with fame and glory, to make them rejoice, yet to preserve their proper nature. It is called righteousness to establish great exploits, to establish illustrious fame, to establish the relationship between monarchs and subjects, to be upright in courtesy, to be clear about estrangement and closeness, to determine the level of nobility and lowliness, to save a country in peril, to restore an extinct dynasty, to resolutely control turmoil and sorrow, to revitalize a destroyed ancestral temple, and to choose the successor of the latter. It is called righteousness to

古文：是故道散而为德，德溢而为仁义，仁义立而道德废矣。
现代文：所以， 道 散逸就只能依靠 德 ， 德 流溢就只得施 仁义 ， 仁义 树立则意味着道德的废弃。
English: Therefore, to dissipate virtue, one can only rely on virtue; to overflow virtue, one must practice benevolence; and to establish benevolence means to abandon morality.

古文：百围之木，斩而为牺尊，镂之以剞劂，杂之以青黄，华藻鏄鲜，龙蛇虎豹，曲成文章，然其断在沟中，一比牺尊沟中之断，则丑美有间矣，然而失木性钧也。
现代文：百围粗的树木，砍断制成牺樽，用曲凿刻刀雕镂，涂上青黄相间的颜色，花纹华丽、金饰鲜亮，龙蛇虎豹的形象被精心雕刻成图案。然而将另一段被扔弃在水沟中的木头和这被雕成的华丽牺樽相比，尽管美丑相去甚远，但两段木头均失去了树木的质朴本性则是相同的。
English: Hundreds of thick trees, cut down to make sacrificial barrels, carved with a chisel, painted with blue and yellow colors, gorgeous patterns, bright gold ornaments, and the image of dragons, snakes, tigers and leopards were carefully carved into patterns. However, comparing another piece of wood that was thrown into the ditch and this carved ornate sacrificial barrel, although the beauty and ugliness are far apart, both pieces of wood have lost the simple nature of trees, but they are the same.

古文：是故神越者其言华，德荡者其行伪。至精亡于中，而言行观于外，此不免以身役物矣。
现代文：由此可见，精神流失的人就会表现为言语华而不实，德性荡飞的人就会表现为行为虚假不诚；至精至诚的精神一旦从心中流散，浮辞伪行就会显露在人们的眼前，并难免不受外界物质世界的驱使。
English: From this, it can be seen that a person who has lost his or her spirit will express himself or herself in words that are flashy and insincere, and a person whose virtue is soaring will express himself or herself in actions that are false and insincere. Once the spirit of the most refined and sincere is dispersed from the heart, flamboyant words and actions will be revealed to people's eyes, and they will inevitably not be driven by the external material world.

古文：夫趋舍行伪者，为精求于外也。精有湫尽，而行无穷极，则滑心浊神而惑乱其本矣。
现代文：人们的言行举止都是精神世界外化的表现，精神是会有耗尽的时候，而行为却不会终止的，假如神不守舍，就会心神不定迷失生命的根本方向。
English: People's words, deeds and behavior are all manifestations of the externalization of the spiritual world. The spirit will be exhausted, but the behavior will not end. If God does not keep His promises, the spirit will lose the fundamental direction of life.

古文：其所守者不定，而外婬于世俗之风，所断差跌者，而内以浊其清明，是故踌躇以终，而不得须臾恬淡矣。
现代文：人的精神守持不定，就会沉溺于世俗的风气中，一旦失误失足，内在的纯洁本性就受到污染而浑浊，因而会彷徨一生，得不到片刻的宁静。
English: If a person's spiritual stability is not stable, he will indulge in worldly customs. Once he makes a mistake, his inner pure nature will be polluted and muddied, so he will wander for a lifetime and will not get a moment's peace.

古文：是故圣人内修道术，而不外饰仁义；不知耳目之宣，而游于精神之和。
现代文：所以圣人注重人的内在修养而不在乎外表装饰仁义。不宣泄情欲、显示聪明而遨游于精神的和谐。
English: Therefore, sages pay attention to people's inner cultivation and do not care about outward adornment of benevolence and righteousness. They do not give vent to lust, show intelligence, and wander in spiritual harmony.

古文：若然者，下揆三泉，上寻九天，横廓六合，揲贯万物，此圣人之游也。
现代文：这样他可以下探三泉、上寻九天、横廓四方上下、贯通天下万物。这些就是圣德之人的行为表现。
English: In this way, he can explore the three fountains below, the nine heavens above, the four directions above and below, and all things under the heaven. These are the behaviors of a person of holiness.

古文：若夫真人，则动溶于至虚而游于灭亡之野，骑蜚廉而从敦圄，驰于方外，休乎宇内；烛十日，而使风雨；臣雷公，役夸父，妾宓妃，妻织女，天地之间何足以留其志！
现代文：至于那 真人 更飘动在虚无的区域，遨游于无形的境界；他骑着蜚廉神兽，带着敦圄侍从，驰骋于世俗之外，休闲在宇宙之中，让十个太阳照明，使风雨听从使唤，让雷公当臣子、夸父为役仆，纳宓妃为妾，娶织女为妻。天地之间哪有什么可值得留恋的。
English: As for the real man, he floats in the region of nothingness, wandering in the invisible realm; he rides on the crippled gods and beasts, with his unruly attendants, gallops outside the mundane world, relaxes in the universe, lets ten suns illuminate, makes the wind and rain obey his call, lets Lei Gong be a courtier, Qua Father be a servant, Na Junhui be a concubine, and marries Weaver Woman. What is there between heaven and earth that is worth yearning for?

古文：是故虚无者道之舍，平易者道之素。
现代文：所以说虚无是道的立足点，平易是道的本性。
English: Therefore, nothingness is the foothold of Tao, and simplicity is the nature of Tao.

古文：夫人之事其神而娆其精，营慧然而有求于外，此皆失其神明而离其宅也。
现代文：人们过度劳碌心志而扰乱自己的精神，费尽心思去追求物质利益，这些都会耗损人的精神元气而使精神离开了人的身心。
English: People overwork their minds and disturb their spirits, and make every effort to pursue material interests. These will deplete people's spiritual vitality and cause the spirit to leave people's body and mind.

古文：是故冻者假兼衣于春，而暍者望冷风于秋。
现代文：所以，得寒症的人即使在春天还得借助衣服来御寒，而得热症的人就是在秋天还是希望冷风来解热。
English: Therefore, even in spring, people with colds still have to protect themselves from the cold with the help of clothes, while people with fevers still hope for a cold wind to relieve the heat in autumn.

古文：夫有病于内者，必有色于外矣。
现代文：体内有病者，必定会在气色上有所体现。
English: If there is a disease in the body, it will definitely be reflected in the appearance.

古文：夫梣木色青翳，而赢瘉蜗睆，此皆治目之药也，人无故求此物者，必有蔽其明者。
现代文：秽木浸水能治疗青翳，蜗牛唾液能治疗蜗睆，这些均是治疗眼疾的良药，但如果无缘无故使用一定会伤害人的眼睛。
English: Water-soaked camphor wood can cure glaucoma, and snail saliva can cure porphyria. These are all good medicines for treating eye diseases, but if used for no reason, they will definitely harm people's eyes.

古文：圣人之所以骇天下者，真人未尝过焉；贤人之所以矫世俗者，圣人未尝观焉。
现代文：圣人之所以惊骇天下，真人从来不去过问；贤人之所以矫正世俗，圣人也从来不去过问。
English: The reason why sages horrify the world is never questioned by real people; the reason why sages correct the mundane is never questioned by sages.

古文：夫牛蹄之涔，无尺之鲤，块阜之山，无丈之材，所以然者何也？
现代文：那牛蹄踩出的小水洼是容不下一尺长的鲤鱼的；土丘似的山坡是长不出参天大树的。
English: The small puddle created by the cow's hoof cannot accommodate a foot-long eel; the mound-like hillside cannot grow a towering tree.

古文：皆其营字狭小而不能容巨大也，又况乎以无裹之者邪，此其为山渊之势亦远矣。
现代文：这是什么原因呢？都是因为狭小的范围容不下巨大的东西，更何况要容纳无形的天地呢？它们离深渊高山的规模和气势还远着呢。
English: What is the reason for this? It's all because a small area can't accommodate huge things, let alone accommodate the invisible heavens and earth? They are far from the size and power of the abyss and mountains.

古文：夫人之拘于世也，必形系而神泄，故不免于虚。
现代文：人们沉溺于世俗社会，必定身形受系绊而同时精神散逸，所以不免会虚弱。
English: People are addicted to the secular society, their bodies are bound to be tripped up and their spirits dissipated at the same time, so they will inevitably be weak.

古文：使我可系羁者，必其有命在于外也。
现代文：如人被名利欲念所羁绊，必定是精神散逸在外，也必定会受系累。
English: If a person is tripped up by the desire for fame and fortune, his spirit must be scattered, and he must be burdened.

古文：至德之世，甘瞑于溷澖之域，而徙倚于汗漫之宇，提挈天地而委万物，以鸿濛为景柱，而浮扬乎无畛崖之际。
现代文：在道德最纯的时代，人们酣眠于虚无混沌的区域里，遨游在浩瀚无边的领域中，扶持天地而委弃万物，以鸿濛作圭表，飘浮在没有疆域的地方。
English: In the era of the purest morality, people slumbered in the region of nothingness and chaos, wandered in the vast and boundless fields, supported the heavens and the earth and abandoned all things, used the great dragon as a guidebook, and floated in the place where there was no territory.

古文：是故圣人呼吸阴阳之气，而群生莫不颙颙然仰其德以和顺。
现代文：因此圣人呼吸阴阳二气而众生仰慕归依、内心和顺。
English: Therefore, the saint breathes yin and yang and is admired by all living beings for his conversion and inner harmony.

古文：当此之时，莫之领理，决离隐密而自成，浑浑苍苍，纯朴未散，旁薄为一而万物大优，是故虽有羿之知而无所用之。
现代文：那时，没有人有意治理引导，但人和万物循性顺理悄然形成生长，浑浑然然，纯粹质朴的道德没有散逸，磅礴浑然一体而万物悠游自得。因此，即使有后羿的智慧也使用不上。
English: At that time, there was no one to intentionally govern and guide, but people and all things quietly formed and grew in accordance with the laws of nature. Pure and simple morality did not dissipate, grandeur was a seamless whole, and all things were carefree. Therefore, even the wisdom of hindsight cannot be used.

古文：及世之衰也，至伏羲氏，其道昧昧芒芒然，吟德怀和，被施颇烈，而知乃始，皆欲离其童蒙之心，而觉视于天地之间，是故其德烦而不能一。
现代文：时代发展到伏羲氏的时候，天下道术仍然浑厚茫然，蕴含道德和气，布施德泽颇为盛广，但人们的智慧开始萌发产生，似乎若有所知，并开始失去童稚蒙胧之心，观察起天地间的各种事物。所以伏羲氏的道德杂乱烦多而不专一。
English: When the era developed to Fuxi's time, the world's Taoism was still thick and vague, containing morality and qi, and Bushi Deze was quite extensive, but people's wisdom began to germinate, as if they knew something, and began to lose their childish hazy heart, observing various things in heaven and earth. So Fuxi's moral clutter is annoying and not specific.

古文：乃至神农、黄帝，剖判大宗，窍领天地，袭九窾，重九熟，提挈阴阳，嫥捖刚柔，枝解叶贯，万物百族，使各有经纪条贯。
现代文：到了神农、黄帝时代，他们开始分离道统根本，通理天地，顺循自然法则形制，掌握阴阳变化，调和阴阳刚柔，分解联贯，使万物百事均有秩序条理。
English: By the time of Shennong and the Yellow Emperor, they began to separate the fundamental principles of Taoism, rationalize heaven and earth, follow the laws of nature, grasp the changes of yin and yang, reconcile yin and yang, and decompose and connect, so that all things have order and structure.

古文：于此万民睢睢盱盱然，莫不竦身而载听视，是故治而不能和。
现代文：这样百姓无不张目直视，无不踮脚仰视聆听君主命令，仰头察看君王脸色。所以神农、黄帝虽然能治理好天下，但却不能和谐自然。
English: In this way, the common people looked straight ahead with open eyes, looked up to listen to the monarch's orders, and looked up to see the monarch's face. Therefore, although Shennong and the Yellow Emperor could govern the world well, they could not harmonize with nature.

古文：下栖迟至于昆吾、夏后之世，嗜欲连于物，聪明诱于外，而性命失其得。
现代文：社会延续到昆吾、夏后时代，人们的嗜好欲望被外界诱惑，聪明受外界引诱，因而失去了天然本性和赖以存在的道德。
English: Society continued into the Kunwu and Xiao Hou eras. People's hobbies and desires were seduced by the outside world, and their intelligence was seduced by the outside world. As a result, they lost their natural nature and the morality on which they depended.

古文：施及周室之衰，浇淳散朴，杂道以伪，俭德以行，而巧故萌生。
现代文：到了周室衰亡时期，敦厚淳朴的风气被冲淡散失，办事行为背离道德、偏离德性，因而奸巧狡诈也随之产生。
English: By the time of the decline of the Zhou dynasty, the dignified and simple culture had been diluted and lost, and the conduct of affairs had deviated from morality and virtue, and thus treachery and cunning also arose.

古文：周室衰而王道废，儒墨乃始列道而议，分徒而讼。
现代文：周王室的衰败使王道废弛，墨、儒也开始宣传标榜起自己的学说来，招聚门徒争论是非。
English: The decline of the Zhou royal family led to the decline of the royal way, and the Chinese and Confucianists also began to advertise their own doctrines and recruit disciples to argue the rights and wrongs.

古文：于是博学以疑圣，华诬以胁众，弦歌鼓舞，缘饰诗书，以买名誉于天下。
现代文：于是各家学说均以博学来比拟圣人，实际是用华而不实的言辞来欺骗胁迫民众；他们行施礼乐歌舞，拿《诗》、《书》来文饰门面，为的是在天下沽名钓誉。
English: As a result, all schools of thought use erudition to compare saints, but in reality they use pompous rhetoric to deceive and coerce the public; they perform ceremonial music and dance, and use "poetry" and "books" to decorate the facade, in order to win fame and reputation in the world.

古文：繁登降之礼，饰绂冕之服，聚众不足以极其变，积财不足以赡其费，于是万民乃始樠觟离跂，各欲行其知伪，以求凿枘于世，而错择名利。
现代文：与此同时，他们又实行繁琐礼节，装饰绂冕礼服，并使之等级化；聚集民众变化着无穷无尽的花样，积聚财富来满足无法满足的消费。在这种社会风气下，百姓也开始误入歧途，不明事理，却又想施展智巧，迎合世俗，不折手段取得名利。
English: At the same time, they also practice complicated etiquette, decorate coronation robes, and classify them; gather people in an endless variety of patterns, accumulate wealth to meet unsatisfactory consumption. Under this social atmosphere, the people also began to go astray, do not know the reason, but also want to show cleverness, cater to the world, and earn fame and fortune by all means.

古文：是故百姓曼衍于婬荒之陂，而失其大宗之本。
现代文：这时人们都一心钻研歪门邪道了，丧失了 道 之根本。
English: At this time, people were all bent on studying the crooked and evil way, and lost the fundamentals of the way.

古文：夫世之所以丧性命，有衰渐以然，所由来者久矣。
现代文：世人之所以沦丧纯正天性，并日益衰落，其产生根源由来很久了。
English: The reason why the world's people have lost their pure nature and are declining day by day has a long history.

古文：是故圣人之学也，欲以返性于初，而游心于虚也；达人之学也，欲以通性于辽廓，而觉于寂漠也。
现代文：因此圣人学习，是要将心性返归到最初质朴状态而让心神遨游于虚无之境；达人学习，是要将心性与旷漠无边相通而在寂静淡漠中觉醒。
English: Therefore, for a sage to learn is to return the mind to its original simplicity and let the mind wander in the realm of nothingness; for an adept to learn is to connect the mind with the boundless wilderness and awaken in the silence and desolation.

古文：若夫俗世之学也则不然，擢德慊性，内愁五藏，外劳耳目，乃始招蛲振缱物之豪芒，摇消掉捎仁义礼乐，暴行越智于天下，以招号名声于世。
现代文：若是世俗之人的学习就不这样了，他们拔去德性，扰乱心胸，损伤耳目，老是追求事物的微小利益，为推行仁义礼乐奔走忙碌，在世上自我表现以求获得世俗的名声。
English: This is not the case with the learning of worldly people, who pull out virtue, disturb the heart, damage the ears and eyes, always pursue the small interests of things, run around for the promotion of benevolence and righteousness, and express themselves in the world in order to gain worldly fame.

古文：此我所羞而不为也。
现代文：这种事情我是感到羞耻而不屑做的。
English: It's the sort of thing I'd be too ashamed to do.

古文：是故与其有天下也，不若有说也；与其有说也，不若尚羊物之终始也，而条达有无之际。
现代文：所以与其占有天下，还不如对此超脱一些；与其有超脱的思想，还不如彻底抛弃天下而逍遥流连在虚无境地、通达于事物有无之间。
English: Therefore, rather than possessing the world, it is better to be detached from it; rather than having the idea of detachment, it is better to completely abandon the world and wander freely in the realm of nothingness, in the realm of things with and without.

古文：是故举世而誉之不加劝，举世而非之不加沮；定于死生之境，而通于荣辱之理；虽有炎火洪水弥靡于天下，神无亏缺于胸臆之中矣。
现代文：因此，天下的人都赞扬我，我也不会受到鼓励，天下的人都非议我，我也不会感到沮丧。对生死泰然处之，对荣辱通达处置，即使面对天下大火蔓延、洪水泛滥，我内心中的精神不会亏缺。
English: Therefore, people all over the world praise me, and I will not be encouraged; people all over the world criticize me, and I will not feel depressed; I will be calm about life and death, and I will be able to deal with honor and disgrace; even if I face the spread of fire and flooding all over the world, I will not lack the spirit in my heart.

古文：若然者，视天下之间，犹飞羽浮芥也，孰肯分分然以物为事也？
现代文：像这样的话，就会将天下及天下之事看得轻如羽毛、浮泛芥草，谁还肯忙忙碌碌将外物当回事！
English: In this way, you will see the world and the things of the world as light as feathers and floating mustard, and who would be too busy to take foreign things seriously!

古文：水之性真清，而土洞之；人性安静，而嗜欲乱之。
现代文：水的本性清澈纯净，泥土掺入使它混浊；人的天性安寂宁静，嗜欲搅乱使它不安。
English: The nature of water is clear and pure, the addition of mud makes it turbid; the nature of man is peaceful and tranquil, and the disturbance of desire makes it uneasy.

古文：夫人之所受于天者，耳目之于声色也，口鼻之于芳臭也，肌肤之于寒燠，其情一也。
现代文：人的天生本性是耳能听声、目能观色、口尝滋味、鼻闻气味、肌肤感受寒暑，这些天性都是一样的。
English: The innate nature of human beings is that their ears can hear, their eyes can see, their palates can taste, their noses can smell, and their skin can feel hot and cold. These innate natures are all the same.

古文：或通于神明，或不免于痴狂者，何也？其所为制者异也。
现代文：但为什么有的人神志清醒，有的人不免痴狂？这就是因为制约他们的精神状况的不同。
English: But why are some people sane, while others inevitably go mad? This is because of the different mental conditions that govern them.

古文：是故神者智之渊也，渊清则智明矣；智者心之府也，智公则心平矣。
现代文：所以说精神是智慧的渊源，这渊源清静，智慧就可明察；而智慧却是心灵的城府，智慧公正不诈邪，人的心灵就平静。
English: Therefore, it is said that the spirit is the source of wisdom. This source is clear and quiet, so that wisdom can be clearly observed. But wisdom is the city of the soul. Wisdom is just and does not betray evil, and the human soul is calm.

古文：人莫鉴于流沫，而鉴于止水者，以其静也；莫窥形于生铁，而窥于明镜者，以睹其易也，夫唯易且静，形物之性也。由此观之，用也必假之于弗用也。
现代文：所以人都不用流动涌动着泡沫的水做镜，而用相对静止清明的水照形，就是因为它平静；同样人们没有用生铁来照自己的形影，而对着明亮的铜镜察看自己的容貌，也是因为铜镜平整。只有平和静，才能显现事物的本性。由此看来， 用 必借助于 不用 。
English: For this reason, people do not use flowing, foaming water as a mirror, but use relatively still, clear water to illuminate the figure, because it is calm; similarly, people do not use pig iron to illuminate their image, but look at their appearance against a bright copper mirror, also because the copper mirror is flat. Only peace and quiet can reveal the nature of things. From this point of view, use must be aided by disuse.

古文：是故虚室生白，吉祥止也。
现代文：所以说，虚静的心神产生纯白的光亮，这吉祥也就会降临了。
English: Therefore, it is said that when the empty and quiet mind generates pure white light, this auspiciousness will also come.

古文：夫鉴明者，尘垢弗能藐；神清者，嗜欲弗能乱。
现代文：镜子明亮，尘埃就不会玷污它，精神心志纯白清静，嗜欲也就难以搅乱它。
English: The mirror is bright, the dust will not tarnish it, the spirit is pure and tranquil, and it is difficult for lust to disturb it.

古文：精神已越于外，而事复返之，是失之于本而求之于未也。
现代文：如果精神心志超越散逸到身心之外，再去想法让它复归回来，这实际上是失去了根本而追求的是枝节。
English: If the spiritual aspiration transcends the dissipation to the outside of the body and mind, and then goes to the idea to make it return, this is actually losing the root and pursuing the branches.

古文：外内无符，而欲与物接，弊其玄光，而求知之于耳目，是释其炤炤而道其冥冥也，是之谓失道。
现代文：内在精神与外表行为相分离而与外界事物相接触，实际上是遮蔽了精神心志的纯白清静之光，任凭耳目听视来获得智慧，这就是抛弃了光明之道而走向黑暗，这也叫 失道 。
English: When the inner spirit is separated from the outer behavior and comes into contact with external things, it is actually the pure white and quiet light of the spiritual mind that is obscured, and the ears and eyes are allowed to listen to gain wisdom. This is abandoning the path of light and going to darkness, which is also called losing the way.

古文：心有所至，而神喟然在之，反之于虚，则消铄灭息，此圣人之游也。
现代文：人的心志往哪里，精神也会跟着跑去；反之，如心志返回虚静的境界，精神也就随之宁静，嗜欲也就灭息。
English: Wherever the human mind wanders, the spirit wanders with it; on the other hand, if the mind wanders back to the realm of nothingness, the spirit also wanders back to the realm of nothingness, and craving is extinguished.

古文：故古之治天下也，必达乎性命之情；其举错未必同也，其合于道一也。
现代文：这就是圣人的行为表现。所以古代圣人治理天下，一定是通达性命之情，尽管具体的行为措施不尽相同，但合乎 道 的原则是一致的。
English: This is the behavior of a sage. Therefore, the ancient sages ruled the world, and it must be the feeling of reaching life. Although the specific behavioral measures are not the same, the principle of being virtuous is consistent.

古文：夫夏日之不被裘者，非爱之也，焕有余于身也；冬日之不用翣者，非简之也，清有余于适也。
现代文：夏天不穿皮衣，并不是爱惜它，而是对身体来说温暖已是足够的了；冬天不用扇子，并不是因为简朴，而是对人来说清凉已是相当充分的了。
English: If you don't wear a fur coat in summer, it's not because you don't care about it, but because it's warm enough for your body; if you don't use a fan in winter, it's not because it's simple, but because it's cool enough for you.

古文：夫圣人量腹而食，度形而衣，节于己而已，贪污之心，奚由生哉？
现代文：所以圣人估量自己的饭量而进食，度量自己的体形而裁衣，对自己的物欲有所节制，恰如其分，这样哪会产生贪婪之心呢！
English: That is why sages measure their food intake and eat accordingly, measure their body shape and cut their clothes, and restrain their material desires appropriately. How can this produce a greedy heart?

古文：故能有天下者，必无以天下为也；能有名誉者，必无以趋行求者也。
现代文：因此，能够持有天下者，一定不是以天下作为追求的目标；能够享有名誉者，一定不是靠奔波忙碌追求得到的。
English: Therefore, those who can hold the world must not pursue the world as their goal; those who can enjoy fame must not pursue it by running around.

古文：圣人有所于达，达则嗜欲之心外矣。
现代文：圣人能够于道相通，因而嗜欲之心也必被排斥在外。
English: The saint can be in communion with the Way, and therefore the lustful heart must be excluded.

古文：孔、墨之弟子，皆以仁义之术教导于世，然而不免于儡，身犹不能行也，又况所教平！
现代文：孔子、墨子的弟子们都拿仁义的道理来教导人，然而不免于丧败。他们自身都不能实行仁义，更何况他们所教导的世人呢？
English: The disciples of Confucius and Mozi both taught people the principles of benevolence and righteousness, but they were doomed to failure. They could not practice benevolence themselves, let alone the people they taught.

古文：是何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：其道外也。
现代文：是因为他们的学说是天道本性外的东西。
English: It is because their doctrine is something outside the nature of the heavenly way.

古文：夫以未求返于本，许由不能行也，又况齐民乎！
现代文：用皮毛末节去谋求归返根本，即使像许由这样的高洁之士都办不到，又何况一般老百姓呢！
English: Using the last of one's fur to seek a return to basics, even if such noble people as Xu Yue can't do it, let alone ordinary people!

古文：诚达于性命之情，而仁义固附矣，趋舍何足以滑心！
现代文：如果真能通达性命之情，那么仁义自然会依附归顺，举止行为哪能扰乱得了人的心？
English: If one can truly attain the feeling of life, then benevolence and righteousness will naturally adhere to obedience. How can one's behavior disturb one's heart?

古文：若夫神无所掩，心无所载，通洞条达，恬漠无事，无所凝滞，虚寂以待，势利不能诱也，辩者不能说也，声色不能婬也，美者不能滥也，智者不能动也，勇者不能恐也，此真人之道也。
现代文：假如精神不被掩遮伤害，心志没有压力负担，通畅恬静，淡漠无事，没有凝滞郁结，虚寂静漠对待外物，那么利禄权势就不能使他动心，巧辩之人不能说服他，声色不能使他淫乱，美妙之物不会使他丧志，智慧之人不会使他动摇，勇猛之人不会使他恐惧，这就是真人之道。
English: If the spirit is not harmed by concealment, the mind is not burdened by pressure, the mind is smooth and tranquil, indifferent to everything, not stagnant and stagnant, and indifferent to external things, then the power of the lilo cannot move him, the clever person cannot convince him, the color of the voice cannot make him lewd, the wonderful thing will not discourage him, the wise person will not shake him, and the brave person will not frighten him. This is the way of the true man.

古文：若然者，陶冶万物，与造化者为人，天地之间，宇宙之内，莫能夭遏。
现代文：这样的话，他就能陶冶万物，与自然造化相伴，天地之间，宇宙之内，没有什么能阻止他。
English: In this way, he will be able to cultivate all things, to accompany the creation of nature, between heaven and earth, within the universe, nothing can stop him.

古文：夫化生者不死，而化物者不化。神经于驱山、太行而不能难，入于四海九江而不能儒，处小隘而不塞，横扃天地之间而不窕。
现代文：化育生命的人不死，促使生物变化的人不变；他的精神经过骊山、太行不受阻拦，进入四海九江不会沾湿；处在狭窄之地不感到挤塞，横贯天地之间不肆意放纵。
English: The man who transmutes life does not die, and the man who promotes biological change does not change; his spirit passes through Lushan and Taihang unimpeded, and enters the four seas and nine rivers without getting wet; he does not feel crowded in a narrow place, and does not wantonly indulge between heaven and earth.

古文：不通此者，虽目数千羊之群，耳分八风之调，足蹀《阳阿》之舞，而手会《绿水》之趋，智终天地，明照日月，辩解连环，泽润玉石，犹无益于治天下也。
现代文：不能通达天道者，即使眼睛能够数清一群上千只的羊，耳朵能分辨八风之调，脚踏着 阳阿 之舞，手合着《绿水》的节拍，智谋能统贯天地，目光像日月样明亮，口才可以讲清复杂难题，言辞润泽动听如玉石，但对治理天下来说还是没有什么裨益的。
English: Those who are not able to reach the heavenly way, even if their eyes can count a group of thousands of sheep, their ears can distinguish the tone of the eight winds, their feet can step on the dance of the yang, their hands can meet the rhythm of "Green Water," their wisdom can unify heaven and earth, their eyes are as bright as the sun and moon, their eloquence can clarify complex problems, and their words are as moist and beautiful as jade, but they are still of no benefit to the governance of the world.

古文：静漠恬澹，所以养性也；和愉虚无，所以养德也。
现代文：静默恬淡是用以养性的；和愉虚无是用以养德的。
English: Silence and light are used to nourish nature; and pleasure and nothingness are used to nourish virtue.

古文：外不滑内，则性得其宜；性不动和，则德安其位。
现代文：外物不诱乱内在本性，那么本性就有安适的居所；性情保持平和，那么德就有安处的位置。
English: If the external things do not tempt the inner nature, then the nature will have a comfortable abode; if the disposition remains peaceful, then virtue will have a safe place.

古文：养生以经世，抱德以终年，可谓能何道矣。
现代文：人能够养性以处世，怀德以享天年，这样就可以说能够体察天道了。
English: People can cultivate their character by living in the world, and cultivate their virtue by enjoying the heavenly life. In this way, it can be said that they can experience the heavenly way.

古文：若然者，血脉无郁滞，五藏无蔚气，祸福弗能挠滑，非誉弗能尘垢，故能致其极。
现代文：如是这样，人的血脉就不会郁积阻滞，五脏就不会受病气侵入，祸福也不能扰乱，毁誉也不能玷污，所以也能达到最高的道德境界。
English: If this is the case, people's blood will not be blocked by stagnation, the five viscera will not be invaded by illness, misfortune and fortune can not be disturbed, and reputation can not be tarnished, so they can also reach the highest moral realm.

古文：非有其世，孰能济焉？
现代文：但是，如果不是处在一个有道德的时代，哪里能做到这点呢？
English: But where else can you do that if not in an ethical age?

古文：有其人，不遇其时，身犹不能脱，又况无道乎！
现代文：有能体道的人，但如果没有遇上好的世道，就有可能摆脱不了乱世的干扰，更何况那些本身没有道德的人呢？
English: There are people who can be moral, but if they do not encounter a good world, they may not be able to get rid of the interference of the chaotic world, let alone those who do not have morality themselves?

古文：且人之情，耳目应感动，心志知忧乐，手足之疾痒，辟寒暑，所以与物接也。
现代文：况且人的本能性情是耳目易受外界感应而动，心思天生知道忧愁快乐，手脚会触摸疼痒、躲避凉热，这些都是因为与外界发生接触中必然发生的。
English: Moreover, people's instinctive disposition is that the ears and eyes are easily moved by external stimuli, the mind inherently knows sadness and happiness, the hands and feet will touch itching and avoid cold and heat, all of which are inevitable due to contact with the outside world.

古文：蜂虿螫指而神不能檐，蚊虻肤而知不能平，夫忧患之来，撄人心也，非直蜂虿之螫毒而蚊虻之惨怛也，而欲静漠虚无，奈之何哉！
现代文：被蜂蝎刺咬了手指精神就会不愉快，被蚊虻叮咬了皮肤人的心思就会不平静；而受忧患的骚扰，人更是揪心般的痛苦，就不只是像蜂蝎螫刺蚊虻叮咬那样的皮肉之苦了，因此人就是想静寂淡漠，也只得徒唤奈何！
English: If a wasp stings one's finger, one's spirit will be unhappy; if a mosquito bites one's skin, one's mind will not be calm; and if one is harassed by sorrow, one's pain will be even more heart-wrenching. This is not just the pain of the flesh like the sting of a wasp sting. Therefore, even if one wants to be calm and indifferent, one has no choice but to be disturbed.

古文：夫目察秋毫之末，耳不闻雷霆之音；耳调玉石之声，目不见泰山之高，何则？
现代文：眼睛能观察到秋毫之末，而耳朵却难以承受雷霆的巨响；耳朵能听玉石般的圆润乐声，眼睛却难以看到泰山的峰顶。
English: The eyes can observe the end of autumn, but the ears can hardly bear the thunder; the ears can listen to the rounded music like jade, but the eyes can hardly see the peak of Mount Tai.

古文：小有所志而大有所忘也。
现代文：这些是什么原因呢？因为它们已是习惯接受小的地方而不习惯接受大的地方。
English: What are the reasons for this? Because they are used to accepting small places and not large ones.

古文：今万物之来，擢拔吾性，攓取吾情，有若泉源，虽欲勿禀，其可得邪？
现代文：现在万事万物纷至沓来，扯拉拔取我们这些人的性情，就像泉水源头流淌过来的大水，那河川即使不想接纳，哪能办得到呢？
English: Now everything is rushing to us, tugging and pulling at our human nature, just like the water flowing from the source of a spring. If you don't want to accept that river, how can you do it?

古文：今夫树木者，灌以瀿水，畴以肥壤，一人养之，十人拔之，则必无余孽，又况与一国同伐之哉！
现代文：今天有植树育林者，给树苗灌上足够的水，并培上肥沃的土，但如一人培育，却有十人去毁林拔树，那必定是连一枝新芽都保不住的，更何况举国上下一起来砍伐它呢？
English: Today, there are afforestationists who water the seedlings sufficiently and cultivate fertile soil, but if one person cultivates, but ten people destroy the forest and pull up the trees, it must be impossible to keep even a single sprout, not to mention the whole country coming together to cut it down?

古文：虽欲久生，岂可得乎？
现代文：在这种情况下，虽想活得长久些，但哪里能做到？
English: In this case, although you want to live longer, where can you do it?

古文：今盆水在庭，清之终日，未能见眉睫，浊之不过一挠，而不能察方员。
现代文：放一盆水在庭院里，用一整天时间来澄清，清澈度还不足以照清眉睫毛，而要使它变浑浊，只需要轻轻搅动一下，就浑浊得连盆底是方还是圆都看不出来。
English: Put a basin of water in the courtyard and spend a whole day clarifying it. The clarity is not enough to illuminate the eyebrows and eyelashes, but to make it cloudy, you only need to stir it gently, and it will be so cloudy that you can't even see whether the bottom of the basin is square or round.

古文：人神易浊而难清，犹盆水之类也，况一世而挠滑之，曷得须臾平乎？
现代文：以此联系到人的精神也是容易被搞浑浊而难以保持清明，就像上述提到的盆里的水一样，更何况可搅乱人精神的是整个世俗社会，你哪里可得到片刻的平静啊！
English: In this connection, the human spirit is also easily muddied and difficult to keep clear, just like the water in the basin mentioned above. What's more, it is the entire secular society that can disturb the human spirit. Where can you get a moment's peace?

古文：古者至德之世，贾便其肆，农乐其业，大夫安其职，而处士修其道。
现代文：古代至德的时代，商人开店买卖，农夫耕种愉快，士人安心职责，处士修养道德。
English: In the era from ancient times to the present, merchants opened shops, farmers were happy to cultivate, officials had safe duties, and clerks cultivated morality.

古文：当此之时，风雨不毁折，草木不夭，九鼎重味，珠玉润泽，洛出《丹书》，河出《绿图》，故许由、方回、善卷、披衣得达其道。
现代文：在这个时候，风雨不摧毁万物，草木也不会夭折；九鼎国宝分外厚重，珠玉格外光泽；洛水有神龟送呈《丹书》，黄河上浮显《绿图》。所以这时的许由、方回、善卷、披衣这些贤达之士能够成就他们的道德志向。
English: At this time, the wind and rain will not destroy everything, and the plants and trees will not die prematurely; the Jiuding National Treasure is extraordinarily thick, and the precious stones are extraordinarily shiny; there are divine turtles in Luoshui presenting the "Dan Shu," and the "Green Map" is emerging on the Yellow River. Therefore, at this time, Xu Rong, Fang Hui, Zhan Zhuan, and Ping Yi, these sages can achieve their moral aspirations.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：世之主有欲利天下之心，是以人得自乐其间。
现代文：因为一国君主怀有让天下所有人得利的心愿，所以人们能够在这世间自得其乐。
English: Because the monarch of a country has the desire to benefit everyone in the world, people can enjoy themselves in this world.

古文：四子之才，非能尽善盖今之世也，然莫能与之同光者，遇唐虞之时。
现代文：许由等人的才德并非尽善尽美超过今世，但是今世没有谁能和他们相媲美，是因为许由等四人碰上了唐虞的好世道。
English: The talents of Xu Yue and the others are not perfect beyond this world, but no one in this world can match them, because Xu Yue and the other four encountered the good world of Tang Yu.

古文：逮至夏桀、殷纣，燔生人，辜谏者，为炮烙，铸金柱，剖贤人之心，析才士之胫，醢鬼侯之女，葅梅伯之骸。
现代文：到了夏桀、殷纣王之时，他们火烧活人，肢裂敢于劝谏的忠臣，设造炮烙、铸造铜柱之类的刑具，解剖忠贤之士的心脏，剖析分解才能之士的脚骨，将鬼侯奉献的女儿剁成肉酱，砍碎梅伯的骨骸。
English: When it came to the time of King Xia and King Yin, they burned people alive, dismembered loyal retainers who dared to dissuade them, set up torture devices such as cannon brands and cast copper pillars, dissected the hearts of loyal and virtuous men, dissected the bones of the feet of talented men, minced the daughter of a ghost lord into meat sauce, and chopped up the bones of Mei Bo.

古文：当此之时，山崩，三川涸，飞鸟铩翼，走兽挤脚。
现代文：在这个时候，峣山崩塌，渭水、泾水和汧水枯涸，飞鸟折羽，走兽断腿。
English: At this time, the Lushan Mountain collapsed, the Lushan Water, the Lushan Water and the Lushan Water dried up, the birds broke their feathers, and the animals broke their legs.

古文：当此之时，岂独无圣人哉？
现代文：这个时候难道没有圣贤者？
English: Are there no sages at this time?

古文：然而不能通其道者，不遇其世。
现代文：不，只是这些圣贤者没有碰上好世道来实现他们的主张。
English: No, it's just that these sages haven't found a good way to implement their ideas.

古文：夫鸟飞千仞之上，兽走丛薄之中，祸犹及之，又况编户齐民乎！
现代文：鸟高飞在天空、兽奔走在草丛，树林尚且有祸难落在它们的身上，更何况编户管理得很严的平民百姓呢！
English: Birds fly high in the sky, beasts run through the grass, the woods still have the misfortune to fall on them, let alone the common people who are strictly managed by the editors!

古文：由此观之，体道者不专在于我，亦有系于世者矣。
现代文：由此看来，能否体现道德不仅仅取决于本人，还与所处的世道好坏相联系。
English: From this point of view, whether or not one can embody morality depends not only on oneself, but is also linked to the good or bad of the world in which one lives.

古文：夫历阳之都，一夕反而为湖，勇力圣知与罢怯不肖者同命；巫山之上，顺风纵火，膏夏紫芝与萧、艾俱死。
现代文：那历阳城，一个夜里就变成了湖泊，使勇夫、智者和胆怯之人、不肖之人一样落个葬身湖底的命运；同样，在巫山上烧荒，这其中的膏夏、紫芝和艾蒿一同烧毁。
English: That Liyang City, in one night, turned into a lake, so that the brave, the wise, the timid, and the unprepossessing alike fell to the fate of being buried at the bottom of the lake; likewise, there was a wildfire on the Wushan Mountain, in which the bitter summer, the purple grass, and the wormwood were burned together.

古文：故河鱼不得明目，穉稼不得育时，其所生者然也。
现代文：所以说黄河里的鱼无法做到眼睛明亮，稚幼的禾苗无法繁育后代，这都是由它们所处的生存环境所决定的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the fish in the Yellow River cannot achieve bright eyes, and the young seedlings cannot breed offspring, which are all determined by the living environment in which they live.

古文：故世治则愚者不能独乱，世乱则智者不能独治。身蹈于浊世之中，而责道之不行也，是犹两绊骐骥，而求其致千里也。
现代文：因此，世道圣明，愚奸者也不能独个儿搞乱社会；反之世道丧败，明智者也不能独个儿治理社会；身处浑浊动荡世道，而责备他实行不了道德，这就像用绳索绊套马的腿，却又要它日行千里一样荒谬。
English: Therefore, the way of the world is clear, and the foolish and treacherous cannot alone mess up society; on the other hand, the way of the world is lost, and the wise cannot alone govern society; in a turbulent and turbulent world, blaming him for not being able to practice morality is as absurd as tying a horse's leg with a rope and making it travel thousands of miles a day.

古文：置猨槛中，则与豚同，非不巧捷也，无所肆其能也。
现代文：也如置于笼中的猿猴像笨猪一样，实际上不是它不灵巧敏捷，而是在笼中无法施展它的灵敏。
English: Just as an ape in a cage is like a pig in a sty, it is not that it is not dexterous and agile, but that it cannot exercise its dexterity in a cage.

古文：舜之耕陶也，不能利其里；南面王则德施乎四海。
现代文：当虞舜还是农夫陶匠之时，不能造福于乡间邻里，而当他接受了尧的禅让南面为王后，便施德泽于四海。
English: When he was a farmer and a potter, he could not benefit his rural neighbors, but when he accepted Nanmen's zen and made her his queen, he became a hero in the four seas.

古文：仁非能益也，处便而势利也。
现代文：这可以看出他的仁爱之情并没增加而是所处的地位便于他实施仁义道德而已。
English: It can be seen that his benevolence did not increase, but his position made it easier for him to practice benevolence.

古文：古之圣人，其和愉宁静，性也；其志得道行，命也。
现代文：所以说，古代圣人尽管有着和愉宁静的天性，但他的志向能否实施运用却取决于 命运 。
English: Therefore, although the ancient sage has a pleasant and tranquil nature, whether his aspiration can be implemented depends on fate.

古文：是故性遭命而后能行，命得性而后能明。
现代文：因此这种天性碰上了好的命运就能实施，好的命运和有宁静天性的人相结合才能表现出清明来。
English: Therefore, this kind of nature can be realized when it encounters a good fate, and a good fate and a person with a peaceful nature can be combined to show clarity.

古文：乌号之弓，溪子之弩，不能无弦而射；越舲蜀艇，不能无水而浮。今矰缴机而在上，罟张而在下，虽欲翱翔，其势焉得！故《诗》云： 采采卷耳，不盈倾筐，嗟我怀人，寘彼周行。 
现代文：这就像乌号之弓、溪子之弩需要有弦才能发射一样；也如同越国的小船和蜀地的小艇也非得有水才能漂浮一样；现在带有丝绳的利箭在空中乱射，网罟在大地上四处张设，这鸟兽尽管想飞翔奔走，但在这种险恶环境下又怎么能行呢？所以《诗》里说： 采摘卷耳野菜，采来采去不满箩筐。怀念远方的人，箩筐放在大路旁。 
English: Just as the bow of the cormorant and the paddle of the sandpiper need strings to launch; just as the small boat of Yue and the small boat of Shu need water to float; now that the sharp arrows with silk ropes are shooting wildly in the air, and the nets are spread all over the land, how can the birds and beasts fly and run in such a dangerous environment? Therefore, the "Poem" says: "Pick ear-rolled vegetables, pick and remove dissatisfied baskets. Nostalgic for the distant people, the baskets are placed on the side of the road."

古文：以言慕远世也。
现代文：这是说思慕远古的清明世道啊！
English: It's about remembering the ancient and pure way of life!

