古文：杯渡释宝志
现代文：杯渡释宝志
English: The story of the cup bearer

古文：杯渡
现代文：杯渡
English: Cup crossing

古文：杯渡者，不知姓名，常乘木杯渡水，因而为号。
现代文：杯渡这个人，不知他姓啥名啥，因为他常常凭借一只大木制杯子渡河，所以都称他为杯渡。
English: This man, I don't know his last name, because he often crossed the river with a large wooden cup, so everyone called him "Cup Crossing."

古文：初在冀州，不修细行，神力卓越，世莫测其由。
现代文：当初他住在冀州，行为举止不拘小节，有着超凡的神力，谁也不知他是什么地方来的。
English: At first, he lived in Jizhou, behaved in an informal manner, had extraordinary divine powers, and no one knew where he came from.

古文：尝于北方，寄宿一家，家有一金像，渡窃而将去。
现代文：他曾在北方寄宿在一户人家，这家有座金身佛像，杯渡偷到手后要带着出走。
English: He used to stay with a family in the north. The family had a gold Buddha statue, and when he stole the cup, he was going to run away with it.

古文：家主觉而追之，见渡徐行，走马逐之不及。
现代文：主人发觉后便去追他。见他走得很慢，但是马跑得再快也追上他。
English: When his master saw him, he ran after him. He saw that he was walking very slowly, but the faster the horse ran, the faster it could catch up with him.

古文：至于孟津河，浮木杯于水，凭之渡河，不假风掉，轻疾如飞，俄而渡岸，达于京师。
现代文：到了孟津河时，杯渡把木杯漂在河水上，自己就凭着杯子过河，用不着风帆与船桨之类，行驶起来却轻快如飞，不大一会儿就到了对岸，来到了京都。
English: When he arrived at the Mengjin River, Kado floated a wooden cup on the water, and he crossed the river with the cup. He did not need a sail or a paddle, but he moved as if he were flying. Soon he reached the opposite bank and arrived in Kyoto.

古文：见时可年四十许，带索褴褛，殆不蔽身。
现代文：当时他有四十来岁，穿得破破烂烂，真可谓衣不蔽体。
English: At that time, he was in his forties, and his clothes were so tattered that he was practically naked.

古文：言语出没，喜怒不均。
现代文：言谈举止，喜怒无常。
English: He speaks and behaves in a temperamental manner.

古文：或剖冰扣冻而洗浴，或著履上山，或徒行于市。
现代文：有时凿开冰冻用冰水洗澡，有时穿着草鞋爬山，或者赤着两脚逛闹市。
English: Sometimes they cut through the ice to take a bath with ice water, sometimes they climb mountains wearing straw sandals, or walk around the city barefoot.

古文：唯荷一芦圌子，更无余物。
现代文：他除了带着那个芦草囤子外，身上别无他物。
English: He's got nothing on him but that reed shovel.

古文：尝往延贤寺法意道人处，意以别房待之。后欲往瓜步，至于江侧，就航人告渡，不肯载之。复累足杯中，顾眄言咏，杯自然流，直渡北岸。
现代文：他曾到延贤寺法意道人那里居住过，法意把他安置在另外一间寺房内，后来他要去瓜步，到了江边，跟船夫说自己要渡江，船夫不愿意让他上船，他只好又将双脚放在木杯里，顾盼自如谈笑风生，杯子自然地向前飘行，直到对岸。
English: He had once lived with the Taoists of Yan Xian Temple, and the Taoists placed him in another temple. Later, he wanted to go to Guapu, and when he got to the river, he told the boatman that he wanted to cross the river. The boatman did not want to let him on the boat, so he had to put his feet in the wooden cup again, hoping to be able to talk and laugh freely. The cup naturally floated forward until it reached the opposite shore.

古文：向广陵，遇村舍、李家八关斋，先不相识。乃直入斋堂而坐，置圌于中庭。
现代文：登岸之后向广陵走去，路上遇到姓李的村舍，李家设八关斋，杯渡过去并不认识李家，他进院之后直奔斋堂里面坐下，把那个芦革囤子放在院子中间。
English: After disembarking, he walked towards Guangling. On the way, he came across a village house with the surname Li. The Li family set up a bakufu, but he didn't know the Li family. After he entered the hospital, he went straight to the hall and sat down, and put the leather loincloth in the middle of the yard.

古文：众以其形陋，无恭敬之心。
现代文：大家都因为他形貌难看，都无恭敬之心。
English: Everyone is drawn to him because of his ugly appearance, and they have no respect for him.

古文：李见芦圌当道，欲移置墙边。数人举不能动。渡食竟，提之而去，笑曰： 四天王李家。 
现代文：李见芦草囤子挡道，欲移到墙脚下，但是好几个人都拿不起来，杯渡吃完饭之后，提起来就走，而且笑着说： 四天王李家！ 
English: When Li saw the reed raft blocking the way, he wanted to move it to the foot of the wall, but several people couldn't lift it up. After he finished eating, he picked it up and walked away, and said with a smile, "Four Heavenly Kings, the Li family!"

古文：于时有一竖子，窥其圌中，有四小儿，并长数寸，面目端正，衣裳鲜洁。
现代文：这时有个仆人瞧见囤子里有四个小孩，都是几寸高，生得面目端正，衣服鲜艳洁净。
English: At this time, a servant saw that there were four children in the basket, all a few inches high, born with a neat face, bright and clean clothes.

古文：于是追觅，不知所在。
现代文：于是就追了出去，但不知到了何处。
English: So they chased him, but they didn't know where he was.

古文：后三日，乃见在西界蒙龙树下坐，李礼拜请还家，日日供养。渡不甚持斋，饮酒噉肉，至于辛脍，与俗不殊。
现代文：第四天，见他坐在西边的蒙龙树下，李便客客气气地把他请到家里，天天供给他好吃的，杯渡不太讲究戒规，喝酒吃肉，以至于率辛辣腥荤，都跟平常人没有什么区别。
English: On the fourth day, seeing him sitting under the Menglong tree on the west side, Li Bengu politely invited him to his home and provided him with delicious food every day. He was not too particular about the rules of drinking, and he drank wine and ate meat, so much so that he was spicy and salty. There was no difference with ordinary people.

古文：百姓奉上，或受不受。
现代文：百姓将这些东西送给他，愿意要就要，不想要就不要。
English: The people give these things to him, whether they want them or not.

古文：沛国刘兴伯为兖州刺史，遣使要之。负圌而来。
现代文：沛郡人刘兴伯是衮州刺史，派人邀请杯渡，杯渡带着芦草囤子就来了。
English: Liu Xingbo, a resident of Pei County, who is the chief historian of Luzhou, sent someone to invite Cupo, and Cupo came with reed rafts.

古文：兴伯使人举视，十余人不胜，伯自看，唯见一败衲及一木杯。
现代文：刘兴伯派遣的那个人仰着脸看，见杯渡比十多个人叠在一起还要高，刘兴伯自己看时，则只看到一件破僧衣与一只木杯。
English: The person sent by Liu Xingbo looked up and saw that the goblet was taller than more than ten people stacked together. When Liu Xingbo looked at it himself, he only saw a broken monk's robe and a wooden cup.

古文：后李家复得二十余日，清旦忽云： 欲得一袈裟，中时令办。 
现代文：后来李家又请他回去住了二十多天，一天早上他忽然说起，想要一件袈裟，并要他们中午时必须办到。
English: Later, the Li family invited him back to stay for more than 20 days. One morning, he suddenly said that he wanted to buy a gong and told them that they had to do it by noon.

古文：李即经营，至中未成。
现代文：李即令人赶紧操办，到了中午也没办成。
English: Li immediately ordered a hasty operation, which was not completed by noon.

古文：渡云暂出，至暝不返。
现代文：杯渡说要暂时出去一会儿，结果到了晚上也没回来。
English: He said he wanted to go out for a while, but he didn't come back in the evening.

古文：合境闻有异香，疑之为怪。
现代文：到处都闻到有一股奇异的香味，人们怀疑杯渡在作怪。
English: There was a strange smell everywhere, and people suspected that the cupbearer was playing tricks.

古文：处处觅渡，乃见在北岩下，敷败袈裟于地，卧之而死。
现代文：四处寻找他，只见在北面山岩下面，他身上盖着破袈裟，躺在那里死了。
English: They looked for him everywhere, but they found him under the rocks to the north, covered with a broken skull, where he lay dead.

古文：头前脚后，背生莲华，极鲜香，一夕而萎。
现代文：在他的头前脚后以及背上，生着莲花，极为鲜艳、芬芳，经过一晚上又枯萎了。
English: In front of his head, behind his feet and on his back, there were lotus flowers, very bright and fragrant, which withered after one night.

古文：邑共殡葬之。
现代文：村里的人一起把他殡葬了。
English: The people of the village buried him together.

古文：后日有人从北来云 见渡负芦圌，行向彭城。 
现代文：第三天，有人从北边回来说，他看见杯渡背着芦草囤子，正往彭城走。
English: On the third day, someone from the north came back to say that he had seen Kado carrying reed mules and heading for Pengcheng.

古文：乃共开棺，唯见败衣。既至彭城，遇有白衣黄欣，深信佛法，见渡礼拜，请还家。
现代文：大家去打开棺材一看，只见到里面有杯渡穿的那件破衣服，杯渡到了彭城后，见到一个叫黄欣的平民百姓，黄欣虔诚地信奉佛教，他向杯渡行礼拜见，请他到了自己家里。
English: Everyone went to open the coffin and took a look, only to see the torn piece of clothing with a cup inside. After the cup was passed to Pengcheng, a commoner named Huang Xin was seen. Huang Xin was a devout Buddhist. He paid homage to the cup and invited him to his home.

古文：至贫，但有麦饭而已，渡食之怡然。
现代文：他家极穷，只有糊口的米饭而已，但杯渡吃起来很坦然、很有滋味。
English: His family is extremely poor, and all they have is the rice they need to survive, but it's very calming and delicious to eat it by the cup.

古文：止得半年，忽语欣云： 可觅芦圌三十六枚，吾须用之。 
现代文：住了半年后，杯渡忽然对黄欣说： 你去找三十六只芦草囤子，我要使用。 
English: After living there for half a year, Kado suddenly said to Huang Xin, "Go find thirty-six reed mules. I want to use them."

古文：答云： 此间止可有十枚，贫无以买，恐不尽办。 
现代文：黄欣答道： 我家里能有十来只，又没钱去买，恐怕弄不到这么多。 
English: Huang Xin replied, "I can have more than ten cows at home, but I don't have the money to buy them. I'm afraid I can't get this many.

古文：渡曰： 汝但检觅，宅中应有。 
现代文：杯渡说： 你只管去找一找，把家里有的都拿出来。 
English: "All you have to do is look for it and take out everything you have at home," said Kazu.

古文：欣即穷检。果得三十六枚，列之庭中。
现代文：黄欣便去到处搜拾，果然找到了三十六只，都摆在院子里。
English: Huang Xin then searched everywhere and found thirty-six toads, all of which were placed in the yard.

古文：虽有其数，亦多破败。
现代文：数量虽然不少，只是大都破败了。
English: There are quite a few, but most of them are in ruins.

古文：命欣次第孰视，皆已新完。
现代文：杯渡让他挨个看一看，一个个全已变成了新的。
English: He let him take a look at the cups one by one, and they had all turned into new ones.

古文：渡密封之，因语欣令开，乃见钱帛皆满，可堪百许万。
现代文：杯渡将囤子一个个地封闭好，然后告诉黄欣去打开，便见里面都装满了钱与绸缎，能值一百来万。
English: Kado sealed the cocoons one by one, and then told Huang Xin to open them. He saw that they were all filled with money and silk cocoons, which could be worth a million or more.

古文：识者谓杯渡分身他土，所得亲施，回以施欣。
现代文：一个有见识的人说，这是杯渡使用分身法，到别地方化缘得来的，又转手送给了黄欣。
English: An insightful person said that this was the result of Kauto's use of the doppelganger method, which came from somewhere else, and was then passed on to Huang Xin.

古文：欣受之，皆为功德。
现代文：黄欣接受了这些东西，都捐给了寺庙。
English: Huang Xin accepted these things and donated them to the temple.

古文：经一年许，渡辞出，欣为办粮食。
现代文：过了一年多，杯渡向黄欣辞行，黄欣便为他准备了干粮。
English: After more than a year, the cup was passed to Huang Xin, and Huang Xin prepared dry food for him.

古文：明晨，见粮食皆存，不知渡所在。
现代文：第二天早晨，见干粮都放在那里，杯渡却不知哪里去了。
English: The next morning, I saw that all the dry food had been placed there, but I didn't know where the cup had gone.

古文：经一月许，复至京师。
现代文：过了一个来月，杯渡又到了京都。
English: A month later, the cup was back in Kyoto.

古文：时潮沟有朱文殊者，少奉佛法。
现代文：当时潮沟有个叫朱文殊的，年纪轻轻信奉佛教，杯渡经常来到他家。
English: At that time, there was a man in Chaogou called Zhu Wenshu, who was young and believed in Buddhism, and cup-bearers often came to his house.

古文：渡多来其家，文殊谓渡云： 弟子脱舍身没后，愿见救济，脱在好处，愿为法侣。 
现代文：文殊对杯渡说： 弟子死了之后，愿您能够救济我的灵魂，如果脱生在好地方，来生我愿成为一个僧侣。 
English: Manjusri said to the cup bearer, "After the death of my disciple, may you be able to relieve my soul. If I am reborn in a good place, I would like to become a monk in my next life."

古文：渡不答。
现代文：杯渡没吱声。
English: There was no squeak as the cup was passed.

古文：文殊喜，佛法默默，已为许矣。
现代文：文殊很高兴，以为佛法使其沉默，就是已经应允了。
English: Manjusri was very happy, thinking that the Buddha's order to silence him had already been obeyed.

古文：后东游入吴郡，路见钓鱼师，因就乞鱼。
现代文：杯渡后来东游到了吴郡，路上遇见个钓鱼的，便向他要鱼。
English: After the cup crossing, he swam east to Wu County. On the way, he met a fisherman and asked him for fish.

古文：鱼师施一餧者。渡手弄反覆，还投水，游活而去。
现代文：钓鱼的给了他一条臭烂鱼，杯渡放在手上弄了几下，又把它放在水里，这条鱼便摇头摆尾地游走了。
English: The fisherman gave him a rotten fish, he put it in his hand, gave it a few strokes of the paddle, put it back in the water, and the fish swam away, head and tail wagging.

古文：又见网师，更从乞鱼。
现代文：又看见一个用网打鱼的，又去跟他要鱼。
English: And again he saw a man casting a net, and he went to him and asked him for a fish.

古文：网师瞋骂不与，渡乃拾取两石子掷水中。俄而有两水牛斗其网中，网碎败，不复见牛，渡亦已隐。
现代文：打鱼的骂了一顿不给他，杯渡便捡起两块石子扔到河里，立即有两头水牛在那个人的鱼网里顶起架来，网碎了，水牛不见了，杯渡也已经不见踪影。
English: The fisherman scolded him for not giving him a meal, and Kado picked up two stones and threw them into the river. Immediately, two buffaloes stood up in the man's fishing net. The net broke, the buffalo disappeared, and Kado disappeared.

古文：行至松江，乃仰盖于水中，乘而渡岸。
现代文：杯渡走到松江，便仰卧在水上，漂流到了对岸。
English: When he reached Matsue, he lay on his back on the water and drifted to the opposite shore.

古文：经涉会稽剡县，登天台山。
现代文：路过会稽剡县，登上了天台山。
English: Passing through Huiqi County, he climbed Tiantai Mountain.

古文：数月而返京师。
现代文：几个月之后又返回了京都。
English: A few months later he returned to Kyoto.

古文：少时，游止无定，请召或往不往。
现代文：不久，他又到处云游，去什么地方，住在哪里，都不一定。
English: Before long, he was wandering all over the place, not sure where to go or where to live.

古文：时南州有陈家，颇有衣食，渡往其家，甚见迎奉。
现代文：有人邀请他的时候，或者去或者不去，也不一定。当时南州有一家姓陈的，衣食丰足，杯渡到了他家，很受欢迎与优待。
English: When someone invited him, he either went or did not go, not necessarily. At that time, there was a family in Nanzhou with the surname Chen. They had plenty of food and clothing, and the cup was delivered to their home. They were very popular and received preferential treatment.

古文：闻都下复有一杯渡，陈父子五人，咸不信，故下都看之，果于其家杯渡形相一种。
现代文：听说京都城里也有一个杯渡，陈家父子五人都不相信，便到京都去看个究竟，果然看到城里那个与自己家里的杯渡一模一样。
English: Hearing that there was also a cup crossing in Kyoto Castle, the five members of the Chen family, father and son, didn't believe it, so they went to Kyoto to see for themselves, and indeed saw that the one in the city was exactly the same as the cup crossing in their own home.

古文：陈设一合蜜姜，及刀子陆香等，伺渡。渡即食蜜姜都尽，余物宛在膝前。其父子五人，恐是其家杯渡，即留二弟停都守视，余三人还家。见杯渡如旧，膝前亦有香刀子等，但不噉蜜姜为异尔。乃语陈云： 刀子钝，可为磨之。 
现代文：陈家父子买了一盒蜜姜给城里这个杯渡吃，还给他准备了刀子与陆香之类，只见他把蜜姜全吃光了，其余的东西仍然放在面前，父子五人怀疑他就是自己家里那个杯渡，便留下其中兄弟二人住在京都守视这个杯渡，其余三人立即赶回了家，见家里的杯渡还与过去一样，并且面前也有陆香与刀子等，不同的地方只是他还没有吃蜜姜。他对陈氏说： 刀子太钝了，给我磨一磨。 
English: Chen's father and son bought a box of honey ginger to the city to eat this cup of water, and also prepared knives and incense for him. He ate all the honey ginger, and the rest of the things were still in front of him. The father and son five suspected that he was the cup of water in their own home, and left two of the brothers living in Kyoto to watch the cup of water. The remaining three immediately rushed back home. The cup of water at home was still the same as before, and there were incense and knives in front of him. The only difference was that he had not yet eaten honey ginger. He said to Mr. Chen: The knife is too blunt

古文：二弟还都，云： 杯渡已移灵鹫寺。 
现代文：留在京都的哥儿俩回来说，城里那个杯渡已迁移到灵鹫寺去了。
English: The two brothers who stayed in Kyoto came back to say that the cup holder in the city had been moved to Lingya Temple.

古文：其家忽求黄纸两幅，作书不成字，合同其背。
现代文：家里这个杯渡忽然要了两张黄纸，在上面写了些不成文字的东西，将两张黄纸的背面合在了一起。
English: At home, this cup-bearer suddenly asked for two pieces of yellow paper, wrote something on it that couldn't be put into words, and put the backs of the two pieces of yellow paper together.

古文：陈问上人作何券书，渡不答，竟莫测其然。
现代文：陈氏问他写的是什么文章，杯渡没有回答，一直不知他这是什么意思。
English: Mr. Chen asked him what kind of article he had written, but he did not answer, and he did not know what he meant.

古文：时吴部民朱灵期使高丽还，值风，舶飘经九日，至一洲边。洲上有山，山甚高大，入山采薪，见有人于路，灵期乃将数人随路告乞。
现代文：当时吴王的部属朱灵期出使高丽回国，途中遇上大风，航船漂荡了九天，到了一个岛边，岛上有山，山非常高大，朱灵期等上山捡柴，见路上有人家，他便领着大家沿路乞讨。
English: At that time, Zhu Lingzhi, a subordinate of King Wu, sent Goryeo to return to China. On the way, he encountered a strong wind. The ship drifted for nine days and arrived at an island. There were mountains on the island, and the mountains were very tall. Zhu Lingzhi waited to go up the mountain to collect firewood. When he saw someone's house on the road, he led everyone along the road to beg.

古文：行千余里，闻磬声香烟，于是共称佛礼拜。
现代文：走了一千多里远；听到钟磬敲的声音，又见香烟缭绕，于是都说有佛寺在此，要去礼拜。
English: Walked more than a thousand miles away; heard the sound of the chimes, and saw the smoke, so they all said there was a Buddhist temple here, and they were going to worship.

古文：须臾，见一寺甚光丽，多是七宝庄严，又见十余石人，乃共礼拜。
现代文：不一会儿，便见有座寺庙出现在眼前，寺庙辉煌壮丽，多由金银玛瑙等七宝镶嵌而成，极为庄严，又见寺庙前面有十多个石人，他们都进行了礼拜。
English: Not long after, a temple appeared in front of me. The temple was magnificent, mostly made of gold, silver, onyx and other cloisonné, extremely solemn. I also saw more than ten stone people in front of the temple, and they all worshiped.

古文：还反行少许，闻唱道声，还往更看，犹是石人。
现代文：往回去不多远，听到诵经的声音，回去一看，诵经的好像就是那几个石人。
English: Not far back, I heard the sound of chanting, and when I looked back, it seemed to be the stone people who were chanting.

古文：灵期等相谓： 此是圣僧，吾等罪人，不能得见。 
现代文：朱灵期等互相说： 这一定是得道的僧人，我们是有罪的人，所以看不见他们。 
English: Zhu Lingzhi and the others said to each other, "These must be monks who have attained enlightenment. We are sinners, so we cannot see them."

古文：因共竭诚忏悔。
现代文：于是便竭诚地忏悔了一番。
English: So he sincerely repented.

古文：更往，乃见真人，为期等设食，食味是菜，而香美不同。
现代文：再往前走便见到了真的人，他们为朱灵期等准备好了饭，吃起来味道就是普通的菜，但比普通的菜香美多了。
English: Walking further, I saw real people. They had prepared a meal for Zhu Ling, etc. It tasted like an ordinary dish, but it was much more fragrant than an ordinary dish.

古文：众食竟，共叩头礼拜，乞速还至乡。
现代文：大家吃完了，都叩头礼拜，请求帮他们尽快返回故土。
English: After everyone finished eating, they all bowed their heads in prayer, asking for help to return to their homeland as soon as possible.

古文：有一僧云： 此间去都乃二十余万里，但令至心，不忧不速也。 
现代文：有一个僧人说： 这个地方距离京都有二十多万里，但是只要心诚，就不愁不能迅速回去。 
English: A monk said: This place is more than two hundred thousand miles away from Beijing, but as long as you are sincere, you will not worry about not being able to return quickly.

古文：因问期云： 识杯渡道人不。 
现代文：他问朱灵期： 认不认识杯渡道人？ 
English: He asked Zhu Lingzhi: Do you recognize or know the cup crossing people?

古文：答言甚识。
现代文：答道： 非常熟识。 
English: Answer: I am very familiar with it.

古文：因指北壁，有一壶，挂锡杖及钵，云： 此是杯渡住处，今因君以钵与之。 
现代文：他便指着北墙一一一那里有一把壶，挂着锡杖与钵子一一说： 这是杯渡住的地方，现在托你把钵子带给他。 
English: He pointed to the north wall, where there was a jug with a pewter rod and pliers, and said, "This is the place where the cup is kept. Now take the pliers to him."

古文：并作书著函中，别有一青竹杖，谓期言： 但掷此杖置舫前水中，闭目静坐，不假劳力，必令速至。 
现代文：他还写了封信装在信封里，另外还有支青竹杖，一并交给朱灵期，对他说： 只要把这支青竹杖扔进船千面的水里，闭上眼睛静静地坐着，不用费力就能叫你们很快到家。 
English: He also wrote a letter and put it in an envelope. In addition, he also had a bamboo cane, which he handed to Zhu Lingzhi and said to him: "Just throw this bamboo cane into the water of the ship, close your eyes and sit quietly, and you can get home quickly without any effort.

古文：于是辞别，令一沙弥送至门上，语曰： 此道去，行七里至船，不须从先路去也。 
现代文：于是辞别，叫一个小和尚送他们到门口，告诉说： 沿着这条道走七里就能到你们停船的地方，不用从原先的路回去了。 
English: So they said good-bye, and called a little monk to escort them to the door, and told him: "Follow this road for seven miles and you will reach the place where you stopped the boat, and you will not have to return by the original route."

古文：如言西转，行七里许，至船。
现代文：照他的话往西转，走了七里左右便到了船上。
English: According to his words, I turned west and walked about seven miles to the boat.

古文：即具如所示，唯闻舫从山顶树木上过，都不见水，经三日，至石头淮而住，亦不复见竹杖所在。
现代文：又按他的要求一一照办后，只听到船从山顶树上飞过的声音，根本听不到水的响声，经过三天，到了石头淮便停了下来，那支竹杖也不见了。
English: After doing everything according to his request, he only heard the sound of the boat flying over the trees at the top of the mountain, and did not hear the sound of the water at all. After three days, he stopped at the stone pond, and the bamboo cane was gone.

古文：舫入淮，至朱雀，乃见杯渡骑大航兰，以捶捶之曰： 马何不行？ 
现代文：船入了淮河，行驶到朱雀，便见杯渡骑着大航兰，用木棰敲着它说： 马儿呀，你为什么不走！ 
English: The boat entered the Huaihe River, traveled to Suzaku, and saw a cup ferryman riding a great peregrine falcon, knocking it with a raft and saying: Horse, why don't you go!

古文：观者甚多。
现代文：围在岸上看热闹的人非常多。
English: There were a lot of people gathered on the shore to watch the fun.

古文：灵期等在舫，遥礼之。
现代文：朱灵期等人站在船上远远地向他行礼，杯渡便自行下到船舵，来拿书信和钵子。
English: Zhu Lingshi and others stood on the boat and bowed to him from a distance. He went down to the helm of the boat by himself to get the letter and the paddle.

古文：渡乃自下舫，取书并钵，开书视之，字无人识者。渡大笑曰： 使我还耶。 取钵掷云中，还接之曰： 我不见此钵，四千年矣。 
现代文：他打开信来看，上面的字没有人认识。杯渡大笑道： 让我回去呢！ 他拿起钵子抛向天空，又伸手将它接住，说： 我不见此钵已有四千年了！ 
English: He opened the letter and saw that no one knew the words on it. He laughed and said, "Let me go back!" He picked up the shovel and threw it into the sky, then reached out his hand to catch it and said, "I haven't seen this shovel for four thousand years!"

古文：渡多在延贤寺法意处，时世以此钵异物，竟往观之。
现代文：杯渡经常住在延贤寺法意那里，当对人们以为这只钵子是奇异之物，都争着去看。
English: He often stayed at the Yan Xian Temple, and people thought that this louse was a strange thing, and they all wanted to see it.

古文：一说云：灵期舫漂至一穷山，遇见一僧来，云是渡弟子，昔持师钵而死冶城寺，今因君以钵还师，但令一人擎钵舫前，自安隐至也。
现代文：还有一种说法是，朱灵期的船漂到一座穷山下面，遇见一位僧人走来，自称是杯渡的弟子，从前拿着师父的钵子死在冶城寺里，如今托你把钵子送还师父，只要叫一个人擎着钵子坐在船的前面，就能安安稳稳到家。
English: There is also a saying that Zhu Ling's ship floated to the bottom of a poor mountain, and he met a monk who claimed to be a disciple of Cupid. He once died in Yecheng Temple holding his master's shovel, and now he asked you to return the shovel to his master. As long as you ask a person to sit in front of the ship with a shovel, you can get home safely.

古文：期如所教，果获全济。至南州杯渡，期当骑兰之日。
现代文：朱灵期照他说的办，果然全船人都安全地回来了，船至南州看到杯渡时，正赶上他骑兰的那天。
English: Zhu Ling did as he said, and sure enough, all the sailors returned safely. When the ship arrived in Nanzhou and saw the cup crossing, it was just in time for the day he rode the orchid.

古文：尔日早出，至晚不还，陈氏明但见门扇上有青书六字云： 福经门，灵人降。 
现代文：那天早上杯渡从陈家出来，直到晚上也没回去，第二天天亮，陈氏只见门上写着六个黑体字： 福径门，灵人降。 
English: That morning, the cup bearer left Chen's home and did not return until the evening. At dawn the next day, Chen only saw six black characters written on the door: "Fu Qian Men" (福径门), "Spiritual Man" (靈人降).

古文：字劲可识，其家杯渡遂绝迹矣。
现代文：笔体苍劲有力，可以认定是杯渡写的。陈家那个杯渡于是绝迹了。
English: The handwriting is strong and powerful, and can be identified as having been written by a cup bearer. The cup bearer of the Chen family then disappeared.

古文：都下杯渡往来山邑，多行神咒。
现代文：京都那个杯渡往来于深山与城邑之间，经常念诵神咒。
English: That cup in Kyoto travels back and forth between the mountains and the city, often chanting mantras.

古文：时庾常婢偷物而叛，四追不擒，乃问渡，云： 已死，在城江边空冢中。 
现代文：当时庾家一个长年丫环偷了东西逃跑了，四处抓不到，便去询问杯渡，杯渡说： 此人已经死了，在城外江边的一座空坟里。 
English: At that time, a long-serving maidservant of the Yan family stole something and ran away. They couldn't catch her anywhere, so they went to inquire about Cupid. Cupid said: This person is already dead, in an empty grave by the river outside the city.

古文：往看果如所言。
现代文：到那个地方一看，果然跟他说一样。
English: When I visited the place, I found it to be just as he said.

古文：孔宁子时以黄门侍郎在家患痢，遣信请渡，咒竟云： 难差，见有四鬼，皆被伤截。 
现代文：孔宁子当时是黄门侍郎，因患痢疾朵在家里，他派人请杯渡治病，杯渡念完咒语后说： 很难治愈。现在有四个鬼缠着你，都是被砍残了的。 
English: At that time, Kong Ningzi was a Yellow Gate attendant. Due to suffering from dysentery, he was at home. He sent someone to ask Cupid to cure the disease. After Cupid recited the spell, he said, "It is difficult to cure. Now there are four ghosts haunting you, all of which have been mutilated."

古文：宁子泣曰： 昔孙恩作乱，家为军人所破，二亲及叔，皆被痛酷。 
现代文：孔宁子哭泣着说： 当初孙思作乱，他家被军人攻破，父母及叔叔都被砍死。 
English: Confucius wept and said: At first, Sun Si caused a disturbance, his home was broken into by soldiers, and his parents and uncle were all hacked to death.

古文：宁子果死。
现代文：孔宁子果然死了。
English: Confucius is indeed dead.

古文：又有齐谐妻胡母氏病，众治不愈，被请僧设斋。坐有僧，劝迎杯渡。渡既至，一咒，病者即愈。
现代文：又有个叫齐谐的，妻子胡氏的母亲病了，许多人治疗都没治好，他便请僧人念经还愿，其中一个僧人劝他去请杯渡，杯渡请来后，念了一遍神咒，病人立即痊愈了。
English: There was also a man named Chihong, whose wife, Mr. Hu's mother, was ill. Many people were not cured after treatment, so he asked a monk to recite a sutra to fulfill his wish. One of the monks advised him to ask for a cup of water. After inviting the cup of water, he recited a mantra, and the patient was immediately healed.

古文：齐谐伏事为师，因为作传，记其从来神异，不可备纪。
现代文：齐谐把他当师父服侍，于是为他作传，传记中写他始终这么神奇，具体事例无法一件件都写进去。
English: They all served him as a master, so they wrote a biography for him. In the biography, they wrote that he was always so amazing, and it was impossible to include all the specific examples.

古文：元嘉三年九月，辞谐入东，留一万钱物寄谐，请为营斋，于是别去。
现代文：元嘉三年九月，杯渡辞别齐谐要去江东，留下一万钱的东西放在齐谐家，请他为自己营选房子，于是就走了。
English: In September of the third year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, he said he was going to go to the east of the Yangtze River, leaving 10,000 yuan worth of things at Qi Jia's home, and asked him to choose a house for himself, so he left.

古文：行至赤山湖，患痢而死。
现代文：去到赤山湖时，因患痢疾而死了。
English: When he went to Lake Akayama, he died of dysentery.

古文：谐即为营斋，并接尸还，葬建康覆舟山。
现代文：齐谐立即为他造好了斋堂，并把他的尸体接回来，安葬在建康覆舟山上。
English: In unison, they immediately built a temple for him, and brought his body back to be buried on Jiankangzhu Mountain.

古文：至四年，有吴兴邵信者，甚奉法，遇伤寒病，无人敢看，乃悲注念观音。
现代文：到了元嘉四年，有个吴兴人叫邵信的，虔诚地信奉佛教，他染上了伤寒病，没有人敢给他看病，他便悲泣着念叨观音菩萨。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Jia, there was a Wu Xing person named Shao Xin, a devout believer in Buddhism. He contracted typhoid fever, and no one dared to treat him, so he cried and chanted about Guanyin Bodhisattva.

古文：忽见一僧来，云是杯渡弟子，语云： 莫忧，家师寻来相看。 
现代文：忽然看见有个僧人走来，说是杯渡的弟子，跟他说： 不要忧虑，我师父一会儿就来给你看。 
English: Suddenly, he saw a monk coming, who said he was a disciple of the cup bearer, and told him, "Don't worry, my master will come to show you in a moment."

古文：答云： 渡久已死，何容得来？ 
现代文：邵信答道： 杯渡早已死了，怎么能够来呢！ 
English: Shao Xin replied, "Cup crossing is already dead, how can I come?"

古文：道人云： 来复何难。 
现代文：僧人说： 他要来，又有什么难的。 
English: The monk said, "If he wants to come, what's the problem?

古文：便衣带头出一合许散，与服之，病即差。
现代文：便从衣带的一端取出一盒左右的药面，给他服了下去，顿时病就好了。
English: He then took out a box or so of medicinal noodles from one end of his belt and gave it to him. He was instantly cured of his illness.

古文：又有杜僧哀者，住在南冈下，昔经伏事杯渡。
现代文：又有个叫杜僧哀的人，住在南岗下面，过去长经服待过杯渡。
English: There is also a man named Du Sengai, who lives below Nangang and used to live in Changjing.

古文：几病甚笃，乃思念，恨不得渡与念神咒。
现代文：他儿子现在病得很厉害，思念起杯渡来，遣杯渡不能来为他儿子念神咒。
English: His son is now very ill, and he misses raising the cup to cross the river. He cannot come to recite the mantra for his son.

古文：明日，忽见渡来，言语如常，即为咒，病者便愈。
现代文：第二天，突然看见杯渡来了，说话跟从前一个样儿，当即给他念起了咒语，病重的儿子便痊愈了。
English: The next day, she suddenly saw the cup-bearer arrive, and he spoke as before. She immediately recited a spell to him, and her gravely ill son was healed.

古文：至五年三月，渡复来齐谐家。吕道惠、闻人怛之、杜天期、水丘熙等并见，皆大惊，即起礼拜。
现代文：到了元嘉五年三月，杯渡又来到齐谐家，吕道惠、闻人恒之、杜天期、水丘熙等一起见到了他，都很惊讶，急忙站起来向他行礼。
English: In March of the fifth year of the Yuan Jia era, Cup Wading came to the Qidong family again. Lu Daohui, Wenren Hengzhi, Du Tianqi, and Shu Qiuxi were all surprised to see him, and hurriedly stood up and bowed to him.

古文：渡语众人，言年当大凶，可勤修福业。
现代文：杯渡告诉众人，说年内会有大灾祸，要殷勤奉佛与积功德。
English: The cup bearer told everyone that there would be a great calamity within the year, and that they should diligently practice Buddhism and accumulate merits.

古文：法意道人甚有德，可往就之。
现代文：法意道人很有德性，可以去找他。
English: The people of the Taoist School of Taoism and Vajrayana are very virtuous and can go to him.

古文：修立故寺，以禳灾祸也。
现代文：修善原来的旧寺庙，以求免除灾祸。
English: The original old temple was renovated in order to be spared from the disaster.

古文：须臾，门上有一僧唤，渡便辞去，云： 贫道当向交广之间，不复来也。 
现代文：不一会儿，门口有个僧人召唤他，杯渡便告辞而去，临行时说： 贫道将要去交广之间，不再来了。 
English: After a while, a monk at the gate called him, and he bade farewell and left, saying as he went: "Poverty Road is going to go between Jiaobuang, and will not come again."

古文：齐谐等拜送殷勤，于是绝迹。
现代文：齐谐等人频频致礼，依依送别，杯渡从此绝迹。
English: In unison, the others frequently saluted and bid farewell one after another, and the cup parade was no more.

古文：顷世亦言时有见者。
现代文：不久，世间也有传说时常有人看见他的。
English: Soon, the world also had a legend about how he was often seen.

古文：释宝志
现代文：释宝志
English: Shih Pao Zhi

古文：释宝志本姓朱，金城人。
现代文：释宝志俗姓朱，金城人。
English: Shi Baozhi's common surname is Zhu, and he is from Jincheng.

古文：少出家，止江东道林寺，修习禅业。
现代文：少年出家。住江东道林寺，修习禅学。
English: As a young man, he became a Buddhist monk and studied Zen at Shoryo-ji Temple in Suminoe.

古文：至宋大始初，忽如僻异，居止无定，饮食无时，发长数寸，常跣行街巷。
现代文：到了南朝宋太始初年，忽然像入了魔一样，居止无定处，饮食无定时，蓄起头发长有几寸，常常赤着脚在大街小巷里走路。
English: In the first year of the Southern Dynasty's Song Dynasty, he suddenly became like a demon. He lived in many places, ate at different times, grew several inches of hair, and often walked barefoot in the streets and alleys.

古文：执一锡杖，杖头挂剪刀及镜，或挂一两匹帛。
现代文：拿着一根锡杖，杖头上挂着剪刀与镜子，或者挂着一两片丝布。
English: He carried a tin cane with a pair of scissors and a mirror hanging from its head, or a piece or two of silk cloth.

古文：齐建元中，稍见异迹，数日不食。
现代文：南齐建元年间，逐渐显示出奇异之处。
English: During the first year of the Southern Qi Dynasty, strange things gradually appeared.

古文：亦无饥容；与人言，始苦难晓，后皆效验；时或赋诗，言如谶记。
现代文：一连几天不吃饭，也没饥饿的表情；跟别人说的话，人们开始很难理解其含义，后来则都被事实所验证；时常作诗，但语言像谶言咒语一样。
English: He doesn't eat for days at a time, and he doesn't look hungry; when he speaks to others, people find it difficult to understand his meaning at first, but later it is all verified by facts; he often writes poetry, but the language is like a curse.

古文：江东士庶皆共事之。
现代文：江东的人士与俗民百姓都对他礼敬。
English: People in the Kanto region as well as the general public have shown him great respect.

古文：齐武帝谓其惑众，收驻建康。
现代文：齐武帝说他迷惑群众，将他收监于建康。
English: Emperor Qiwu said that he had confused the masses and imprisoned him in Jiankang.

古文：既旦，人见其入市，还检狱中，志犹在焉。志语狱吏： 门外有两舆食来，金钵盛饭，汝可取之。 
现代文：第二天，有人见他在市区内游逛，回到监狱里一看，宝志却仍然在牢房里，宝志对狱卒说： 门外有两驾车子给我送饭来了，用金钵子装着饭，你可去给我拿来。 
English: The next day, someone saw him wandering around the city, and when he returned to the prison, he saw that Baozhi was still in his cell. Baozhi said to the jailer: "There are two cars outside the door that have brought me food. They are carrying the food with gold tongs. You can go and get it for me."

古文：既而齐文惠太子、竟陵王子良并送食饷志，果如其言。建康令吕文显以事闻，武帝即迎入宫，居之后堂，一时屏除内宴，志亦随众出。
现代文：说完，只见齐王的文惠太子、竟陵王子良一块儿来给宝志送饭，果然像他所说，建康县令吕文显将此事奏闻武帝，武帝便把宝志接到了宫里，让他住在皇宫后院的厅房里，这里暂时停止了内部宴乐活动，宝志也可以像别人一样随意出入。
English: Having said that, I saw Prince Wen Hui of King Qi and Prince Jingting together to bring food to Baozhi. As he said, Jiankang County ordered Lu Wenxian to report the matter to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu then received Baozhi to the palace and let him live in the hall in the backyard of the palace. Here, the internal banquet activities were temporarily suspended, and Baozhi could enter and leave at will like others.

古文：既而景阳山上，犹有一志，与七僧具。
现代文：后来，景阳山上还有个宝志，与七个僧人在一起。
English: Later, there was another Baozhi on the Jingyang Mountain, together with seven monks.

古文：帝怒，遣推检其所。关吏启云：志久出在省，方以墨涂其身。 
现代文：武帝大怒，派人去检查宝志的住处，守门人报告说，宝志出门好长时间了，在省，正以黑墨涂抹他的身上。
English: Emperor Wu was furious and sent someone to check Baozhi's residence. The gatekeeper reported that Baozhi had been out for a long time and was smearing his body with black ink in the province.

古文：时僧正法献欲以一衣遗志，遣使于龙光罽宾二寺求之，并云昨宿且去。
现代文：当时僧正法献打算赠给宝志一件衣服，便派人到龙光寺和罽宾寺找他，两个寺庙的人都说他昨晚上住宿在寺庙，刚刚走了。
English: At that time, the Buddhist monks sent people to Longguang Temple and Qibin Temple to look for him. Both temples said that he had stayed at the temple last night and had just left.

古文：又至其常所造侯伯家寻之，伯云： 志昨在此行道，旦眠未觉。 
现代文：又到他常去的侯伯家寻找，侯伯说： 宝志昨天在这里行道，早上睡眠还没醒呢。 
English: He also went to Hou Bo's house, which he often visited, to look for it. Hou Bo said, "Bao Zhi was walking here yesterday, but he didn't wake up from his sleep in the morning.

古文：使还以告，献方知其分身三处宿焉。
现代文：此人回去把打听到的情况告诉了法献，法献才知道宝志昨晚上分身在三处住宿。
English: This person went back and told the Dharma Offering what he had learned, and the Dharma Offering learned that Baozhi had stayed in three different places last night.

古文：志常盛冬袒行。沙门宝亮欲以衲衣遗之，未及发言，志忽来引衲而去。
现代文：宝志常常在隆冬数九光着身子走路，出家道人宝亮想要送给他一件和尚穿的衣服，没等开口，宝志突然到来，伸手拿过那件衣服就走了。
English: Bao Zhi often walks naked on the ninth day of the ninth month in the middle of winter. The ordained Taoist Bao Liang wanted to give him a robe worn by a monk. Without waiting for an opening, Bao Zhi suddenly arrived, reached for the robe and left.

古文：后假齐武帝神力，使见高帝于地下，常受锥刀之苦，帝自是永废锥刀。
现代文：后来，宝志假齐武帝以神力，让他在地下见到了父王齐高帝，让他在地下备尝锥扎刀割之苦，汉帝从此永远废除了锥刀之苦刑。
English: Later, Baozhi pretended to be Qiwu Emperor and used his divine powers to let him meet his father, King Qigao Emperor, underground, and let him experience the suffering of being beheaded with a beveled sword. From then on, the Han Dynasty abolished the beveled sword torture forever.

古文：武帝又常于华林园召志，志忽著三重布帽以见。
现代文：武帝又常在华林园召宝志，宝志带着三层布帽来见。
English: Emperor Wu often summoned Baozhi in the Hualing Garden, and Baozhi came to see him with a three-layered cloth cap.

古文：俄而武帝崩，文惠太子及豫章王相继而薨。
现代文：不久武帝死，文惠太子及豫章王相继死去。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu died, and Prince Wen Hui and King Yuanzhang died one after another.

古文：永明中，常住东宫后堂。
现代文：永明年间，宝志经常住在东宫的后厅。
English: For years, Baozhi often stayed in the back room of the East Palace.

古文：一旦平明，从门出入，忽云： 门上血污衣。 
现代文：一天黎明，他从大门出入时，忽然说道： 门槛上的血能弄脏衣服。 
English: One day at dawn, as he was going in and out of the gate, he suddenly said: "The blood on the threshold can stain clothes.

古文：褰衣走过。
现代文：于是提着衣服跨了过去。
English: So I carried my clothes and stepped over.

古文：及郁林见害，车载出此，帝颈血流于门限。
现代文：等到郁林事变皇帝被害时，车驾载着人从这里出去，皇帝脖子上的血流到门槛上许多。
English: When the emperor was killed in the Yulin Incident, a car drove people out of here, and a lot of blood flowed from the emperor's neck to the threshold.

古文：齐卫尉胡谐疾，请志，志註疏云明日，竟不往。
现代文：南齐卫尉胡谐患了病，派人请宝志，宝志解释说： 明天 ，结果没有去。
English: Nanqi Lieutenant Hu Xiny fell ill and sent someone to invite Baozhi. Baozhi explained, "Tomorrow, but I didn't go."

古文：是日谐亡，载尸还宅。志曰： 明日尸出也。 
现代文：这天胡谐死了，用车载着尸体回了家，宝志说： 我说的明天，是指明天尸体被载着出去。 
English: On this day, Hunny died, and the car was used to carry the body back home. Baozhi said, "When I say tomorrow, I mean that the body will be carried out tomorrow."

古文：齐太尉司马殷齐之随陈显达镇江州，辞志，志画纸作树，树上有鸟，语云： 急时可登此。 
现代文：南齐太尉司马殷齐之跟随陈显达去镇守江州，临行前向宝志辞别，宝志在纸上画了棵树，树上有鸟，告诉他说： 急难之时可以登上这棵树。 
English: Nanqi captain Sima Yinqizhi followed Chen Xianda to the garrison of Jiangzhou. Before leaving, he said goodbye to Baozhi. Baozhi drew a tree on a piece of paper. There was a bird on the tree. He told him: "You can climb this tree when you are in trouble."

古文：后显达逆节，留齐之镇州。及败，齐之叛入庐山，追骑将及。
现代文：后来显达背叛朝廷，留下齐之镇守江州，叛乱失败后，齐之叛逃进了庐山。
English: Later, Xanda betrayed the imperial court, leaving Qi Zhen to defend Jiangzhou. After the rebellion failed, Qi Zhen defected to Lushan.

古文：齐之见林中有一树，树上有鸟，如志所画，悟而登之，鸟竟不飞。
现代文：有人骑马追了上来，眼看就要追到跟前了，齐之见林中有一棵树，树上有鸟，跟宝志所画的一样。他顿时省悟过来，急忙爬到了树上，树上的鸟一直没有飞走。
English: Someone on horseback chased him up and was about to catch up with him when he saw a tree in the forest with a bird on it, just like the one drawn by Bao Zhi. He suddenly came to his senses and hurriedly climbed up the tree. The bird on the tree never flew away.

古文：追者见鸟，谓无人而反。
现代文：追的人看到树上有鸟，便以为树上不会有人，于是回去了。
English: When the pursuers saw the bird in the tree, they thought that there would be no one in the tree, so they went back.

古文：卒以见免。
现代文：结果，齐之就这样逃脱了。
English: As a result, Qi Zhi escaped in this way.

古文：齐屯骑桑偃将欲谋反，往诣志。遥见而走，大呼云： 围台城，欲反逆，斫头破腹。 
现代文：南文屯骑桑偃想要谋反朝廷，他去看望宝志，宝志远远地看见他就跑了，边跑边大喊道： 要围台城，想反叛，砍头破肚。 
English: Nanwen Tun and Mulberry wanted to rebel against the imperial court, so he went to visit Baozhi. Baozhi saw him from a distance and ran away. As he ran, he shouted, "I want to encircle Taicheng, I want to rebel, I want to cut off my head and disembowel myself."

古文：后有旬事发，偃叛往朱方，为人所得，果斫头破腹。
现代文：过了十来天叛乱终于发生，桑偃叛逃去了朱方，被人捉住，果然被砍头破肚。
English: After more than ten days, the rebellion finally took place. Mulberry defected to the Zhu side, was caught, and was indeed beheaded.

古文：梁鄱阳忠烈王，尝屈志至第，忽令觅荆子甚急，既得，安于门上，莫测所以。
现代文：南梁鄱阳忠烈王曾经硬把宝志弄到自己的府第，宝志突然急急忙忙地让人寻找荆子，找到之后，他放在了门上，谁也不知道这是什么意思。
English: The Southern Liang Poyang Loyalist King once forced Baozhi to come to his capital. Baozhi suddenly hurriedly sent someone to look for Jingzi. After he found it, he put it on the door, and no one knew what it meant.

古文：少时王出为荆州刺史。
现代文：不久，忠烈王出任为荆州刺史。
English: Not long after, King Zhongre Liang was appointed as the crown prince of Jingzhou.

古文：其预鉴之明，此类非一。
现代文：宝志的先见之明，像这次一样的，并非一次两次。
English: The foresight of Baozhi, like this time, is not once or twice.

古文：志多往来兴皇、净名两寺。及梁武即位，下诏曰： 志公迹均尘垢，神游冥漠，水火不能焦濡，蛇虎不能侵惧。
现代文：宝志平常大都住在兴皇与净名这两座寺院里，梁武帝即位后颁下诏书说： 宝志公虽然身处世俗凡尘之中，却能神游于幽远无极之境，水火不能使其焦湿，蛇虎不能使其惧怕。
English: Baozhi usually lived in the two temples of Xingwang and Jinniang. After Emperor Liangwu ascended the throne, he issued an edict saying: Although Baozhi is in the midst of the mundane world, he can swim in the boundless realm. Water and fire cannot make him wet, and snakes and tigers cannot make him afraid.

古文：语其佛理，则声闻无上；谈其隐沦，则道行高著。
现代文：论其佛理造诣则声誉无比，论其隐居韬晦之志则道行高绝。
English: On the other hand, his reputation is incomparable in terms of his accomplishment in Buddhism, and his aspiration to live in seclusion is the highest in the world.

古文：岂得以俗士凡情，空相拘制，何其鄙陋，一至于此。
现代文：岂得以对待俗士凡情之举，白白将他拘束限制，愚蠢鄙陋，竟至如此！
English: Was it possible to treat a layman so meanly, to confine him so gratuitously, so stupidly, so shabbily?

古文：自今行来，随意出入，勿得复禁。 
现代文：从今以后，准其自由出入，不得再行限制。 
English: From now on, they are allowed to enter and leave freely, and no restrictions may be imposed on them.

古文：志自是多出入禁中，长于台城。
现代文：宝志自此常常出入于皇宫，经常出现在台城里。
English: Since then, Baozhi has often been in and out of the imperial palace, and often appears in Taicheng.

古文：对梁武帝吃鲙，昭明诸王子皆侍侧，食讫，武帝曰： 朕不知味二十余年矣。师何谓尔？ 
现代文：他与梁武帝对面坐在一起吃鱼肉，昭明等各位王子都侍立在旁边。吃完之后，武帝说： 我有二十多年吃不出鱼的味道来了。师父有何高见？ 
English: He and Emperor Liangwu sat across from each other to eat the fish, and all the princes such as Zhaoming stood by. After eating, Emperor Wu said, "I can't stand the taste of fish for more than twenty years. What is Master's insight?"

古文：志公乃吐出小鱼，依依鳞尾，武帝深异之。
现代文：宝志便从嘴里吐出一条小鱼，鱼鳞鱼尾都完好清晰，武帝见了深感惊异。
English: Baozhi then spat out a small fish from his mouth. The fish's scales and tail were all intact and clear. Emperor Wu was deeply surprised to see it.

古文：如今秣陵尚有脍残鱼也。
现代文：如今在秣陵仍有一条切剩的鱼。
English: Today, there is still one fish left in Fuling.

古文：天监五年冬旱，雩祭备至，而未降雨。
现代文：天监五年冬，天大旱，各种祀祭方式都用到了，也没求下雨来。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of Tianjun, there was a severe drought, and various methods of worship and sacrifice were used, but no rain was asked for.

古文：忽上启云： 志病不差，就官乞活，若不启白官，应得鞭杖。
现代文：宝志忽然启奏皇帝道： 我现在患病未愈。我来告诉官府求雨活命的办法。如果不来告诉官府，就应受到惩罚。
English: Bao Zhi suddenly began to chant the emperor's words: "I am still ill. I have come to tell the government how to survive the rain. If you don't come to tell the government, you will be punished."

古文：愿于华光殿讲胜鬓经请雨。 
现代文：希望在华光殿宣讲《胜鬓经》求雨。 
English: I hope to preach "The Victory Sutra" and pray for rain at the Hua Guang Temple.

古文：梁武即使沙门法云讲胜鬘竟，夜更大雨。
现代文：梁武帝立即让僧人法云宣讲了《胜鬓经》，夜间便下起了大雨。
English: Emperor Liangwu immediately asked the monk Fa Yun to preach the "Championship Sutra," and it rained heavily during the night.

古文：志又云： 须一盆水，加刀其上。 
现代文：宝志又说： 须用一盆水，上面放一把刀。 
English: Baozhi also said: You must use a basin of water and put a knife on top.

古文：俄而天雨大降，高下皆足。梁武尝问志云： 弟子烦惑未除，何以治之？ 答云： 十二。 
现代文：一会儿大雨普降，高处与低洼处都浇得透透的窈武帝曾经询问宝志道： 弟子的烦忧困惑尚未解除，用什么办法根治呢？ 答道： 十二。 
English: After a while, a heavy rain fell everywhere, and the high places and low places were all thoroughly watered. Emperor Wu of the Zhou Dynasty once asked the Baoshi Dao: "The troubles and perplexities of the disciples have not yet been resolved, so how can they be completely cured?" He replied: "Twelve."

古文：识者以为十二因缘，治惑药也。
现代文：明白人以为他说的是 十二因缘 是根治困惑的良药。
English: The Ming people thought he was talking about the twelve causes and conditions, which is a good medicine to cure the confusion.

古文：又问十二之旨？答云： 在书字时节刻漏中。 
现代文：又问他 十二 的含义是什么，答道： 在书字时节刻漏中。 
English: He also asked him what the meaning of "twelve" was, and he replied: "In the book of hours and minutes."

古文：识者以为书之在十二时中。
现代文：明白人以为他说的是 写在十二个时辰之中 。
English: The Ming people thought he was talking about writing in twelve hours.

古文：又问弟子何时得静心修习？答云： 安乐禁。 
现代文：又问他 弟子什么时候能够静心修习 ，他答道： 安乐禁。 
English: He also asked his disciple when he would be able to meditate, to which he replied, "Not at all."

古文：识者以为禁者止也，至安乐，时乃止耳。
现代文：明白人以为， 禁 者 止 也，到了 安乐 的时候，就可以停止了。
English: The Ming people thought that even the prohibitionists could stop when they were at peace.

古文：后法云于华林讲法华经，至假使黑风，志忽问之有无。
现代文：后来，法云在华林寺讲说《法华经》，讲到 假使黑风 处，宝志突然问他 有 与 无 的问题。
English: Later, when Fa Yun was giving a lecture on "The Lotus Sutra" at the Hualin Temple, he suddenly asked Bao Zhi a question about existence and non-existence.

古文：答云： 世谛故有，第一义则无也。 
现代文：法云答道： 世俗之谛自然是 有 ，第一义的真谛则为 无 。 
English: Fa Yun replied: The worldly essence is naturally existence, but the true essence in the first sense is nonexistence.

古文：志往复三四番，便笑云： 若体是假有，此亦不可解，难可解。 
现代文：宝志与他往复几次进行辩难，然后笑道： 若说体相是假有，这也不可解悟，很难解悟。
English: Baozhi argued back and forth with him several times, and then said with a smile: If you say that the body is false, this is also incomprehensible, difficult to understand.

古文：其辞旨隐没，类皆如此，有陈征虏者，举家事志甚笃。志尝为其见真形，光相如菩萨像焉。
现代文：所谓 假使黑风 ，辞旨实属隐晦。其他地方也都与此类似。 有个叫陈征虏的，全家人都对宝志十分热情，宝志曾为他显示过自己的真面目，形相光泽像菩萨的塑像一样。
English: The so-called "pretending to be a black wind" is actually an obscure expression. Other places are similar to this. There is a man named Chen Zheiru, and his whole family is very enthusiastic about Baozhi. Baozhi has shown him his true colors, and his appearance is shiny like a statue of a bodhisattva.

古文：志知名显奇，四十余载，士女供事者，不可胜数。然好用小便濯发，俗僧暗有讥笑者。
现代文：宝志在世上出名显奇共四十多年，崇敬信奉他的男男女女不计其数，但他喜欢用小便洗濯头发，俗众与僧人暗中都有讥笑他的。
English: Baozhi has been famous in the world for more than forty years, and there are countless men and women who worship him. However, he likes to wash his hair with urine, and both lay people and monks secretly mock him.

古文：志亦知众僧多不断酒肉。讥之者饮酒食猪肚，志勃然谓曰： 汝笑我以溺洗头，汝何为食盛粪袋？ 
现代文：宝志也知道许多僧人仍然喝酒吃肉，当讥笑他的人自己却喝酒吃猪肚时，宝志愤怒地质问他们道： 你们讥笑我用尿洗头，那你们为什么吃装猪粪的袋子呢？ 
English: Baozhi also knew that many monks still drank alcohol and ate meat. When those who mocked him drank alcohol and ate pork belly, Baozhi angrily asked them, "You mock me for washing my hair with urine, so why do you eat bags of pig feces?"

古文：讥者惧而惭服。
现代文：讥笑他的人惧怕他，并且自感惭愧而佩服他了。
English: His mockers fear him, and are ashamed to admire him.

古文：晋安王萧纲初生日，梁武遣使问志，志合掌云： 皇子诞育幸甚，然冤家亦生。 
现代文：晋安王萧纲刚出生的时候，梁武帝派人询问宝志，宝志合起两只手掌来说： 皇子诞生了，好得很！然而冤家也出世了。 
English: When King Xiao Gang of Jin'an was just born, Emperor Liangwu sent someone to inquire about Bao Zhi. Bao Zhi put his two palms together and said, "A prince has been born, how wonderful! However, an enemy has also been born."

古文：于后推寻历数。与侯景同年月日而生也。
现代文：后来推算年月日，萧纲与侯景是同年同月同日生的。
English: Later, Xiao Gang and Hou Jing were born on the same day of the same month of the same year.

古文：会稽临海寺有大德，常闻扬州都下有志公，语言颠狂，放纵自在。僧云： 必是狐狸之魅也。
现代文：会稽临海寺有个高僧，常常听人说扬州城里有个宝志，语言颠狂，放纵自在，这位高僧说： 一定是狐狸的鬼魅。
English: There is a high priest of the Linhai Temple, and I often hear people say that there is a treasure in Yangzhou City, the language is crazy, indulgent and free. This high priest said: It must be the ghost of a fox.

古文：愿向都下，觅猎犬以逐之。 
现代文：我要到扬州都城去，找一只猎狗把他赶跑。 
English: I'm going to the capital of Yangzhou to find a hound and chase him away.

古文：于是轻船入海，趋浦口。
现代文：他乘上快船下海，直奔浦口。
English: He took a fast boat out to sea and went straight to Pukou.

古文：欲西上，忽大风所飘，意谓东南，六七日始到一岛中。
现代文：正要沿着长江往西行驶时，小船忽然被大风鼓荡起来，他心里知道是在往东南方向漂荡，过了六七天才漂到一座海岛上。
English: When he was about to sail west along the Yangtze River, the small boat was suddenly buffeted by a strong wind. He knew in his heart that he was drifting in a south-easterly direction, and it took him six or seven days to reach an island.

古文：望见金装浮图，干云秀出，遂寻径而往。
现代文：远远望见前面有一座用金箔装饰的寺塔，高耸入云，他便顺着跑去。
English: In the distance, he could see a temple tower adorned with gold leaf, towering into the clouds, and he ran towards it.

古文：至一寺，院宇精丽，花卉芳菲，有五六僧，皆可年三十，美容色，并著员绯袈裟，倚仗于门树下言语。
现代文：走到寺庙前一看，只见庭院与庙宇精美壮丽，到处是芳香的鲜花，有五六个僧人，都有三十来岁，个个容貌秀美，都穿着圆领乔色袈裟，正依在门前树枝下谈话。
English: When I walked to the front of the temple, I could only see the exquisite and magnificent courtyard and temple, fragrant flowers everywhere, and five or six monks, all in their thirties, all of them handsome, all wearing round necked chasubles, who were talking under the branches in front of the door.

古文：僧云： 欲向都下，为风飘荡，不知上人此处何州国？
现代文：高僧说： 我要到扬州都城去，被大风飘荡到此处，不知你们这里是什么州什么国。
English: The high priest said, "I want to go to the capital city of Yangzhou. I was blown here by the strong wind. I don't know what state or country you are from.

古文：今四望环海，恐本乡不可复见。 
现代文：如今四面环海，恐怕再也见不到自己的故乡了。 
English: Now surrounded by the sea on all sides, I'm afraid I'll never see my hometown again.

古文：答曰： 必欲向扬州，即时便到。
现代文：那几个答道： 真要去扬州，即刻便能到。
English: Those few answered: I really want to go to Yangzhou, I can get there immediately.

古文：今附书到钟山寺西行南头第二房，觅黄头付之。 
现代文：现在有封信托你捎到钟山寺西排南头第二间僧房，送给一个黄头发的人。 
English: Now there is a letter of trust addressed to a yellow-haired man in the second monk's room at the south end of the west row of the bell tower.

古文：僧因闭目坐船，风声定开眼，如言奄至西岸。
现代文：高僧便闭上两眼坐在船上，等风声休止时睁开眼一看，果然像那几个僧人所说的，不知不觉间便到了西海岸。
English: The high priest then closed his eyes and sat on the boat, waiting for the wind to die down. When he opened his eyes, he found himself on the west coast, just as the monks had said.

古文：入数十里，至都。
现代文：往里行驶几十里，来到扬州。
English: After driving for dozens of miles, they arrived in Yangzhou.

古文：径往钟山寺访问，都无有黄头者。
现代文：他径直去钟山寺访向，都说没有黄头发的。
English: He went straight to visit Zhongshan Temple, and they all said that there was no one with yellow hair.

古文：僧具说委曲，报云： 西行南头第二房，乃风病道人志公。
现代文：他把事情的原委说了一遍，有人报告说： 西排南头第二间房子，住的是疯子道人宝志。
English: He recounted the incident to the original committee, and someone reported: The second house in the southern part of Xibei was lived in by the mad Taoist Baozhi.

古文：虽言配在此寺，在都下聚乐处，百日不一度来。
现代文：他虽说分配在这座寺院，但总在都城的热闹地方，一百天也不回来一趟。
English: Although he is assigned to this temple, he always goes to busy places in the capital and doesn't come back for a hundred days.

古文：房空无人也。 
现代文：那间房子空无一人。 
English: The house was empty.

古文：问答之间，不觉志公已在寺厨上，乘醉索食。
现代文：正在他问答的时候，谁也没发觉宝志已经来到寺庙的厨房里。他在外面喝醉了，回来要饭吃。
English: During his Q&A session, no one noticed that Baozhi had gone to the temple's kitchen. He had been out drinking and had come back to ask for food.

古文：人以斋过日晚，未与间。便奋身恶骂。
现代文：别人因为已经开过饭，太晚了，没有给他，他就跳起来恶骂。
English: When others didn't give him his dinner because it was too late, he jumped up and cursed.

古文：寺僧试遣沙弥绕厨侧，漫叫黄头。
现代文：这边的僧人听说后，打发小和尚绕到厨房旁边，随便地喊着 黄头发 。
English: When the monks on this side heard about it, they sent the little monk to walk around the kitchen, casually calling out "yellow hair."

古文：志公忽云： 阿谁唤我。 
现代文：宝志听到后忽然说： 谁在叫我？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Baozhi suddenly said, "Who is calling me?"

古文：即逐沙弥来到僧处。谓曰：汝许将猎狗捉我，何为空来？ 
现代文：即追小和尚来到僧人跟前，对他说： 你发誓要找猎狗捉我，为什么空手来了？ 
English: That is to say, he chased the little monk to the monk and said to him, "You swore to look for a hound to catch me, why did you come empty-handed?

古文：僧知是非常人，顶礼忏悔，授书与之。
现代文：高僧知道他不是寻常人对他行礼表示忏悔，把书信交给了他。
English: Knowing that he was not an ordinary man, the high priest bowed to him in repentance and handed him the letter.

古文：志公看书云： 方丈道人唤我，不久亦当自还。 
现代文：宝志看完书信说： 方丈道人召唤我，不用多久我也该自行回去。 
English: After reading the letter, Bao Zhi said, "The Abbot Taoist summoned me, and it won't take long for me to go back on my own.

古文：志公遂屈指云： 某月日去。 便不复共此僧语。
现代文：宝志屈指一算，又说某月某日就去，便不再与这位高僧说话。
English: He said that he would go there on a certain day of a certain month, and then he would no longer speak to the high priest.

古文：众但记某月日。
现代文：众人只记得他说的某月某日。
English: People only remember what he said on a certain day of a certain month.

古文：至天监十三年冬，于台城后堂谓人曰： 菩萨将去。 
现代文：天监十三年冬天，宝志在台城后面堂里对别人说： 菩萨要走了。 
English: In the winter of the thirteenth year of Tianjun, Baozhi said to others in the hall behind Taicheng: Bodhisattva wants to leave.

古文：未及旬日，无疾而终。
现代文：不到十天，他就无病而死。
English: In less than ten days, he died without any illness.

古文：尸体香软，形貌熙悦。
现代文：尸体柔软兼有香味，容貌自然和悦。
English: The corpse is soft and fragrant, with a natural and pleasant appearance.

古文：临亡，燃一烛以付后阁金人吴庆。庆即启闻，梁武叹曰： 大师不复留。
现代文：临死前，他点上一支蜡烛，交给了后屋的守门人吴庆，吴庆立即奏禀了皇帝，梁武帝叹道： 大师不再留在人间了。
English: Before his death, he lit a candle and handed it to Wu Qing, the gatekeeper of the back room. Wu Qing immediately played the emperor, and Emperor Liangwu sighed: The master no longer remains on earth.

古文：以烛者，将以后事属我乎？ 
现代文：给你 烛 的用意，是要你把后事 嘱 与我啊！ 
English: I've prepared a candle for you, and I want you to tell me what happens next!

古文：因厚加殡送，葬于钟山独龙之阜。
现代文：于是厚加殡葬。
English: As a result, there was a lot of funerals.

古文：仍于墓所立开善寺，敕陆倕制铭于冢内，王筠勒碑文于寺门。
现代文：遗体安葬在钟山独龙岗上，仍在墓地建立开善寺，敕令陆倕在坟前制作墓志铭，王筠在寺门内刻写碑文，并在各处传布其遗像。
English: His body was buried on the Dulong Hill of Zhongshan, and Kaizen Temple was still being built in the cemetery. He ordered Lu Yao to make an epitaph in front of the grave, and Wang Yao inscribed an epitaph inside the temple gate, and spread his remains everywhere.

古文：传其遗像，处处存焉。初志显迹之始，年可无五六十许，而终亦不老，人诚莫测其年。
现代文：宝志开始显露神奇形迹时，约有五六十岁，直到临终也不见衰老，实在看不出究竟有多大年纪。
English: Baozhi was about fifty or sixty years old when he began to show miraculous signs, and he did not see aging until the end of his life, so he really did not see how old he was.

古文：有余捷道者，居于京师九日台北，自言是志外舅弟，小志四年。
现代文：有个叫余捷的道人，住在京都九日台的北面，自称是宝志的姑舅表弟，比宝志小四岁，推算起来。
English: There is a Taoist named Yu Jie, who lives in the north of Kyoto's Kuchidai district, and claims to be Takashi's uncle's cousin. He is four years younger than Takashi, according to calculations.

古文：计志亡时，应年九十七矣。
现代文：宝志死时该有九十七岁了。
English: Takashi would have been ninety-seven years old when he died.

古文：又后魏有沙门宝公者，不知何处人也，形貌寝陋，心识通达，过去未来，预睹三世。
现代文：后魏也有个称作宝公的僧人，不知老家是什么地方的，相貌很丑陋，知识极通达，能通晓过去和预见未来三代的事。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, there was also a monk called Baogong. He did not know where his hometown was, his appearance was very ugly, and he was extremely knowledgeable, able to understand the past and foresee the future of three generations.

古文：发言似谶，不可得解。
现代文：说的话像谶言符咒，无法理解，事后则被证明句句属实。
English: What he said was like a magic spell, impossible to understand, but later proved to be true.

古文：事过之后，始验其实，胡太后问以世事，宝公把粟与鸡，唤朱朱，时人莫解。
现代文：胡太后问他世事的结局怎样，宝公抓一把米给鸡，嘴里发出 朱朱 的唤鸡声，当时人们都不解其意。
English: When the Empress Dowager Hu asked Bao Gong about the outcome of his life, Bao Gong grabbed a handful of rice and gave it to the chicken, and Zhu Zhu called for the chicken from his mouth. At that time, people were puzzled.

古文：建义元年，后为尔朱荣所害，始验其言。
现代文：到了建义元年，胡太后被尔朱荣杀害，这才验证了 朱朱 是有所指的。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the Empress Dowager Hu was killed by Er Zhu Rong, which proved that Zhu Zhu had something to do with it.

古文：时有洛阳人赵法和，请占早晚当有爵，宝公曰： 大竹箭，不须羽。东厢屋，急手作。 
现代文：当时有个洛阳人叫赵法和，请宝公占卜什么时候能有爵位，宝公说： 大竹箭，不用羽，东厢屋，急手作。 
English: At that time, there was a Luoyang man named Zhao Fa, who asked Baogong to predict when he could have a title. Baogong said: Big bamboo arrow, no feather, east wing house, hastily made.

古文：时人不晓其意。
现代文：当时谁也不懂是什么意思。
English: At the time, no one understood what it meant.

古文：经月余，法和父亡。大竹箭者，苴杖；东厢屋者，倚庐。
现代文：过了一个多月，赵法和的父亲死了，所谓 大竹箭 者，是指服父丧所用的粗竹杖， 东厢屋 者，是在中门东侧搭制的守丧的房子。
English: After more than a month, Zhao Fa and his father died. The so-called "Big Bamboo Arrow" refers to the coarse bamboo cane used for mourning his father, and the "East Wing House" is the mourning house built on the east side of the middle gate.

古文：初造十二辰歌，终其言也。
现代文：当初宝公所作的十二字歌诀，都被说中了。
English: At the beginning, Baogong's twelve-character songs were all right.

古文：此宝公与江南者，未委是一人也两人也。
现代文：这个宝公与江南那个宝志公，尚未查明是一个人还是两个人。
English: It has not yet been ascertained whether this Bao Gong and the Bao Zhi Gong in the south of the Yangtze River are one person or two.

