古文：乡师之职，各掌其所治乡之教，而听其治。
现代文：乡师的职责是，各自掌管所治理之乡的教育，评断乡中官吏的治理情况。
English: The duties of the township teachers are, respectively, to administer the education of the township they govern, and to judge the governance of officials in the township.

古文：以国比之法，以时稽其夫家众寡，辨其老幼、贵贱、废疾、马牛之物，辨其可任者与其施舍者。掌其戒令纠禁，听其狱讼。
现代文：依据国家的校比法，按时清查各家人数的多少，分辨他们当中的老幼、贵贱、残疾者，以及牛马等，分辨他们当中可以充任兵役、劳役的和应当免除兵役、劳役者，掌管有关他们的戒令、纠察和禁令，评断他们的争讼。
English: According to the country's law of comparison, it is necessary to check the number of members of each family on time, distinguish the old and the young, the high and the low, the disabled, and the cattle and horses among them, distinguish those who can serve as military service and labor service and those who should be exempted from military service and labor service, control the restraining orders, pickets and prohibitions related to them, and judge their disputes.

古文：大役，则帅民徒而至，治其政令。
现代文：有大劳役，就率领民夫来到施工地，监督他们执行政令的情况。
English: If there is a large number of laborers, they will lead the people to the construction site to supervise their implementation of the decree.

古文：大军旅、会同，正治其徒役与其輂辇，戮其犯命者。
现代文：劳役开始后，接受各基层的民夫名册，按照司空的施工章程，来考查他们服役的情况。凡王国有事，令有秩序。王亲征、会同，管理监督役徒和车辆，惩罚那些违犯禁令的人。
English: After the labor service began, it accepted the roster of all grassroots people's servants and inspected their service conditions in accordance with the construction regulations of the Sikuo. Whenever there is an event in the kingdom, it is orderly. The prince recruits, joins, manages and supervises the servants and vehicles, and punishes those who violate the ban.

古文：大丧用役，则帅其民而至，遂治之。
现代文：有大丧需用役徒，就率领乡民而来，于是负责监督乡民。
English: When there was a great mourning and it was necessary to use apprentices, he led the villagers to come, and was responsible for supervising the villagers.

古文：及葬，执纛以与匠师、御而治役。
现代文：到下葬时，持纛与匠师引导柩车前进，而监督役徒。
English: At the time of burial, the person holding the yakitori and the craftsman lead the yakitori cart forward, while supervising the attendant.

古文：及窆，执斧以莅匠师。
现代文：到下棺入墓穴时，持斧临视匠师。
English: When the coffin was lowered into the grave, he approached the craftsman with an axe.

古文：凡四时之田，前期，出田法于州里，简其鼓铎、旗物、兵器，修其卒伍。
现代文：凡四季的田猎，事前先向各基层宣布田猎的法则，检阅他们的鼓铎、旗帜、武器和器械，整齐他们的军事编制。
English: For field hunting in all four seasons, announce the rules of field hunting to all grassroots in advance, review their drums, flags, weapons and equipment, and tidy up their military establishment.

古文：及期，以司徒之大旗，致众庶而陈之。以旗物辨乡邑，而挛其政令、刑禁，巡其前后之屯，而戮其犯命者。断其争禽之讼。
现代文：到期，用司徒的大旗召集民众，用旗帜排列队形，辨别乡邑而监督他们执行政令、刑法和禁令，巡视前后驻扎的，而惩罚违犯禁令的人，评断他们争夺猎物的争讼。
English: When the time was up, he would gather the people together with the great banner of the sutras, line them up in formation with the banner, identify the townships to supervise their implementation of the decrees, criminal laws and prohibitions, inspect those stationed in front and behind, punish those who violated the prohibitions, and judge their disputes over the prey.

古文：凡四时之征令有常者，以木铎徇於市朝。
现代文：凡四季当定期宣布的法令，就在众人聚集的地方边走边摇动木铎宣布。
English: All ordinances that are to be announced at regular intervals during the four seasons are announced by shaking a wooden pestle while walking in places where many people gather.

古文：以岁时巡国及野，而赒万民之艰，以王命施惠。
现代文：在有必要时就巡视国都和六乡四郊，而救济民众中饥饿困乏的人，以王的名义施予恩惠。
English: When it is necessary, he will visit the capital and the six townships and four suburbs, and help the hungry and needy among the people, and grant favors in the name of the king.

古文：岁终，则考六乡之治，以诏废置。
现代文：年终，就考察乡的治理情况，报告上级以决定罢免或提升。
English: At the end of the year, they will examine the governance of the township and report to their superiors to decide on dismissal or promotion.

古文：正岁，稽其乡器，比共吉凶二服，闾共祭器，族共丧器，党共射器，州共宾器，乡共吉凶礼乐之器。
现代文：正月，核查乡中的公共器物和衣服，比长供给祭服和吊服，闾胥供给祭祀器具，族师供给丧葬器具，党正供给乡射礼的器具，州长供给乡饮酒礼的器具，乡大夫祭器、丧器和乡射礼、乡饮酒礼的器具。
English: In the first month of the year, check the public utensils and clothes in the township, the mayor shall provide the ceremonial robes and hanging robes, the mayor shall provide the sacrificial tools, the family teacher shall provide the funeral tools, the party shall provide the township shooting tools, the governor shall provide the township drinking tools, the township doctor shall provide the sacrificial tools, the funeral tools and the township shooting tools, and the township drinking tools.

古文：若国大比，则考教、察辞，稽器、展事，以诏诛赏。
现代文：如果国家大校比，就考核教育成绩，考察汇报的情况，核查衣服器物，省视所办事情，以报告上级决定赏罚。
English: If the national university is superior, it will assess the educational achievements, inspect the reporting situation, check the clothes and equipment, and report to the superior to decide the reward and punishment.

古文：乡大夫之职，各掌其乡之政教禁令。
现代文：乡大夫的职责是，各自掌管本乡的政教和禁令。
English: The duty of the township doctor is to take charge of the political and religious affairs and prohibitions of their respective townships.

古文：正月之吉，受教法于司徒，退而颁之于其乡吏，使各以教其所治，以考其德行，察其道艺。
现代文：正月初一，从大司徒那里接受教法，下来颁布给乡吏们，让他们各自用以教育所治理的民众，并据以考察被教民众的德行和道艺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, he received the teachings from the chief priests and promulgated them to the village officials, so that they could use them to educate the people they governed, and use them to examine the virtues and ethics of the people they were teaching.

古文：以岁时登其夫家之众寡，辨其可任者。
现代文：每年按季登记乡中男女的多少，分辨其中可以胜任役事的人。
English: Every year, the number of men and women in the village is registered quarterly, and those who can be qualified for positions are distinguished.

古文：国中自七尺以及六十，野自六尺以及六十有五，皆征之。
现代文：都城中从二十岁到六十岁，郊野从十五岁到六十五岁，都要为公事服役。
English: From the age of twenty to sixty in the capital, and from the age of fifteen to sixty-five in the countryside, everyone must serve in the public service.

古文：其舍者，国中贵者、贤者、能者、服公事者、老者、疾者皆舍，以岁时入其书。
现代文：其中可以免除役事的，是都城中地位尊贵的人、有德行的人、有才能的人、在官府当差的人、年老的人、有残疾的人，都免除服役。
English: Among those who can be exempted from service are those with high-ranking positions in the capital, those with virtues, those with talents, those on duty at government offices, the elderly, and those with disabilities.

古文：三年则大比，考其德行、道艺，而兴贤能者，乡老及乡大夫帅其吏兴其众寡，以礼礼宾之。
现代文：每年按季把簿册上报。每三年进行一次大校比，考查乡民的德行和道艺，而荐举有德行、有才能的人。乡老和乡大夫率领属吏以及善良的乡民而不论人数多少，用乡饮酒礼像对待宾客一样礼敬被荐举出来的人。
English: The register is reported quarterly every year. Every three years, a large-scale comparison is carried out to examine the virtues and skills of the villagers, and recommend people with virtues and talents. Townspeople and township doctors lead the officials and kind villagers, regardless of the number, and use the township drinking ceremony to treat the recommended people like guests.

古文：厥明，乡老及乡大夫、群吏献贤能之书于王，王再拜受之，登于天府，内史贰之。
现代文：第二天，乡老和乡大夫以及乡吏们，呈献荐举贤能的文书给王，王行再拜礼而后接受文书，再把文书上交到天府收藏，内史收藏文书的副本。
English: The next day, the townspeople, the town doctor and the town officials presented the document of recommendation to the king. Wang Xing then bowed and accepted the document, and then submitted the document to the Tianfu collection, a copy of the internal history collection document.

古文：退而以乡射之礼五物询众庶：一曰和，二曰容，三曰主皮，四曰和容，五曰兴舞，此谓使民兴贤，出使长之；使民兴能，入使治之。
现代文：回来后而用有关乡射礼的五个方面询问众人：一是看是否做到了身体与心志相和协，二是看仪容是否符合礼，三是看是否射中目标，四是看是否符合音乐节奏，五是看舞姿怎样。这就叫做让人民自己推举有德行的人，使他们做人民的长官；让人民自己推举有才能的人，使他们治理人民。
English: After returning, they asked the people about the five aspects of the township shooting ceremony: First, to see if the body and mind were in harmony, second, to see if the appearance was in line with the ceremony, third, to see if the target was hit, fourth, to see if it was in line with the rhythm of music, and fifth, to see how the dance was. This is called letting the people themselves elect virtuous people and make them the people's officers; let the people themselves elect talented people and make them govern the people.

古文：岁终，则令六乡之吏，皆会政致事。
现代文：年终，就命令本乡的官吏总结政事并将文书上报。
English: At the end of the year, he ordered the officials of his hometown to summarize the political affairs and report the documents.

古文：正岁；令群吏考法于司徒以退，各宪之于其所治。
现代文：正月，命令乡吏们到司徒那里考察教法，而后回来，各自把教法悬挂在自己的办公处。
English: On the first day of the month, he ordered the village officials to go to St. Peter's to study the teachings, and then to come back and hang the teachings in their offices.

古文：国大询于众庶，则各帅其乡之众寡而致于朝。
现代文：国家有大事要征询广大民众的意见时，就各自率领本乡的民众来到王的外朝。
English: When the state had important matters to consult the opinions of the broad masses of the people, they each led the people of their hometown to the king's foreign court.

古文：国有大故，则令民各守其闾，以致政令。以旌节辅令，则达之。
现代文：国家有大的事故，就命令民众各自聚守在闾门，以等待命令，有用旌节帮助说明是奉命而行的，才允许通行。
English: If there is a big accident in the country, the people are ordered to gather at the gate to wait for the order, and it is only allowed to pass if they can prove that they are following the order.

古文：州长各掌其州之教治政令之法。
现代文：州长各掌管本州有关教育、治理、行政和禁令的法则。
English: The governors each control their state's laws on education, governance, administration and prohibition.

古文：正月之吉，各属其州之民而读法，以考其德行、道艺而劝之，以纠其过恶而戒之。
现代文：正月初一，各聚集本州的民众而宣读法令，用以考察州民的德行和道艺则而加以劝勉，用以纠正州民的过错而加以告诫。
English: On the first day of the first month, the people of the state gathered together to read the decree, to examine the virtues and virtues of the people of the state and to exhort them, to correct the mistakes of the people of the state and to admonish them.

古文：若以岁时祭祀州社，则属其民而读法，亦如之。
现代文：如果是在春秋二季祭祀州的社神的时候，就利用此时聚集州民而宣读法令，也这样对州民进行劝勉和告诫。
English: If it is in the spring and autumn when the shrine gods of the state are worshiped, they will use this time to gather the people of the state and read out the decree, and also exhort and admonish the people of the state.

古文：春秋，以礼会民而射于州序。
现代文：春、秋二季依礼会聚州民，而在州序中举行乡射礼。
English: In the second quarter of spring and autumn, the people of the prefecture will gather according to the rite, and the town shooting ceremony will be held in the prefecture.

古文：凡州之大祭祀、大丧，皆莅其事。
现代文：凡州中的大祭祀、大丧，都亲临其事。
English: The great sacrificial rites and great funerals in all states are attended in person.

古文：若国作民而师田行役之事，则帅而致之，掌其戒令与其赏罚。
现代文：如果国家征调民众参加征伐、田猎、巡狩、劳役的事，就率领本州的民众到小司徒那里，并掌管对于本州被征之民的戒令和赏罚。
English: If the state conscripts the people to participate in the conquest, field hunting, patrol hunting, and labor service, it will lead the people of the state to Xiao Szeto and take charge of the command and reward and punishment of the people conscripted in the state.

古文：岁终，则会其州之政令。
现代文：年终，就总结本州执行政令的情况。
English: At the end of the year, it will summarize the state's implementation of the decree.

古文：正岁，则读教法如初。
现代文：正月，像当初一样宣读法令。
English: On New Year's Day, the decree will be read out as it was originally.

古文：三年大比，则大考州里，以赞乡大夫废兴。
现代文：到三年大校比时，就对州里官吏进行一次总考核，以协助乡大夫决定对州里官吏的罢免或提升。
English: By the time of the three-year seniority, a general assessment of the state officials was carried out to assist the township doctor to decide on the dismissal or promotion of the state officials.

古文：党正各掌其虺之政令教治。
现代文：党正各自掌管本党的行政、禁令、教育和治理。
English: Each party is in charge of its own party's administration, prohibition, education and governance.

古文：及四时之孟月吉日，则属民而读邦法，以纠戒之。
现代文：每到四季的第一个月的初一，就会聚民众宣读国家的法令，用以纠察和告诫民众。
English: On the first day of the first month of each of the four seasons, people gather to read out the country's laws and regulations to picket and admonish the people.

古文：春秋祭萗，亦如之。
现代文：春秋举行禁祭时，也这样做。
English: This is also done when the Forbidden Festival is held in spring and autumn.

古文：国索鬼神而祭祀，则以礼属民而饮酒于序，以正齿位。
现代文：当王国、搜求各种鬼神加以祭祀时，就用饮酒礼在党序中会聚民众，而按照年龄长幼排列位次。
English: When the kingdom searched for various ghosts and gods to sacrifice, they used the drinking ceremony to gather the people in the order of the party, and ranked according to the age of the eldest and youngest.

古文：壹命齿于乡里，再命齿于父族，三命而不齿。
现代文：一命的官要与乡里众宾按年龄序尊卑，二命的官要与本族众宾按年龄序尊卑，三命的官就不与众宾按年龄序尊卑了，
English: Officials with one life should be ranked higher or lower than the guests in the village according to age, officials with two lives should be ranked higher or lower than the guests of their own ethnic group according to age, and officials with three lives should not be ranked higher or lower than the guests according to age.

古文：凡其党之祭祀、丧礼、昏冠、饮酒，教其礼事，掌其戒禁。
现代文：凡党中的祭祀、丧事、婚礼、冠礼、饮酒礼，教民众行礼的事，并掌管有关的戒令而加以纠禁。
English: In all the party's rituals, funerals, weddings, coronation ceremonies, and drinking ceremonies, teach the people to perform the rites, and control the relevant precepts to prohibit them.

古文：凡作民而师田、行役，则以其法治其致事。
现代文：凡征调民众参加征伐、田猎、巡守、劳役的事，就用有关的法治理有关政事。
English: Whenever the people are conscripted to take part in military campaigns, field hunting, patrol duty, or labor service, the relevant laws are used to govern the relevant political affairs.

古文：岁终，则会其党政，帅其吏而致事。
现代文：年终，就总结本党的政事，率领本党属吏呈报政绩。
English: At the end of the year, he will summarize the party's political affairs and lead the party's officials to report their political achievements.

古文：正岁，属民读法而书其德行道艺。
现代文：正月，会聚民众宣读法令，并记录人们的德行和道艺。
English: In the first month of the year, the people gathered to read the decrees and record people's virtues and virtues.

古文：以岁时涖校比，及大比，亦如之。
现代文：按照一年的四季亲临对民众的校比。到三年进行大校比时，也这样。
English: According to the four seasons of the year, the school is compared to the public in person. This is also the case when the big school comparison is carried out in three years.

古文：族师各掌其族之戒令政事。
现代文：族师各自掌管本族的戒令和政事。
English: Each clan leader is in charge of his clan's precepts and politics.

古文：月吉，则属民而读邦法，书其孝弟睦姻有学者。
现代文：每月初一，就会聚民众而宣读国家法令，记录民众中孝顺父母、敬爱兄长、和睦姻戚和学有所成的人。
English: On the first day of every month, the people gather to read out the state decrees and record the people who are filial to their parents, respect their brothers and sisters, have a harmonious marriage, and have achieved academic success.

古文：春秋祭酺，亦如之。
现代文：春秋祭酺时，也这样做。
English: This is also done during the Spring and Autumn Festival.

古文：以邦比之法，帅四闾之吏，以时属民，而校登其族之夫家众寡，辨其贵贱、老幼、废疾、可任者，及其六畜、车辇。
现代文：依照王国的校比法，率领所属四闾的长吏，按时会聚民众而登记本族人数的多少，辨别其中的贵贱、老幼、残废疾病和可胜任役事的人，以及民众的各种牲畜和车辆数。
English: In accordance with the Kingdom's law of collation, the chiefs of the four clans led by their chiefs gathered the people on time and registered the number of their own people, distinguishing among them the noble and the lowly, the old and the young, the disabled and the sick, and the competent officials, as well as the number of various livestock and vehicles of the people.

古文：五家为比，十家为联；五人为伍，十人为联；四闾为族，八闾为联；使之相保相爱，刑罚庆赏，相及相共，以受邦职，以役国事，以相葬埋。
现代文：五家为比，十家为联；五人为伍，十人为联；四闾为族，八闾为联；使他们相互担保托付，有刑罚、喜庆、赏赐的事，相互共受共享，这样来承担王国的职事，为国事服役，相互帮助丧葬。
English: Five families are to be compared, ten families are to be compared; five people are to be compared, ten people are to be compared; four families are to be compared, and eight families are to be compared; so that they are entrusted to each other, there are punishments, celebrations, rewards, and they are shared with each other, so that they can undertake the duties of the kingdom, serve the national affairs, and help each other with funerals.

古文：若作民而师田行役，则合其卒伍，简其兵器，以鼓铎旗物帅而至。掌其治令、戒禁、刑罚。
现代文：如果征调民众参加征伐、田猎、巡守、劳役的事，就把他们按军事编制加以组合，检阅他们的武器和器械，带着鼓铎和旗帜率领徒众而到，并掌管对徒众的治理、禁戒和刑罚。
English: If the people are conscripted to participate in the work of conquest, hunting, patrol and labor, they will be grouped according to the military establishment, review their weapons and equipment, lead the crowd with drums and flags, and take charge of the governance, prohibition and punishment of the crowd.

古文：岁终，则会政致事。
现代文：年终，就总结政事呈报政绩。
English: At the end of the year, it will summarize the government affairs and report on the performance of the government.

古文：闾胥各掌其闾之征令。
现代文：闾胥各自掌管本闾有关征收赋税、徭役的命令。
English: Each of them is in charge of the relevant tax collection and enforcement orders.

古文：以岁时各数其闾之众寡，辨其施舍。
现代文：按一年的四季清点本闾人数的多少，辨别其中应当免除役事者。
English: According to the four seasons of the year, count the number of people on the list, and identify those who should be exempted from officials.

古文：凡春秋之祭祀、役政、丧纪之数，聚众点。既比，则读法，书其敬敏任恤者。
现代文：凡春秋举行祭祀、田猎、乡射礼或饮酒礼、丧事等事聚集民众的时候，及校比民众的时候，就要宣读法令，并记录民众中具有尊敬长上、及时行仁义、信任朋友和救济贫困等德行的人。
English: Whenever the public gathers in spring and autumn for a religious service, field hunting, village shooting ceremony, drinking ceremony, or funeral, and when there is a school competition, the decree should be read out and the people who have the virtues of respect for superiors, timely practice of benevolence, trust in friends, and relief of poverty should be recorded.

古文：凡事，掌其比觵挞罚之事。
现代文：凡有事，掌管对众人的稽查、罚失礼者饮酒或鞭挞失礼者的事。
English: In all matters, he is in charge of the inspection of the people, the punishment of those who drink alcohol or the whipping of those who are rude.

古文：比长，各掌其比之治。
现代文：比长各自掌管对本比的治理。
English: The ratio holders are in charge of the governance of the ratio.

古文：五家相受相和亲，有辠奇邪，则相及。
现代文：五家相互托付、相互和睦亲善，有犯罪或造谣惑众的，就连带受惩罚。
English: The five families trust each other, live in harmony and amity with each other. Those who commit crimes or spread rumors to mislead the public will be punished.

古文：徙于国中及效，则従而授之。
现代文：迁徙到都城中或郊里，就要跟从而把他交付给当地官吏。
English: If he moves to the center or suburbs of the capital, he will be handed over to local officials.

古文：若徙于他，则为之旌节而行之。
现代文：如果迁徙到其他地方，就授给迁徙者符节让他上路。
English: If they migrate to other places, they will be given a token to set them on their way.

古文：若无授无节，则唯圆土内之。
现代文：如果迁徙者没有交付或没有符节，就要被收进圜土。
English: If the migrants fail to deliver or do not have the required documents, they will be taken to the camp.

