古文：厥阴有余病阴痹，不足病生热痹；滑则病狐疝风；濇则病少腹积气。
现代文：厥阴之气过盛就会发生 阴痹 ，不足则发生 热痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 狐疝风 ；气血运行涩滞则形成少腹中有积气。
English: If the qi of Jueyin is too abundant, it will cause palsy, and if it is deficient, it will cause heat stroke; if the qi and blood are too slippery, it will suffer from "foxtail wind"; if the qi and blood run sluggishly, it will form a small abdomen with gas accumulation.

古文：少阴有余病皮痹、隐轸，不足病肺痹；滑则病肺风疝；濇则病积、溲血。
现代文：少阴之气有余可以发生 皮痹 、隐疹，不足则发生 肺痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 肺风疝 ；气血运行涩滞则病积聚和尿血。
English: If the qi is too weak, it can cause skin palsy and rashes, and if it is too weak, it can cause pneumonia; if the qi and blood are too slippery, it can cause pneumonia; if the qi and blood flow is too slow, it can cause disease accumulation and blood in the urine.

古文：太阴有余病肉痹、寒中，不足病脾痹；滑则病脾风疝；濇则病积、心腹时满。
现代文：太阴之气有余可以发生 肉痹 和寒中，不足则发生 脾痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 脾风疝 ；气血运行涩滞则病积聚和心腹胀满。
English: If the qi is too weak, it can cause spleen paralysis; if the qi and blood are too slippery, it can cause splenic spasms; if the qi and blood are too stagnant, it can cause disease accumulation and abdominal distension.

古文：阳明有余病脉痹、身时热，不足病心痹；滑则病心风疝；濇则病积、时善惊。
现代文：阳明之气有余可以发生 脉痹 、身体有时发热，不足则发生 心痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 心风疝 ；气血运行涩滞则病积聚和不时惊恐。
English: If there is too much Yangming qi, it can cause pulse paralysis, the body sometimes heats up, and if there is not enough, it can cause heart paralysis; if the qi and blood are too slippery, it can cause heart palpitations; if the qi and blood are running sluggishly, it can cause disease accumulation and panic from time to time.

古文：太阳有余病骨痹、身重，不足病肾痹；滑则病肾风疝；濇则病积、时善巅疾。
现代文：太阳之气有余可以发生 骨痹 、身体沉重，不足则发生 肾痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 肾风疝 ；气血运行涩滞则病积聚，且不时发生头顶部疾病。
English: If there is too much qi from the sun, it can cause bone palsy and heavy body, and if there is not enough, it can cause kidney palsy; if the qi and blood are too slippery, it can cause nephritis; if the qi and blood are running sluggishly, it can cause accumulation of diseases, and from time to time, diseases of the top of the head can occur.

古文：少阳有余病筋痹、胁满，不足病肝痹；滑则病肝风疝；濇则病积、时筋急目痛。
现代文：少阳之气有余可以发生 筋痹 、胁肋满闷，不足则发生 肝痹 ；气血过于滑利则患 肝风疝 ；气血运行涩滞则病积聚，有时发生筋脉拘急和眼目疼痛等。
English: If there is too much qi in the weak yang, muscle paralysis and stiffness may occur, and if there is not enough, liver paralysis may occur; if the qi and blood are too slippery, liver apoplexy may occur; if the qi and blood are running sluggishly, accumulation of diseases may occur, and myocardial urgency and eye pain may sometimes occur.

古文：是故春气在经脉，夏气在孙络，长夏气在肌肉，秋气在皮肤，冬气在骨髓中。
现代文：所以春天人的气血在经脉，夏天人的气血在孙络，长夏人的气血在肌肉，秋天人的气血在皮肤，冬天人的气血在骨髓中。
English: Therefore, in spring, people's qi and blood are in the meridians, in summer, people's qi and blood are in the meridians, in summer, people's qi and blood are in the muscles, in autumn, people's qi and blood are in the skin, and in winter, people's qi and blood are in the bone marrow.

古文：帝曰：余愿闻其故。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear the reason.

古文：岐伯曰：春者，天气始开，地气始泄，冻解冰释，水行经通，故人气在脉。
现代文：岐伯说：春季，天之阳气开始启动，地之阴气也开始发泄，冬天的冰冻逐渐融化消逝，水道通行，所以人的气血也集中在经脉中流行。
English: Qibo said: In the spring, the yang of the sky begins to start, the yin of the earth begins to vent, the winter freeze gradually melts away, and the waterway passes, so the human qi and blood are also concentrated in the meridians.

古文：夏者，经满气溢，入孙络受血，皮肤充实。
现代文：夏季，经脉中气血充满而流溢于孙络，孙络接受了气血，皮肤也变得充实了。
English: In the summer, the qi and blood in the meridians were full and overflowed to Sun Luo. Sun Luo received the qi and blood, and his skin became plump.

古文：长夏者，经络皆盛，内溢肌中。
现代文：长夏，经脉和络脉中的气血都很旺盛，所以能充分地灌溉润泽于肌肉之中。
English: In the long summer, the qi and blood in the meridians and vas deferens are very strong, so they can fully irrigate and moisturize the muscles.

古文：秋者，天气始收，腠理闭塞，皮肤引急。
现代文：秋季，天气开始收敛，腠理随之而闭塞，皮肤也收缩紧密起来了。
English: In autumn, when the weather starts to get colder, the blood vessels close up and the skin tightens.

古文：冬者，盖藏，血气在中，内着骨髓，通于五脏。
现代文：冬季，主闭藏，人身的气血收藏在内，聚集于骨髓，并内通于五脏。
English: In winter, the main reservoir is closed, and the body's qi and blood are collected, gathered in the bone marrow, and passed to the internal organs.

古文：是故邪气者，常随四时之气血而入客也。至其变化不可为度，然必从其经气，僻除其邪，除其邪则乱气不生。
现代文：所以邪气也往往随着四时气血的变化而侵入人体相应的部位，若待其发生了变化，那就难以预测了；但必须顺应四时经气的变化及早进行调治，驱除侵入的邪气，那么气血就不致变化逆乱了。
English: Therefore, evil spirits often invade the corresponding parts of the human body with the change of the four-hour qi and blood. If it changes, it will be difficult to predict. However, it is necessary to adjust to the changes of the four-hour qi and blood as early as possible, and expel the invading evil spirits. Then the qi and blood will not change and become disordered.

古文：帝曰：逆四时而生乱气奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：针刺违反了四时而导致气血逆乱是怎样的？
English: Huang Di Dao: How does acupuncture violate the four o'clock and lead to qi and blood rebellion?

古文：岐伯曰：春刺络脉，血气外溢，令人少气；春刺肌肉，血气环逆，令人上气；春刺筋骨，血气内着，令人腹胀。
现代文：岐伯说：春天刺络脉，会使血气向外散溢，使人发生少气无力；春天刺肌肉，会使血气循环逆乱，使人发生上气咳喘；春天刺筋骨，会使血气留着在内，使人发生腹胀。
English: Qi Bo said: the spring prickly vein will cause the blood gas to spill out, causing people to have low energy and weakness; the spring prickly muscle will cause the blood gas circulation to be disrupted, causing people to have asthma; the spring prickly muscle and bone will cause the blood gas to remain inside, causing bloating.

古文：夏刺经脉，血气乃竭，令人解㑊；夏刺肌肉，血气内却，令人善恐；夏刺筋骨，血气上逆，令人善怒。
现代文：夏天刺经脉，会使血气衰竭，使人疲倦懈惰；夏天刺肌肉，会使血气不足，使人易于恐惧；夏天刺筋骨，会使血气上逆，使人易于发怒。
English: Summer prick the veins, will make the blood gas exhaustion, make people tired and lazy; summer prick the muscles, will make the blood gas shortage, make people easy to fear; summer prick the bones, will make the blood gas upside down, make people easy to anger.

古文：秋刺经脉，血气上逆，令人善忘；秋刺络脉，气不外行，令人卧不欲动；秋刺筋骨，血气内散，令人寒栗。
现代文：秋天刺经脉，会使血气上逆，使人易于忘事；秋天刺络脉，使人气血内敛而不能外行，因人的阳气不足而嗜卧懒动；秋天刺筋骨，会使血气耗散于内，使人发生寒战。
English: Autumn prick the meridians, will make the blood gas upside down, make people easy to forget things; autumn prick the vas deferens, make people's qi and blood restrained and unable to go out, because of people's yang deficiency and lazy; autumn prick the muscles and bones, will make the blood gas dissipate inside, make people have a cold war.

古文：冬刺经脉，血气皆脱，令人目不明；冬刺络脉，内气外泄，留为大痹；冬刺肌肉，阳气竭绝，令人善忘。
现代文：冬天刺经脉，会使血气虚脱，使人发生目视不明；冬天刺络脉，则收敛在内的真气外泄，体内血行不畅而生成 大痹 ；冬天刺肌肉，会使阳气竭绝于外，使人易于忘事。
English: Winter prickly veins, will make the blood gas collapse, causing people to have blurred vision; winter prickly veins, will leak the true qi, including convergence, and the blood circulation in the body is not smooth, resulting in paralysis; winter prickly muscles, will exhaust the yang qi, making people easy to forget things.

古文：凡此四时刺者，大逆之病，不可不从也。
现代文：以上这些四时的刺法，都将严重地违背四时变化而导致疾病发生，所以不能不注意顺应四时变化而施刺。
English: All the above four-hour pricking methods will seriously violate the four-hour change and lead to the occurrence of disease, so it is necessary to pay attention to the four-hour change and prick.

古文：反之，则生乱气相淫病焉。
现代文：反之，则会产生逆乱之气，扰乱人体生理功能而生病的呀！
English: On the other hand, it will produce a rebellious spirit, disrupt the human physiological function and make you sick!

古文：故刺不知四时之经，病之所生，以从为逆，正气内乱，与精相薄，必审九候，正气不乱，精气不转。
现代文：所以针刺不懂得四时经气的盛衰和疾病之所以产生的道理，不是顺应四时而是违背四时变化，从而导致正气逆乱于内，邪气便与精气相搏了。一定要仔细审察九侯的脉象，这样进行针刺，正气就不会逆乱了，精气也就不会耗散了。
English: Therefore, acupuncture does not understand the rise and fall of qi at four o'clock and the reason why the disease occurs is not to conform to the four o'clock but to violate the four o'clock change, thus causing the righteous qi to rebel within, and the evil qi to fight with the righteous qi. It is necessary to carefully examine the pulse of the nine horas, so that when acupuncture is performed, the righteous qi will not rebel, and the righteous qi will not dissipate.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：刺五脏，中心一日死，其动为噫；中肝五日死，其动为语；中肺三日死，其动为欬；中肾六日死，其动为嚏欠；中脾十日死，其动为吞。
现代文：如果针刺误中了五脏，刺中心脏一天就要死亡，其变动的症状为噫气；刺中肝脏五天就要死亡，其变动的症状为多语；刺中肺脏三天就要死亡，其变动的症状为咳嗽；刺中肾脏六天就要死亡，其变动的症状为喷嚏和哈欠；刺中脾脏十天就要死亡，其变动的症状为吞咽之状等。
English: If the needle is mistakenly stuck in the five viscera, the stung heart will die in one day, and the symptoms of its change will be hernia; the liver will die in five days, and the symptoms of its change will be multilingual; the lung will die in three days, and the symptoms of its change will be cough; the kidney will die in six days, and the symptoms of its change will be sneezing and yawning; the spleen will die in ten days, and the symptoms of its change will be swallowing, etc.

古文：刺伤人五脏必死，其动则依其脏之所变候，知其死也。
现代文：刺伤了人的五脏，必致死亡，其变动的症状也随所伤之脏而又各不相同，因此可以根据它来测知死亡的日期。
English: If a person is stabbed in the five viscera, it is certain to cause death, and the symptoms of its change are also different depending on the wound, so it can be used to determine the date of death.

