古文：贵阳府，旧为程番长官司。
现代文：贵阳府，以前称为程番长官司。
English: Guiyang Prefecture, formerly known as Chengban Chief Procuratorate.

古文：洪武初，置贵州宣慰司，隶四川。
现代文：洪武初年，明朝廷在此设置了贵州宣慰司，隶属于四川。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Ming court set up the Guizhou Consolation Division here, affiliated to Sichuan.

古文：永乐十一年改隶贵州。
现代文：永乐十一年，将此地改为隶属贵州。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongle, this place was changed to belong to Guizhou.

古文：成化十二年置程番府。
现代文：成化十二年，朝廷在此设置程番府。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, the imperial court set up Chengfan Prefecture here.

古文：隆庆三年移程番府为贵阳府，与宣慰司同城，府辖城北，司辖城南。
现代文：隆庆三年，朝廷将程番府移为贵阳府，与宣慰司同在一个城内，贵阳府管辖城北，宣慰司管辖城南。
English: In the third year of the Longqing era, the imperial court moved Chengfan Prefecture to Guiyang Prefecture, and together with the Consolation Division, they were in the same city. Guiyang Prefecture governed the north of the city, and the Consolation Division governed the south of the city.

古文：万历时，改为贵阳军民府。
现代文：万历年间将贵阳府又改为贵阳军民府。
English: During the Wanli era, Guiyang Prefecture was changed to Guiyang Military and People's Government.

古文：领安抚司一，曰金筑；领长官司十八，曰贵竹，曰麻向，曰本瓜，曰大华，曰程番，曰韦番，曰方番，曰洪番，曰卧龙番，曰金石番，曰小龙番，曰罗番，曰大龙番，曰小程番，曰上马桥，曰卢番，曰卢山，曰平伐。
现代文：贵阳军民府统领有一个安抚司，名叫金筑安抚司；统领有十八个长官司，它们分别是贵竹、麻向、木瓜、大华、程番、韦番、方番、洪番、卧龙番、金石番、小龙番、罗番、大龙番、小程番、上马桥、卢番、卢山、平伐等长官司。
English: The Guiyang Military and People's Government had a pacification division under its command, called the Jinzhu Pacification Division; it had eighteen commanding officers, namely, Guizhu, Ma Xiang, Papaya, Dahua, Chengban, Weiban, Fangban, Hongban, Wolongban, Jinshiban, Xiaolongban, Luban, Dalongban, Xiaochengban, Shangmaqiao, Luban, Lushan, Pingfa and other commanding officers.

古文：其贵州宣慰司所领长官司九，曰水东，曰中曹，曰青山，曰札佐，曰龙里，曰白纳，曰底寨，曰乖西，曰养龙坑。
现代文：贵州宣慰司所统领的长官司有九个，它们分别是水东、中曹、青山、答刂佐、龙里、白纳、底寨、乖西、养龙坑等。
English: There are nine prefectural administrative divisions under the leadership of the Guizhou Publicity and Consolation Department, namely, Shuidong, Zhong Cao, Aoyama, Taobao Cao, Longli, Bai Na, Di Zhai, Guixi, and Yao Longkeng.

古文：自蜀汉时，济火从诸葛亮南征有功，封罗甸国王。
现代文：从三国的蜀汉时起，济火跟随诸葛亮南征有功劳，被封为罗甸国王。
English: From the time of Shu and Han in the Three Kingdoms, Ji Hui followed Zhuge Liang in the Southern Expedition and was awarded the title of King of Lodya.

古文：后五十六代为宋普贵，传至元阿画，世有土于水西宣慰司。
现代文：他的第五十六代子孙是宋朝的普贵，传到元代的阿画时，他们在水西宣慰司已经有了世袭领地。
English: The 56th generation of his descendants were the Song Dynasty's Pu Gui. When the A painting was passed down to the Yuan Dynasty, they already had a hereditary territory in the west of Shuixi Xuan Lu.

古文：霭翠，其裔也，后为安氏。
现代文：霭翠，是他们的后裔子孙，即后来的安氏。
English: It was their descendants, the descendants of their descendants, who later became the An clan.

古文：洪武初，同宣慰宋蒙古歹来归，赐名钦，俱令领原职世袭。
现代文：明朝洪武初年，安氏和宣慰宋蒙古歹一起归附朝廷，朝廷给宋氏赐名为钦，让他们世袭原来的领地和职务。
English: In the first year of the Hongwu reign of the Ming Dynasty, the An clan and the Xuanjie Song Mongolian clan were annexed to the imperial court. The imperial court gave the Song clan the name of Qin, allowing them to inherit the original territory and duties.

古文：及设布政使司，而宣慰司如故。
现代文：等到朝廷设置布政使司时，宣慰司依然如故没有撤消。
English: When the imperial court set up the Political Envoy Division, the Consolation Division was still not abolished.

古文：安氏领水西，宋氏领水东。
现代文：安氏统领水西，宋氏统领水东。
English: The An clan's territorial waters are in the west, and the Song clan's territorial waters are in the east.

古文：八番降者，皆令世其职。
现代文：凡番族人来归降朝廷，都让他们世袭原来的职务。
English: Whenever a member of the Fan nationality came to surrender to the imperial court, they were allowed to inherit their original posts.

古文：六年诏霭翠位各宣慰之上。
现代文：洪武六年，皇帝下诏令，将霭翠的地位排在各宣慰之上。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the emperor issued a decree, ranking the status of Xingcui above that of Xuancheng.

古文：霭翠每年贡方物与马，帝赐锦绮钞币有加。
现代文：霭翠每年向朝廷进献土特产和马匹，皇帝总是赏赐锦绮和钞币给他。
English: Every year, Jiu Cui presented local special products and horses to the imperial court, and the emperor always rewarded him with brocade and banknotes.

古文：十四年，宋钦死，妻刘淑贞随其子诚入朝，赐米三十石、钞三百锭、衣三袭。
现代文：十四年，宋钦死，他的妻子刘淑贞和他的儿子宋诚一起入京城朝贡，朝廷赏赐给他们米三十石、钞三百锭、衣服三套。
English: Fourteen years later, after the death of Song Chin, his wife Liu Shuzhen and his son Song Cheng entered the capital together to pay tribute. The imperial court rewarded them with 30 kilos of rice, 300 banknotes and three sets of clothes.

古文：时霭翠亦死，妻奢香代袭。
现代文：这时霭翠也死亡，其妻子奢香代理承袭了他的职务。
English: At this time, Gong Cui also died, and his wife, Luxurious Agent, took over his duties.

古文：都督马晔欲尽灭诸罗，代以流官，故以事挞香，激为兵端。
现代文：都督马晔想把各种罗人都剿灭，代以流官统治，故意找事鞭挞奢香，激起了变故。
English: The governor Ma Ye wanted to annihilate all kinds of Luo people and replace them with officials, deliberately looking for things to whip and incite extravagance, and provoked the change.

古文：诸罗果怒，欲反。
现代文：各罗人果然愤怒，想造反。
English: The people of Kalaw were really angry and wanted to rebel.

古文：刘淑贞闻止之，为走醖京师。
现代文：刘淑贞知道后制止了他们。为此特地入京城向朝廷诉说实情。
English: Liu Shuzhen stopped them after she found out. For this purpose, she went to Beijing to tell the truth to the imperial court.

古文：帝既召问，命淑贞归，招香，赐以绮钞。
现代文：皇帝召问了刘淑贞后，让刘淑贞回去替朝廷招抚奢香，赏赐绮纱给她们。
English: After the emperor summoned Liu Shuzhen, he asked Liu Shuzhen to go back to court for the imperial court to seduce luxury and reward them with embroidery.

古文：十七年，奢香率所属来朝，并诉晔激变状，且愿效力开西鄙，世世保境。
现代文：十七年，奢香率领部属前来京城朝觐皇帝，向皇帝诉说马晔激起变故的情况，并表示愿意替朝廷效力开发西部边疆，世代为朝廷保境安民。
English: In the seventeenth year, Shuxiang led his subordinates to come to the imperial court in Beijing to tell the emperor about the situation caused by the horse-drawn carriage, and expressed his willingness to develop the western frontier for the benefit of the imperial court, and to keep the country safe for the imperial court for generations.

古文：帝悦，赐香锦绮、珠翠、如竟冠、金环、袭衣，而召晔还，罪之。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，给奢香赏赐锦绮、珠翠、如意冠、金环、官衣等礼物，将马晔召回治罪。
English: The emperor was very pleased and rewarded Luxurious Fragrance with gifts such as brocade, jade, crown, gold ring, and official robe, and called Ma Xuan back to punish him.

古文：香遂开偏桥、水东，以达乌蒙、乌撒及容山、草塘诸境，立龙场九驿。
现代文：奢香于是开拓了偏桥、水东等地，打通了通往乌蒙、乌撒和容山、草塘等地的道路，设立了龙场等九个驿所。
English: Luxurious incense then opened up the bridge, water east and other places, opened the road to Umeng, Wusa and Yongshan, grassland and other places, and set up nine brewing places such as Longchang.

古文：二十年，香进马二十三匹，每岁定输赋三万石。
现代文：二十年，奢香向朝廷贡献马二十三匹，每年额定输送赋粮三万石。
English: For twenty years, Luxurious contributed twenty-three horses to the imperial court, and the annual delivery of grain was rated at 30,000 koku.

古文：子安的袭，贡马谢恩。
现代文：不久奢香的儿子安的承袭职位，向朝廷贡献马匹以表示谢恩。
English: Soon after, Luxiang's son An inherited the position and presented horses to the imperial court as a token of gratitude.

古文：帝曰： 安的居水西，最为诚恪。 
现代文：皇帝说： 安的居住在水西，对朝廷最忠诚、恭敬。 
English: The emperor said, "An, who lives in the west of Shu, is the most loyal and respectful to the imperial court.

古文：命礼部厚赏其使。
现代文：命令礼部厚赏安的的使者。
English: Order the etiquette department to reward the messenger of peace.

古文：二十五年，的来朝，赐三品服并袭衣金带、白金三百两、钞五十锭。
现代文：二十五年，安的自己来京城朝觐皇帝，皇帝给他赏赐三品官的官服、织金腰带和二百两白金、钱钞五十锭。
English: In the twenty-fifth year, An himself came to the capital to make a pilgrimage to the emperor. The emperor rewarded him with a three-rank official's official uniform, a woven gold belt, two hundred and two pieces of white gold, and fifty-baht banknotes.

古文：香复遣其子妇奢助及其部长来贡马六十六匹，诏赐香银四百两，锦绮钞币有差。
现代文：奢香又派遣她的儿媳奢助及其手下的部落酋长向朝廷进献贡马六十六匹，皇帝下诏赐给奢香四百两银子，给前来朝贡的使者各按等级赏赐锦绮和钞币。
English: Shuxiang also sent her daughter-in-law Shousuke and the tribal chiefs under her command to present 66 tribute horses to the imperial court, and the emperor gave Shuxiang four hundred and two silver coins, and rewarded the messengers who came to pay tribute with brocade and banknotes according to their rank.

古文：自是每岁贡献不绝，报施之隆，亦非他土司所敢望也。
现代文：从此他们每年都来献贡，而朝廷每年还报他们的礼物之隆重，也是其他土司所不敢望及的。
English: Since then, they have come every year to pay tribute, and the imperial court also reports the grandeur of their gifts every year, which other tushi dare not hope for.

古文：二十九年，香死，朝廷遣使祭之，的贡马谢恩。
现代文：二十九年，奢香死，朝廷专门派使者前去致祭，安的则向朝廷献贡马以表示谢恩。
English: In the 29th year, when Shuxiang died, the imperial court specially sent an envoy to offer a sacrifice, and An offered a tribute horse to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：正统七年，水西宣慰陇富自陈： 祖父以来，累朝皆赐金带。
现代文：正统七年，水西的宣慰陇富自己向朝廷陈说： 自我的祖父以来，每一朝代都给我们家庭赏赐金带。
English: In the seventh year of orthodoxy, Suixi's consolation, Yan Fu himself, said to the imperial court: Since my grandfather, every dynasty has rewarded our family with a gold belt.

古文：臣蒙恩受职，乞如例。 
现代文：我承蒙皇上的恩德受封为宣慰使，请求皇上也按前朝的惯例给我赏赐金带。 
English: Thanks to the grace of the emperor, I was appointed as a messenger of condolence, and I asked the emperor to also reward me with a gold belt according to the practice of the previous dynasty.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是时，宋诚之子斌年老，以子昂代，昂死，然代。
现代文：此时，宋诚的儿子宋斌年事已高，便让儿子宋昂代理他的职务。宋昂死后，又让宋然代理。
English: At this time, Song Bin, the son of Song Cheng, was old, so he asked his son Song Ang to act as his representative. After Song Ang's death, he asked Song Ran to act as his representative.

古文：十四年赐敕陇富母子，嘉其调兵保境之功。陇富颇骄。
现代文：十四年，皇帝给陇富母子俩颁赐敕谕，嘉奖他们调兵保境安民的功劳，陇富颇为此而骄傲。
English: In the 14th year, the emperor issued an imperial edict to Zou Fu's mother and son, commending them for their efforts in mobilizing troops to secure the safety of the people. Zou Fu was quite proud of this.

古文：天顺三年，东苗之乱，富不时出兵，闻朝廷有意督之，乃进马谢罪，赐敕警之。
现代文：天顺三年，东苗发生叛乱，陇富不及时出兵，听说朝廷有对他实施监督的意思，便向朝廷进献马匹以表示谢罪。
English: In the third year of Tenshun, there was a rebellion in Dongmiao, and Shufu did not send troops in time. Hearing that the imperial court intended to supervise him, he presented horses to the imperial court to express his remorse.

古文：富死，侄观袭。
现代文：朝廷赐给他敕令，对他进行警告。
English: The court gave him a royal order and warned him.

古文：观老，子贵荣袭。
现代文：陇富死后，他的侄儿陇观承袭了宣慰使职务。
English: After the death of Zou Fu, his nephew Zou Guan inherited the position of the Consoler.

古文：巡抚陈仪以西堡狮子孔之平，由观与子贵荣统部众二万攻白石崖，四旬而克，家自馈饷，口不言功，特给观正三品昭勇将军诰。
现代文：陇观年纪老了以后，由他儿子陇贵荣承袭职务。巡抚陈仪认为在平定西堡狮子孔的征战中，陇观和他的儿子陇贵荣率领部下两万人攻打白石崖，四十天就攻克该地，而且他们所用的粮饷全是自己家提供的，虽然他们口头上没提功劳，实际上功劳不小，因此特地请求朝廷给陇观颁赐了正三品昭勇将军的诰命。
English: After Gongguan's old age, his son Gong Guirong took over his duties. The governor Chen Yi believed that in the campaign to pacify the Lion's Mouth of Xibao, Gongguan and his son Gong Guirong led 20,000 men to attack the White Rock Cliff and conquered the place in 40 days. Moreover, the grain they used was all provided by their own family. Although they did not mention their contribution verbally, their contribution was not small in fact. Therefore, they specifically requested the court to award Gongguan with the posthumous title of General Zhaoyong.

古文：初，安氏世居水西，管苗民四十八族，宋氏世居贵州城侧，管水东、贵竹等十长官司，皆设治所于城内，衔列左右。
现代文：原先，安氏世代居住在水西，管理苗族四十八个大姓的百姓；宋氏世代居住在贵州城的侧面，管理水东、贵竹等十个长官司。他们都在城内没有治所，衔列左右两边。
English: Originally, the An generation lived in the west of the water and managed the people of the forty-eight great surnames of the Miao people; the Song generation lived on the side of Guizhou City and managed ten chief magistrates such as Shuidong and Guizhu. They all had no office in the city and lined up on the left and right sides.

古文：而安氏掌印，非有公事不得擅还水西。
现代文：安氏执掌宣慰使司的官印时，没有公事不得擅自回水西。
English: When Yasushi was in charge of the official seal of the Xuancheng Envoy Office, he was not allowed to return to West Shui without permission if there was no official business.

古文：至是总兵官为之请，许其以时巡历所部，趣办贡赋，听暂还水西，以印授宣慰宋然代理。
现代文：至此，总兵官为他们请示朝廷，允许他们按时巡视各部落，筹办贡物和赋役，听任安氏暂回水西，将官印交给宣慰宋然代理。
English: At this point, the commander-in-chief petitioned the imperial court for them, allowing them to inspect the tribes on time, prepare tributes and rewards, allow An to temporarily return to the west of Shuixi, and hand over the official seal to the agent of Xuancheng Songran.

古文：贵荣老，请以子佐袭，命赐贵荣父子锦纻。
现代文：陇贵荣年老后，请求朝廷允许他的儿子陇佐承袭职务，皇帝同意了，并给陇贵荣父子赏赐银绽。
English: When Zou Guirong was old, he asked the court to allow his son, Zou Zuo, to take over his duties. The emperor agreed, and gave Zou Guirong and his son a gift of silver.

古文：先是，宋然贪淫，所管陈湖等十二马头科害苗民，致激变。
现代文：在此之前，宋然贪婪好色，他所管辖的陈湖等十二马头作奸犯科损害苗民，致使引起激变。
English: Prior to this, Song Ran was greedy and lecherous, and his subordinates, such as Chen Hu, committed crimes against the Miao people, resulting in a dramatic change.

古文：而贵荣欲并然地，诱其众作乱。
现代文：陇贵荣也想吞并宋然的地盘，故也诱使他手下的百姓作乱。
English: Xing Guirong also wanted to annex Song Ran's territory, so he also induced the people under his command to riot.

古文：于是阿朵等聚众二万余，署立名号，攻陷寨堡，袭据然所居大羊肠，然仅以身免。
现代文：于是，阿朵等人就聚集了两万多人，建立官署，设立名号，攻陷寨堡，袭击并占据了宋然所居的大羊肠，宋然只身逃了出来。
English: As a result, Ado and others gathered more than 20,000 people, set up a government office, set up a name, captured the castle, attacked and occupied the large sheep's intestine where Song Ran lived, and Song Ran escaped.

古文：贵荣遽以状上，冀令己按治之。
现代文：陇贵荣于是急忙将以上情形上报给朝廷，希望朝廷让自己来安抚治理该地。
English: Xing Guirong then hurriedly reported the above situation to the imperial court, hoping that the imperial court would allow itself to pacify and govern the place.

古文：会阿朵党泄其情，官军进讨。
现代文：此时阿朵的同党将此事的内情泄露出来，官军前去进剿讨伐。
English: At this time, Ado's fellow party members leaked the inside story of the matter, and the government army went to the battlefield.

古文：贵荣惧，乃自率所部为助。
现代文：陇贵荣感到害怕，便自动率领部下帮官军清除叛乱。
English: Xing Guirong felt afraid, so he automatically led his subordinates to help the government army to clear the rebellion.

古文：及贼平，贵荣已死，坐追夺，然坐斩。
现代文：待乱贼都已平定后，陇贵荣已死，朝廷按他的罪行追夺了他的官位，而宋然按罪应当斩首。
English: After all the rioters had been subdued, Xing Guirong was dead, the imperial court seized his official position according to his crime, and Song Ran should be beheaded according to his crime.

古文：然奏世受爵土，负国厚恩。
现代文：宋然便上奏说自己家族世代都被朝廷封有官爵和领地，现在是辜负了朝廷的厚恩。
English: Song Ran then went on to say that his family's generation had been given official titles and territories by the court, and now he had failed to live up to the court's kindness.

古文：但变起于荣，而身陷重辟，乞分释。
现代文：但是变故是陇贵荣引起的，而我却受严重牵连，请求朝廷分释自己的罪行。
English: However, the accident was caused by Zhai Guirong, and I was seriously implicated and asked the court to absolve my crime.

古文：因从末减，依土俗纳粟赎罪。
现代文：朝廷最后给予减免，让他按当地习俗向朝廷交纳粟粮以替自己赎罪。
English: In the end, the imperial court granted him a remission, allowing him to atone for his sins by paying maize grain to the imperial court according to local custom.

古文：都御史请以贵筑、平伐七长官司地设立府县，皆以流官抚理。
现代文：都御史请求在贵筑、平伐等七个长官司地区设立府和县，全让流官来安抚治理这些地方。
English: The Metropolitan Government requested the establishment of prefectures and counties in seven prefectural regions such as Guizhong and Pingfa, all of which were to be pacified and governed by officials.

古文：巡抚覆奏以蛮民不愿，遂寝。
现代文：巡抚上奏答复说蛮族百姓不愿意这么做，于是朝廷便将都御史的请求搁置起来了。
English: The governor replied that the barbarian people did not want to do this, so the court put the request of the imperial historian on hold.

古文：宋氏亦遂衰，子孙守世官，衣租食税，听征调而已。
现代文：宋氏家族从此逐渐衰落，其子孙仅是守住世袭官位，依赖租税生活，听从朝廷的征调罢了。
English: From then on, the Song family gradually declined, and their descendants only kept their hereditary official positions, relied on taxes, and obeyed the imperial court.

古文：时安万钟应袭，骄纵不法。
现代文：这时，安万钟承袭官职，但骄纵不法。
English: At this time, An Wan Zhong inherited the official position, but he was arrogant and lawless.

古文：汉民张纯、土目乌挂等导之游猎，酒酣，辄射人为戏。
现代文：有汉人张纯和土目乌挂等人带他去游猎，酒酣耳热之后，总拿弓箭射人为游戏。
English: Some Han people, such as Zhang Chun and Domok Wukang, took him on a hunting trip. After the wine-drinking fever, he always took a bow and arrow as a game.

古文：又尝挞其左右，为所杀。
现代文：同时，安万钟又曾经常鞭挞他左右的人，结果被人所杀。
English: At the same time, An Wan Zhong had often whipped people around him, and was killed as a result.

古文：无子，其从弟万镒宜袭，镒以贼未获辞。
现代文：安万钟死后没有儿子，他的堂弟安万镒本应当承袭官职，但安万镒以贼人还未抓获为由，将此推辞了。
English: After the death of An Wan Zhong, there was no son. His cousin, An Wan Ye, was supposed to succeed to the official post, but An Wan Ye declined on the grounds that the thief had not yet been caught.

古文：乌挂等遂以疏族幼子普者冒万钟弟曰万钧告袭，承勘官入其贿，遂暂委钟妻奢播摄事。
现代文：乌挂等人于是以安万钟远亲的幼子安普冒充为安万钟的弟弟安万钧，宣告继承安万钟的职位。前去审核调查的官员接受了乌挂等人的贿赂，便暂时委托安万钟的妻子奢播摄理宣慰使职务。
English: U Khang and others then announced the succession of An Wan Jong's position by using An Phu, the infant son of a distant relative of An Wan Jong, as An Wan Hui, the younger brother of An Wan Jong. The officials who went to review the investigation accepted the bribe from U Khang and others, and temporarily entrusted the wife of An Wan Jong with the duties of a conciliator.

古文：万镒悔不立，而恨乌挂之主其谋也，遂以兵袭乌挂，乌挂亦发兵相仇杀，皆以万钟之死为辞。
现代文：安万镒后悔自己不承袭宣慰使职务，便转而恨乌挂为安普和奢播主谋此事，于是便带兵袭击乌挂。乌挂也发兵与安万镒相互仇杀，双方都以安万钟的死为托辞。
English: An Wanzhong regretted that he did not succeed to the post of Xuancheng, so he turned to hate Wuzhang for being the leader and mastermind of the matter, so he led an army to attack Wuzhang. Wuzhang also sent troops to fight against each other with An Wanzhong, and both sides used the death of An Wanzhong as an excuse.

古文：巡按御史上其状，以万镒宜袭，但与乌挂相诬讦，宜各宥输赎。
现代文：巡按御史将此情况上报朝廷，说安万镒应当承袭宣慰使职务，但他与乌挂互相诬蔑攻讦，应让他们各自向官府输送粮食替自己赎罪。
English: The inspector general reported this situation to the imperial court, saying that An Wanzhong should take over the post of consoler, but that he and Wu Hang should slander and attack each other, and they should each send grain to the government to atone for their sins.

古文：而枭杀钟者，并戍纯等，受其贿者亦罚治，诏如之。
现代文：杀死安万钟的人，罚去戍守边关；接受乌挂等人贿赂的官员也治罪。
English: The person who killed An Wan Zhong will be punished for guarding the border; officials who accept bribes from Wu Hang and others will also be punished.

古文：未几，镒死，子阿写幼，命以万铨借袭。
现代文：皇帝同意这样处置。不久，安万镒死，他的儿子阿写年幼，朝廷任命安万铨借袭宣慰使职务。
English: The emperor agreed to this arrangement. Soon after, when An Wanzhong died and his son, Ah Pi, was still young, the court appointed An Wanzhong to the post of the Minister of Consolation.

古文：万铨有助平阿向功，提督尚书伍文定为之请。万铨亦自陈其功，乞加参政衔，赐蟒衣，帝命赐以应得之服。
现代文：安万铨在帮助官军平定阿向时立有功劳，提督尚书伍文定为他特向朝廷请示，而安万铨也向朝廷陈述自己的功劳，请求朝廷加封给他参政的头衔，赏赐绣有蟒文的官服。皇帝命令给安万铨赏赐他应得的官服。
English: An Wanzhong had distinguished himself in helping the government army to subdue Ah Xiang. Admiral Shang Shufu Wenzhong made a special request to the court for him, and An Wanzhong also presented his services to the court, requesting the court to give him the title of participation in politics and reward him with an official uniform embroidered with the imperial seal. The emperor ordered to reward An Wanzhong with the official uniform he deserved.

古文：后阿写长，袭职，改名仁。
现代文：后来阿写长大成人，承袭宣慰使职务，将自己改名为安仁。
English: Later, when Ah Pi became an adult, he took over the position of Xuan Ye Zong and changed his name to An Ren.

古文：未几死，子国亨袭。
现代文：不久，安仁死，他的儿子安国亨承袭职务。
English: Soon after, Anren died, and his son, An Guoheng, took over his duties.

古文：淫虐，乃以事杀万铨之子信。
现代文：安国亨生性好淫贪虐，以某事为由杀死安万铨的儿子安信。
English: An Guo Hengsheng was sexually promiscuous and greedy, and killed An Wanxuan's son Anxin for some reason.

古文：信兄智与其母别居于安顺州，闻之，因告国亨反。
现代文：安信的兄长安智与母亲一起另居在安顺州，听说安信被杀后便控告安国亨造反。
English: Anxin's older brother, An Zhi, lived separately with his mother in Anshun Prefecture. When he heard that Anxin had been killed, he accused An Guofeng of rebellion.

古文：巡抚王诤遽请发兵诛国亨，智遂为总兵安大朝画策，且约输兵粮数万。
现代文：巡抚王诤急忙请求朝廷派兵去诛杀安国亨。安智便与总兵安大朝一起策划进兵事宜，并答应给官军输送粮食数万石。
English: The governor Wang Qian hurriedly requested the imperial court to send soldiers to fight and kill An Guoheng. An Zhi then planned the enlistment together with the general soldier An Datang, and promised to deliver tens of thousands of kilos of grain to the government army.

古文：及师至陆广河，智粮不至。
现代文：等官军到达陆广河时，安智的粮食没有送到。
English: When the government army arrived at Lu Guanghe, Anzhi's grain was not delivered.

古文：诤乃令人谕国亨，而止大朝毋进。
现代文：王诤便派人去谕告安国亨，让安大朝停止进兵。
English: Wang Yao then sent someone to tell An Guoheng to stop sending troops to the An Dynasty.

古文：兵已渡河，为国亨所败。
现代文：官军已经渡过了陆广河，结果被安国亨打败。
English: The government army had already crossed the Lu Guang River, and was eventually defeated by An Guoheng.

古文：国亨惧大诛，遣使哀辞乞降，朝廷未之许。
现代文：安国亨害怕遭受大诛，派使者哀婉其辞请求投降，朝廷没答应。
English: An Guoheng was afraid of being beaten up and sent an envoy to beg for surrender, but the imperial court did not agree.

古文：巡抚阮文中至，檄捕诸反者，密使语国亨，亟出诸奸徒，割地以处安智母子，还所费兵粮，朝廷当待汝以不死。
现代文：巡抚阮文中到任后，传檄文拘捕各造反之人，暗地里派人告诉安国亨，让他赶紧献出各奸邪之徒，割让土地以安顿安智母子，偿还所费的军粮，朝廷就会赦免他的死罪。
English: After the arrival of Governor Nguyn Văn Trng, Trn Văn arrested all the rebels and secretly sent a person to tell An Qung Hn that he should quickly surrender all the traitors, cede land to settle An Chi's mother and son, and reimburse the cost of military rations, and the court would pardon his capital crime.

古文：于是国亨悉听命，帝果赦不诛，而命国亨子民袭。
现代文：于是安国亨全部听从阮文中的密令，皇帝果然饶了安国亨的死罪，让安国亨的儿子安民承袭宣慰使职。
English: As a result, An Guoheng all obeyed the secret order of Nguyn Văn, and the emperor actually spared An Guoheng the death penalty and let An Guoheng's son, An Min, succeed to the post of Xuan Hui.

古文：国亨事起于隆庆四年，至成历五年乃已。
现代文：安国亨的事，起始于隆庆四年，至万历五年才结束。
English: The story of An Guoheng began in the 4th year of the Longqing and ended in the 5th year of the Wanli.

古文：国亨既革任，日遣人至京纳赂，为起复地。
现代文：安国亨既被革去职务，便每日派人到京城行贿，想恢复原有的领地。
English: After he was dismissed from his post, Angukoheng sent people to the capital every day to pay bribes, hoping to recover his former territory.

古文：十三年，播州宣慰杨应龙以献大木得赐飞鱼服，国亨亦请以大木进，乞还给冠带诰封如播例。
现代文：十三年，播州宣慰杨应龙因向朝廷贡献大木而被皇帝赐予绣有飞鱼的官服，安国亨也请求向朝廷进献大木，希望朝廷将冠带归还给他，并得到像播州宣慰杨应龙那样的诰封。
English: In the thirteenth year, the emperor gave Yang Yinglong an official robe embroidered with flying fish to Banzhou Xuanyou Yang Yinglong for donating a large tree to the court. An Guoheng also requested to donate a large tree to the court, hoping that the court would return the crown to him and get a seal like Banzhou Xuanyou Yang Yinglong.

古文：既而木竟不至，乃诿罪于木商。
现代文：后来安国亨所进献的大木竟然没运到，而他将罪过推诿给了木头商人。
English: Later, the large tree donated by Angukoheng did not arrive, and he blamed the wood merchant.

古文：上怒，命夺所赉。
现代文：皇帝发怒，命令夺回以前给安国亨的赏赐礼物。
English: The emperor was so angry that he ordered to take back the gifts given to An Guoheng.

古文：国亨请补贡以明不欺，上仍如所请。
现代文：安国亨请求再向朝廷补贡，以表明自己不是故意欺骗朝廷，皇帝同意了他的请求。
English: An Guoheng requested to pay tribute to the imperial court again to show that he did not intentionally deceive the imperial court, and the emperor agreed to his request.

古文：万历二十六年，国亨子疆臣袭职。
现代文：万历二十六年，安国亨的儿子安疆臣承袭官职。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, An Guoheng's son, An Jiangcheng, succeeded to the official post.

古文：会播州杨应龙反，疆臣亦以戕杀安定事为有司所案。
现代文：此地正碰上播州的杨应龙造反，安疆臣亦因屠杀安定被有关官员立案审察。
English: Yang Yinglong's rebellion in Banzhou was taking place here, and An Jiangcheng was also investigated by the relevant officials for the massacre.

古文：科臣有言其逆节渐萌者，诏不问，许杀贼图功。
现代文：有关大臣有的向皇帝进言，说安疆臣叛逆朝廷的情节已渐渐萌发。皇帝下诏给安疆臣时不提这些事，允许他杀贼建功。
English: Some of the ministers concerned suggested to the emperor that the plot of An Jiang Chen's rebellion against the imperial court had gradually sprouted. When the emperor issued an edict to An Jiang Chen, he did not mention these things and allowed him to make a killing.

古文：疆臣奏称： 播警方殷，臣心未白。 
现代文：安疆臣上奏时声称 ：播州的贼警正急，而我的忠心未得清白。 
English: When An Jiangcheng made his report, he claimed: The Banzhou thief police are in a hurry, and my loyalty has not been cleared.

古文：上复优诏报之。
现代文：皇帝便又下诏给他以优厚的还报。
English: The emperor then issued a decree to reward him generously.

古文：巡抚郭子章许疆臣以应龙平后还播所侵水西乌江地六百里以酬功，于是疆臣兵从沙溪入。
现代文：巡抚郭子章答应安疆臣在平定杨应龙的叛乱之后，归还播州所侵占的水西乌江地区六百里土地给他，以酬谢他参与平定杨应龙的功劳。于是安疆臣便从沙溪进兵。
English: After suppressing Yang Yinglong's rebellion, Guo Zizhang, the governor, promised to return the six hundred miles of land in the Wujiang region west of Shuizhou, which had been occupied by Banzhou, to him as a reward for his participation in the suppression of Yang Yinglong. Therefore, Anjiang entered the army from Shaxi.

古文：有蜚语水西佐贼者，总督李化龙檄诘之，疆臣遂执贼二十余人，率所部夺落濛关，至大水田，焚桃溪庄。
现代文：有流言蜚语说水西人帮助叛贼为乱，总督李化龙便传檄文诘问安疆臣，安疆臣便将二十多个叛贼拘捕起来，率领部下夺取落氵蒙关，抵达大水田，焚烧了桃溪庄。
English: There was a rumor that the people of Western Shui had helped the traitors to cause the chaos. Governor Li Hualong then sent a message to the Minister of Anjiang, who arrested more than 20 traitors, led his subordinates to seize Liaocheng and Mengguan, arrived at the large rice paddies, and burned Taoxi Village.

古文：应龙伏诛。
现代文：杨应龙伏法被诛杀。
English: Yang Yinglongfu was beaten to death.

古文：初，应龙之祖以内难走水西，客死。
现代文：当初，杨应龙的祖父因内部有难躲避到水西，结果客死他乡。
English: At first, Yang Yinglong's grandfather had to escape to the west of the water due to internal difficulties. As a result, he died in a foreign country.

古文：宣慰万铨挟之，索水烟、天旺地，听还葬，其地遂为水西所据。
现代文：水西宣慰安万铨以此相要挟，索取了水烟、天旺两个地方，将杨应龙的祖父葬在此地，于是这两个地方便被水西人所占据。
English: Sui Xi Xuan comforted An Manju with this as a threat, and requested two places, Shuiyan and Tianwang, to bury Yang Yinglong's grandfather in this place, so these two places were occupied by Sui Xi people.

古文：及播州平，分其地为遵义、平越二府，分隶蜀、黔，以渭河中心为界。
现代文：等播州的叛乱平定以后，朝廷将播州分为遵义、平越两个府，将它们分别隶属于四川和贵州，把渭河的中心作为两府的分界线。
English: After the Banzhou rebellion was quelled, the imperial court divided Banzhou into Zunyi and Pingyue prefectures, subordinated them to Sichuan and Guizhou respectively, and made the center of the Minhe River the dividing line between the two prefectures.

古文：总督王象乾代化龙，命疆臣归所侵播州地。
现代文：王象乾代替李化龙出任总督以后，命令安疆臣归还所侵占的播州的土地。
English: After Wang Xiangqian replaced Li Hualong as governor, he ordered Anjiang's vassal to return the land in Banzhou that he had occupied.

古文：子章奏言： 侵地始于万铨，而非疆臣。
现代文：郭子章上奏说： 侵占播州土地是始于安万铨，而不是安疆臣。
English: Guo Zizhang said in his report: The occupation of Banzhou land began with An Wanxuan, not An Jiangsen.

古文：安氏迫取于杨相丧乱之时，非擅取于应龙荡平之日。
现代文：安氏利用杨相丧乱之机胁迫他们，从而获取水烟和天旺两地，而不是在荡平了杨应龙的叛乱之后，安疆臣擅自侵占地盘。
English: The An clan used the opportunity of Yang Xiang's death to coerce them, thus acquiring Shuiyan and Tianwang. Instead, after quelling Yang Yinglong's rebellion, the An clan's vassals occupied the site without authorization.

古文：且臣曾许其裂土，今反夺其故地，臣无面目以谢疆臣，愿罢去。 
现代文：况且，我曾经答应他平定了杨应龙之后将割让一部分土地给他管辖，现今反而要夺回他的故地，我已没有面目可以见安疆臣，愿意罢官离去。 
English: Moreover, I once promised him that after defeating Yang Yinglong, I would cede a part of the land to his jurisdiction. Now, on the contrary, I want to recapture his hometown. I no longer have the face to see An Jiangcheng, and I am willing to resign and leave.

古文：象乾疏言： 疆臣征番，歼应龙子惟楝不实，首功可知。
现代文：王象乾上疏说 ：安疆臣征讨播州时，所谓歼灭杨应龙的儿子杨惟栋与事实不符，其所立的首功由此可想而知。
English: Wang Xiangqian wrote in his diary: When Anjiang's vassals conquered Banzhou, the so-called annihilation of Yang Yinglong's son, Yang Weidong, did not match the facts, and his first achievement can be imagined from this.

古文：至佯败弃阵，送药往来，欺君助逆，迹已昭然。
现代文：至于他还佯装失败丢弃阵地，与杨应龙送药彼此往来，欺瞒朝廷助贼为逆，其迹已经昭然若揭。
English: As for the fact that he also pretended to be defeated and abandoned his position, exchanged with Yang Yinglong to send medicine, and deceived the imperial court to help the thief, his traces have been clearly revealed.

古文：令还侵地，不咎既往，已属国家宽大。
现代文：现今让他归还所侵占的土地，不追究他以往的罪错，已体现了国家对他的宽大。
English: The fact that he is now being asked to return the land he occupied and that he is not being held accountable for his past crimes is evidence of the state's leniency towards him.

古文：若因其挟而予之，彼不为恩，我且示弱。
现代文：若因为他的要挟而给他土地，则他不会感恩，且显示了朝廷的软弱。
English: If he is given land as a result of his threat, he will not be grateful and it will show the weakness of the court.

古文：疆臣既无功，不与之地，正所以全抚臣之信。
现代文：安疆臣既然没有立功，不分地给他，正好保全了巡抚大臣的信誉。
English: Since An Jiangchen did not give any merit, he gave it to him indiscriminately, which just preserved the credibility of the Minister of Supervision.

古文：宜留抚臣罢臣，以为重臣无能与蕞尔苗噂沓者之戒。 
现代文：应该将巡抚大臣挽留住，不批准他罢官离去。作为朝廷的重臣不能因为小小的苗人有所议论而去职。 
English: It is necessary to retain the minister of the governor and not allow him to leave the post. As the chief minister of the imperial court, he cannot leave the post because of the small Miao people's discussion.

古文：于是清疆之议，累年不决。
现代文：于是朝廷如何清理边疆的决策，连年也决定不下来。
English: As a result, the imperial court's decision on how to clean up the frontier could not be made for years.

古文：兵部责令两省巡按御史勘报，而南北言官交章诋象乾贪功起衅。
现代文：兵部责成两个省的巡按御史审核情况后上报朝廷，而南北两地的言官都交相上奏章，诋毁王象乾贪图功劳故意挑起争端。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs ordered the inspectors of the two provinces to report to the imperial court after reviewing the situation, and the spokesmen of the two places in the north and south sent a report to each other, slandering Wang Xiangqian for coveting merit and deliberately provoking disputes.

古文：科臣吕邦耀复劾子章纳贿纵奸，子章求去益力。
现代文：而有关大臣吕邦耀又弹劾郭子章有收纳贿赂纵容奸贼的行为，郭子章便更加要求罢官去职。
English: And the relevant minister, Lü Bangyao, also impeached Guo Zizhang for accepting bribes and conniving with traitors, and Guo Zizhang even more demanded to be dismissed from office.

古文：象乾执疆臣所遣入京行贿之人与金，以闻于朝。
现代文：王象乾将安疆臣派入京城行贿的人抓起来，连同贿赂的金子一起送到朝廷。
English: Wang Xiangqian arrested the bribe-givers sent to Beijing by An Jiangcheng and sent them to the imperial court together with the bribe money.

古文：然议者多右疆臣，尚书萧大亨遂主巡按李时华疏，谓： 征播之役，水西不惟假道，且又助兵。
现代文：但朝廷大臣的议论大多庇护安疆臣，尚书萧大亨于是主张按巡按官李时华的疏章办，说： 征讨播州的战役，水西不仅是让官军假道通过，而且还出兵帮助了官军。
English: However, most of the discussions of the ministers of the imperial court were in favor of the Anjiang minister. Shang Shuxiao, a tycoon, then advocated that it should be carried out according to the regulations of the patrol officer Li Shihua, saying: In the campaign to conquer Banzhou, the west side of the water not only allowed the government army to pass through the fake road, but also sent troops to help the government army.

古文：矧失之土司，得之土司，播固输粮，水亦纳赋，不宜以土地之故伤字小之仁，地宜归疆臣。 
现代文：况且，失之于土司，得之于土司，播州固然是向朝廷输送粮食，水西亦向朝廷交纳赋税，不应因为土地的缘故伤害为仁之心，土地还是应归安疆臣。 
English: Moreover, what is lost by the land steward is gained by the land steward. Of course, Banshu delivered grain to the imperial court, and Mizuki also paid taxes to the imperial court. The land should not hurt the benevolent heart because of the land. The land should still belong to An Jiang Chen.

古文：于是疆臣增官进秩，其母得赐祭，水西尾大之患，亦于是乎不可制矣。
现代文：于是安疆臣得以增官进秩，其母死也得到皇帝的赐祭，水西尾大不掉之患从此便无法制止了。
English: As a result, An Jiangcheng was promoted to a higher rank, and his mother's death also received the emperor's blessing, and Mizunishio's great misfortune could no longer be stopped.

古文：三十六年，疆臣死，弟尧臣袭。
现代文：三十六年，安疆臣死，他的弟弟安尧臣袭水西宣慰使职务。
English: In 36 A.D., An Jiangcheng died, and his younger brother, An Qiancheng, assumed the post of the Western Water Consolation Envoy.

古文：四十一年，乌撒土舍谋逐安效良，尧臣以追印为名，领兵数万长驱入滇，直薄沾益州，所过焚掠，备极惨毒。
现代文：四十一年，乌撒土舍谋划驱逐安效良，安尧臣以追夺官印为名，带兵数万长驱直入云南，直逼沾益州。在他们所经过的地方，焚烧抢劫，行为极为残酷狠毒。
English: In the 41st year, Usa Toshe plotted to expel An Xingliang, and in the name of pursuing the official seal, An Xianchen drove tens of thousands of soldiers straight into Yunnan and drove them straight into Zhangyizhou. In the places they passed through, they burned and robbed, and their behavior was extremely cruel and vicious.

古文：朝廷方以越境擅兵欲加尧臣罪，而尧臣死。
现代文：朝廷正想以越境擅兵的名义加罪于安尧臣，安尧臣死了。
English: The imperial court was about to punish An Xiancheng in the name of crossing the border as a draft dodger. An Xiancheng died.

古文：子位幼，命其妻奢社辉摄事。
现代文：他的儿子安位年幼，朝廷便让安尧臣的妻子奢社辉摄理宣慰事务。
English: As his son was still young, the imperial court let An Xiancheng's wife take part in the consolation affairs.

古文：社辉，永宁宣抚奢崇明女弟。
现代文：奢社辉，是永宁宣抚奢崇明的妹妹。
English: Shuxa Hui is the younger sister of Yongning Xuanfu and Shuxa Chongming.

古文：崇明子寅犷悍，与社辉争地，相仇恨。
现代文：奢崇明的儿子奢宣粗犷骠悍，与奢社辉争夺土地，相互仇恨。
English: Lux Chongming's son Lux Xuan was rough and tough, competing with Lux She Hui for land and hating each other.

古文：而安邦彦者，位之叔父也，素怀异志，阴与崇明合。
现代文：而安邦彦，是安位的叔父，素来心怀异志，暗地里与奢崇明勾结。
English: On the other hand, An Bangyan, An's uncle, has always harbored different ambitions and secretly colluded with Suk Chong.

古文：及崇明反，调兵水西，邦彦遂挟位叛以应之，位幼弱不能制。
现代文：等到奢崇明造反时，到水西调兵，安邦彦就要挟安位也起来造反，与奢崇明相呼应。可怜安位年幼力弱无法制止。
English: When Suk Chongming rebelled and moved his troops to the west of the water, An Bangyan also rebelled against Suk Chongming, echoing Suk Chongming. Poor Suk Chongming was too young and weak to stop him.

古文：邦彦更招故宣慰土舍宋万化为助，率兵趋毕节，陷之，分兵破安顺、平坝、沾益。
现代文：安邦彦还招回前宣慰土舍宋万化做助手，率兵攻陷了毕节，又分兵攻破安顺、平坝、沾益等地。
English: An Bangyan also called back Song Wanhua, a former consul, to be his assistant. He led the army to conquer Bijie, and divided the army to conquer Anshun, Pingba, and Zhanyi.

古文：而万化亦率苗仲九股陷龙里，遂围贵阳，自称罗甸王，时天启二年二月也。
现代文：宋万化也率领苗仲九股的蛮族土兵攻陷龙里，包围贵阳，自己号称为罗甸王。这时是天启二年二月。
English: Song Wanhua also led the barbarian invaders led by Miao Zhong Jiuquan to invade Longli and encircle Guiyang, calling himself the King of Rhodia. This was in February of the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：巡抚李枟方受代，闻变，与巡按御史史永安悉力拒守。
现代文：李木云刚接受代理巡抚之职，听到变故的消息后便与巡按御史史永安一起倾全力拒敌坚守。
English: Li Muyun had just accepted the post of acting inspector, and after hearing the news of the change of fortune, he and the inspector, Shi Yong'an, did their best to resist the enemy.

古文：贼攻不能克，则沿岩制栅，断城中出入。
现代文：叛贼攻不下贵阳府，就沿着山岩设置栅卡，切断城中出入之途。
English: When the rebels were unable to capture Guiyang, they set up a barricade along the mountain rock, cutting off the way in and out of the city.

古文：镇将张彦芳将兵二万赴援，隔龙里不得进。
现代文：镇守将领张彦芳带兵两万前来救援，因中间隔着龙里无法前进。
English: Zhang Yanfang, the town's commander, came to the rescue with 20,000 soldiers, but was unable to advance because of the gap in the middle.

古文：贵州总兵杨愈懋、推官郭象仪与贼战于江门而死。
现代文：贵州总兵杨愈懋、推官郭象仪在江门与叛贼作战时阵亡。
English: Yang Yuxuan, Guizhou's general, and Guo Xiangyi, his deputy, were killed in battle with traitors in Jiangmen.

古文：外援既绝，攻益急，城中粮尽，人相食，而拒守不遗余力。
现代文：外援既绝，叛贼的进攻更急，城中粮食吃光了后，就吃死人肉，但仍不遗余力地拒敌坚守。
English: Since foreign aid was cut off, the rebels' attack was more urgent. When the food in the city ran out, they ate dead human flesh, but they still spared no effort to resist the enemy.

古文：中朝方急辽，不之省。
现代文：此时朝廷正为辽阳而着急，无暇考虑贵阳府的事。
English: At this time, the imperial court was in a hurry for Liaoyang and had no time to consider the matter of Guiyang.

古文：已，以王三善为巡抚，仓卒调兵食，大会将士，分兵二道进。
现代文：不久，朝廷任命王三善为贵州巡抚，仓卒之中调兵调粮。在集中了将士之后，便分兵两路向贵阳府进军。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Wang Sanshan as the governor of Guizhou, and hastily transferred troops and rations. After concentrating the soldiers, they marched to Guiyang Prefecture in two directions.

古文：三日抵龙头营，屡败贼兵，遂夺龙里。
现代文：三天内抵达龙头营，屡次打败贼兵，夺取了龙里。
English: Within three days, they arrived at Longtou Camp, repeatedly defeated the bandits, and captured Longli.

古文：邦彦闻新抚自将大兵数十万，惧甚，遂退屯龙洞。
现代文：安邦彦听说新巡抚自己率大兵数十万前来进剿，很害怕，于是便退守龙洞。
English: When An Bangyan heard that the new procurator himself and hundreds of thousands of soldiers were coming to Longdong, he was very afraid, so he retreated to Longdong.

古文：前锋杨明楷率乌罗兵击死安邦俊，遂乘胜抵贵阳城下，先以五骑传呼曰： 新抚至矣。 
现代文：前锋杨明楷率领乌罗土兵攻击并杀死了安邦俊，乘胜抵达贵阳城下，先派五个骑兵向城内传呼： 新任巡抚到了。 
English: Forward Yang Mingkai led the Uro soldiers to attack and kill An Bangjun, and arrived at the foot of Guiyang City with victory. He first sent five cavalrymen to the city to call: The new governor has arrived.

古文：举城欢呼更生。
现代文：贵阳城举城欢呼获得新生。
English: Guiyang City held a celebration to welcome the new generation.

古文：贵阳被围十余月，城中军民男妇四十万，至是饿死几尽，仅余二百人。
现代文：贵阳被围困了十多个月，城中军民男女原有四十万人，到此几乎全都饿死，仅剩下二百人。
English: Guiyang was besieged for more than ten months. Of the 400,000 men and women in the city, almost all of them starved to death, and only 200 remained.

古文：详《李枟》及《三善传》中。
现代文：此事详见《李木云》和《三善传》。
English: For details, please refer to "Li Muyun" and "Three Virtues."

古文：贵阳围既解，邦彦远遁陆广河外。
现代文：贵阳之围既然已解，安邦彦便远逃到陆广河外。
English: Since the siege of Guiyang had been lifted, An Bangyan fled far away to Luguanghe.

古文：三善遣使谕社辉母子缚邦彦以降。
现代文：王三善派使者去谕告奢社辉母子俩，要他们将安邦彦绑缚来归降。
English: Wang Sanshan sent an envoy to tell Shuxa Hui's mother and son to bind An Bangyan and surrender.

古文：大军至者日益众，三善欲因粮于敌。
现代文：朝廷所派的大军越来越多，王三善想从敌人手中夺取粮食。
English: The large army sent by the imperial court was increasing, and Wang Sanshan wanted to seize grain from the hands of the enemy.

古文：又诸军视贼过易，杨明楷营于三十里外。
现代文：而朝廷所派来的各军过于轻视叛贼，杨明楷甚至在贵阳城外三十里的地方扎营。
English: However, the troops sent by the imperial court treated the traitors too lightly. Yang Mingkai even camped in a place thirty miles outside Guiyang.

古文：邦彦复纠诸苗来攻，师败，明楷为所执。
现代文：安邦彦又纠集各地苗兵乘机进攻，官军失败，杨明楷被叛军俘虏。
English: An Bangyan also gathered young soldiers from all over the country to take advantage of the opportunity to attack. The government army failed, and Yang Mingkai was captured by the rebels.

古文：邦彦势复张，合众欲再围贵阳。
现代文：安邦彦的势力又有扩张，纠集众人想再次包围贵阳。
English: An Bangyan's power is expanding again, and he is rallying people to encircle Guiyang again.

古文：三善遣兵三路御之，破生苗寨二百余，擒万化等，焚其积聚数万。
现代文：王三善分兵三路御敌，攻破没有归化朝廷的苗人寨子二百多个，活捉宋万化等人，将叛贼积聚起来的数万物资全都焚烧掉。
English: Wang Sanshan divided his troops into three groups to defeat the enemy, broke through more than 200 Miao stockades that had not been naturalized by the imperial court, captured Song Wanhua and others alive, and burned all the wealth accumulated by the traitors.

古文：龙里、定番四路并通，诸苗畔者相继降。
现代文：而且，官军又分兵四路同时打通龙里和定番，各叛乱的苗人相继投降。
English: Moreover, the government army sent four detachments at the same time to break through Longli and Setan, and the rebellious Miao people surrendered one after another.

古文：邦彦气夺不敢出，于鸭池、陆广诸要地掘堑屯兵，为自守计。
现代文：安邦彦的锐气被官军所夺挫后，不敢出来，只好在鸭池、陆广等要地挖掘沟堑，屯兵自守。
English: After being defeated by the government army, An Bangyan's spirit did not dare to come out, so he had to dig ditches in important places such as Yuchi and Luguang, and the soldiers defended themselves.

古文：时奢崇明为蜀兵所败，计穷投水西，与邦彦合。
现代文：此时奢崇明也被四川官军所败，计穷路尽之后投奔水西，与安邦彦合兵一处。
English: At this time, Suo Chongming was also defeated by the Sichuan government army, and after exhausting his resources, he rushed to the west of the water and joined forces with An Bangyan.

古文：三年，三善督兵攻大方贼巢，擒土司何中尉等，进营红崖。
现代文：三年，王三善督军进攻叛贼的巢穴大方，生擒土司何中尉等人，进兵红崖后扎营。
English: In the third year, Wang Sanshan's army attacked the traitor's lair in a generous manner, capturing Lieutenant He and others, marching into the red cliff and setting up camp.

古文：连破天台、水脚等七囤，夺其天险。
现代文：接着又接连攻破了天台、水脚等七个粮囤，夺取了天险。
English: Next, they successively broke through seven grain bins, such as the roof and the water foot, and captured the natural hazard.

古文：别将亦破贼于羊耳，追至鸭池河，夺其战象。
现代文：别的将领也在羊耳攻破叛贼，追击到鸭池河，夺取了他们的战象。
English: Other generals also defeated the traitors in Yang'er, chased them to Yuchi River, and captured their war elephants.

古文：遂深入至红鸟冈，诸苗奔溃。
现代文：于是官军便深入到红鸟冈，各地苗人逃奔溃散。
English: As a result, the government army penetrated deep into Red Bird Hill, and Miao people from all over the country fled and dispersed.

古文：三善率兵直入大方，奢社辉、安位焚其巢，窜火灼堡，邦彦奔织金。
现代文：王三善带兵直入大方，奢社辉、安位烧焚自己的巢穴，逃窜到火灼堡，安邦彦则逃奔到织金。
English: Wang Sanzhan led his troops straight into Dafang, Shuxa Hui and Anqian burned their nests and fled to Huiyang Fort, while An Bangyan fled to Weidong.

古文：位遂遣人赴镇远，乞降于总督杨述中。
现代文：安位于是派人奔赴镇远，向总督杨述中请求投降。
English: An is said to have sent someone to rush to Zhenyuan to plead with Governor Yang Shulong to surrender.

古文：许之，令擒崇明父子自赎，一意主抚。
现代文：杨述中答应了他，让他将奢崇明父子活捉献来替自己赎罪，于是便主张对贼人一意招抚。
English: In Yang's account, he agreed to let him capture and sacrifice the father and son of Luxong Ming to atone for his sins, and then he insisted on coaxing the thief.

古文：而三善责并献邦彦，当并用剿，议不合。
现代文：而王三善则责成安位将安邦彦一起抓来，主张对叛贼抚剿并用。
English: Wang Sanshan, on the other hand, ordered Anchi to arrest Anbangyan together, and advocated that the traitors should be beaten and tortured together.

古文：往返间已逾数月，邦彦得益兵为备。
现代文：两人意见不合，向朝廷上奏时往返之间已拖延了数个月，安邦彦得以添兵守备。
English: The two men did not see eye to eye, and there had been a delay of several months between their visits to the Imperial Court, so An Bangyan was able to reinforce his troops.

古文：三善粮不继，焚大方，还贵州，道遇贼，三善为所害。
现代文：此后，王三善军粮不继，便焚烧了大方，退兵回贵州，途中与贼人相遇，王三善被害。
English: After that, Wang Sanzhan's army rations did not continue, so he burned a large amount, retreated back to Guizhou, met with thieves on the way, and Wang Sanzhan was killed.

古文：邦彦率数万众来追，总理鲁钦力御之，大战数日，大军无粮，乘夜皆溃，钦自刭。
现代文：于是，安邦彦率数万人马前来追击，总理鲁钦奋力抵御，大战数日。官军粮尽，士兵乘夜逃走，鲁钦自刎而死。
English: As a result, An Bangyan led tens of thousands of horses to pursue, Prime Minister Luqin struggled to resist, and the war lasted several days. The government army ran out of food, the soldiers fled by night, and Luqin hanged himself and died.

古文：贼烧劫诸堡，苗兵复助逆，贵阳三十里外樵苏不行，城中复大震。
现代文：此后贼人对各堡烧杀抢劫，苗人土兵又帮助叛贼，使得贵阳城三十里外的地方柴草不生，于是城内又大受震动。
English: After that, the thieves burned, killed and robbed the forts, and the Miao people and local soldiers also helped the traitors, so that the wood and grass did not grow in the place thirty miles outside Guiyang City, so the city was greatly shaken.

古文：初，大方东倚播，北倚蔺，相为掎角。
现代文：当初，大方东倚播州，北靠蔺州，相互成犄角之势。
English: At the beginning, the Great Wall was flanked to the east by Bozhou and to the north by Ganzhou, and the two were on a collision course.

古文：后播、蔺既平，贼惟恃乌撒为援，而毕节为四夷交通处。
现代文：后来播州、蔺州的叛乱平定之后，大方的叛贼只好依赖乌撒的救援，而毕节又是四方夷人的交汇之所。
English: Later, after the Banzhou and Zhangzhou rebellions were quelled, the generous traitors had to rely on Usa's rescue, and Bijie was the meeting place for people from all over the country.

古文：当三善由贵阳陆广深入大方百七十里，皆罗鬼巢窟，以失地利而陷。
现代文：当王三善从贵阳府的陆广深入到大方之地一百七十里时，都是罗人的巢窟，因失地利所以失败了。
English: When Wang Sanshan penetrated 170 miles from Lu Guang of Guiyang Prefecture to the land of Dafang, they were all the nests of Luo people, and he failed because he lost his place.

古文：天启间，朱燮元为蜀督，建议滇兵出沾益，遏安效良应援，分兵于天生桥、寻甸等处，以绝其走；蜀兵临毕节，扼其交通之路，而别出龙场岩后，以夺其险；黔兵由普定渡思腊河，径趋邦彦巢，由陆广、鸭池捣其虚；粤西兵出泗城，分道策应；然后大军由遵义鼓行而前。
现代文：天启年间，朱燮元出任四川总督，建议云南的官军从沾益州出兵，遏制安效良的救援，并分兵占据天生桥、寻甸等地，切断叛贼的退路；四川的官军则兵临毕节，扼守住交通要道，再出兵绕到龙场岩后面，占领天险之地；贵州的官军从普定渡过思腊河，直接赶往安邦彦的老巢，经过陆广、鸭池直捣叛贼的空虚之地；广西的官军从泗城出发，分路策应；最后朝廷大军从遵义出发，浩浩荡荡敲鼓前进。
English: In the year of the apocalypse, Zhu Rongyuan, as the governor of Sichuan, suggested that the Yunnan government troops should send troops from Zhanyizhou to curb the safe and effective rescue, and divide the troops to occupy Tiansheng Bridge, Zhoudian and other places to cut off the retreat of the traitors; the Sichuan government troops sent troops to Bijie to hold the important traffic routes, and then sent troops to go around behind the Longchang Rock to occupy the dangerous place; the Guizhou government troops crossed the Sira River from Puding and rushed directly to the old nest of An Bangyan, passing through Luguang and Yuchi to directly attack the empty

古文：寻以忧去，未及用。
现代文：不久，朝廷以为该地的忧患已快平息，没有用朱燮元的建议。
English: Soon, the imperial court thought that the troubles in the area had almost subsided, and did not use Zhu Xiyuan's suggestion.

古文：总督闵梦得继之，亦以贵州抵大方路险，贼惟恃毕节一路外通。我兵宜从永宁始，自永宁而普市，而摩泥，而赤水，百五十里皆坦途。
现代文：闵梦得继任总督以后，亦认为贵州到大方之间的路途太险，叛贼只倚恃毕节一条道路与外界相通，建议朝廷的官军应从永宁开始，由永宁再到普市、再到摩泥，再到赤水，这一百五十里路都较平坦。
English: After he succeeded to the post of governor, Yu Mengde also thought that the road between Guizhou and Dafang was too dangerous, and the traitors only relied on Yu Bijie for a road to connect with the outside world. He suggested that the imperial court's official army should start from Yongning, from Yongning to Pu City, then to Mudie, and then to Chashui. This 150-mile road is relatively flat.

古文：赤水有城郭可凭而守，宜结营进逼。
现代文：赤水有城郭可资坚守，官军应安营扎寨逐步进逼。
English: Chishui has a castle that can be defended, and the government army should encamp and gradually advance.

古文：四十里为白岩，六十里为层台，又六十里为毕节。
现代文：赤水过去四十里是白岩，再过六十里是层台，又过六十里是毕节。
English: In the past forty miles of red water is white rock, after another sixty miles is the terrace, and after another sixty miles is Bijie.

古文：毕节至大方不及六十里，贼必并力来御，须重兵扼之，断其四走之路，然后遵义、贵阳克期而进，亦不果用。
现代文：毕节到大方不到六十里路，叛贼定会倾全力守御。官军必须以重兵扼守该地，切断叛贼四散逃跑的道路。然后对遵义和贵阳限期进兵。
English: If the distance from Bijie to Dafang is less than sixty miles, the traitors will surely make every effort to defend it. The government army must hold the place with heavy troops, cut off the escape route of the traitors scattered everywhere, and then march into Zunyi and Guiyang within the time limit.

古文：及是黔事棘，诏起燮元总督贵、云、川、广。
现代文：这个建议也没有被采用。等到贵州的事情弄得非常棘手了，皇帝才下诏书起用朱燮元总督贵州、云南、四川、广西的军务。
English: This proposal was also not adopted. It was not until the situation in Guizhou became very difficult that the emperor issued an edict to use Zhu Rongyuan, the governor of Guizhou, Yunnan, Sichuan and Guangxi, for military affairs.

古文：于是燮元再莅黔，时崇祯元年也。
现代文：这样，朱燮元再次莅临贵州时，已是崇祯元年了。
English: Thus, when Zhu Rongyuan came to Guizhou again, it was already the first year of Chongyuan.

古文：奢崇明自号大梁王，安邦彦自号四裔大长老，其部众悉号元帅。
现代文：奢崇明自称为大梁王，安邦彦自号为四裔大长老，其部下众人都号称为元帅。
English: Suk Chongming called himself the King of the Great Beam, An Bangyan called himself the Great Elder of the Four Descendants, and all his subordinates called themselves marshals.

古文：悉力趋永宁，先犯赤水。
现代文：他们合力向永宁进发，先侵犯赤水。
English: They made a joint effort to march to Yongning and first invaded Chashui.

古文：燮元授意守将佯北，诱深入，度贼已抵永宁，分遣别将林兆鼎从三岔入，王国祯从陆广入，刘养鲲从遵义入。
现代文：朱燮元授意赤水的守将佯装败北，诱敌深入。朱燮元估计叛贼已抵达永宁时，分别派遣将领林兆鼎从三岔进兵，王国祯从陆广进兵，刘养鲲从遵义进兵。
English: Zhu Yuanyuan gave the order to the defenders of Chishui to disguise themselves as soldiers to defeat the north and lure the enemy deeper into Yongning. When Zhu Yuanyuan estimated that the traitors had arrived in Yongning, he separately dispatched the generals Lin Zhaoding to enter the army from Samcheok, Wang Guojun to enter the army from Lukang, and Liu Yaojun to enter the army from Zunyi.

古文：邦彦分兵四应，力不支。
现代文：安邦彦分兵四应，力不能支。
English: An Bangyan divided his troops into four groups, and could not support them.

古文：罗乾象复以奇兵绕其背，急击之，贼大惊溃，崇明、邦彦皆授首。
现代文：罗乾象又出奇兵绕到安邦彦的背后袭击，叛贼大惊而逃，奢崇明、安邦彦都授首被擒。
English: Luo Qianxiang also made a surprise attack on the back of An Bangyan, the traitors fled in shock, and both Suo Chongming and An Bangyan were beheaded.

古文：邦彦乱七年而诛。
现代文：安邦彦作乱七年才被诛杀。
English: It took seven years for An Bangyan to be killed for his rebellion.

古文：燮元乃移檄安位，赦其罪，许归附。
现代文：朱燮元便传檄文给安位，赦免他的罪行，允许他归附朝廷。
English: Zhu Rongyuan then issued an imperial edict to restore him to his throne, pardoned his crimes, and allowed him to join the imperial court.

古文：位竖子不能决，其下谋合溃兵来拒。
现代文：安位这个小子无法决定，他的手下人谋划集合溃散之兵来拒官军。
English: The young man could not make up his mind, and his subordinates plotted to rally the scattered troops to repel the imperial army.

古文：燮元扼其要害，四面迭攻，斩首万余级。
现代文：朱燮元扼守住要害之地，四面迭攻，斩获敌人首级一万多个。
English: Zhu Rongyuan held on to the key areas and attacked in all directions, capturing more than 10,000 enemy heads.

古文：复得向导，辄发窖粟就食，贼益饥。
现代文：同时，朱燮元还得到了向导，发掘敌人埋藏的粟米来吃，叛贼更加饥饿。
English: At the same time, Zhu Rongyuan also got a guide to dig out the enemy's buried corn to eat, and the traitors were even hungrier.

古文：复遣人至大方烧其室庐，位大恐，遂率四十八目出降。
现代文：朱燮元还派人到大方烧毁叛贼的房屋，安位于是大为恐慌，率领手下的四十八人出来投降。
English: Zhu Rongyuan also sent people to Dafang to burn down the houses of the traitors. It was a great panic to settle there, and he led his forty-eight people to surrender.

古文：燮元奏请许之，报可。
现代文：朱燮元上奏朝廷，请求允许安位等人投降，朝廷同意。
English: Zhu Rongyuan appealed to the imperial court, requesting permission for Anchi and others to surrender, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：而前助邦彦故宣慰宋万化之子嗣殷亦至是始剿灭。
现代文：而以前帮助安邦彦作乱的前宣慰宋万化的儿子宋嗣殷到此也被剿灭。
English: And Song Siyin, the son of Song Wanhua, who had previously helped An Bangyan to start the rebellion, was also annihilated.

古文：乃以宋氏洪边十二马头地置开州，建城设官。
现代文：朝廷便在宋氏洪边十二马头的地方设置了开州，修建城垣，设立官衙。
English: The imperial court then set up a keshu in the place of the Song Hongbian twelve horse heads, built a city wall, and set up a government post.

古文：燮元复遣兵平摆金五洞诸叛苗，水西势益孤。
现代文：朱燮元又派兵平定了摆金等五洞的叛乱苗人。这样，水西的势力就更孤弱了。
English: Zhu Rongyuan also dispatched troops to quell the rebellious Miao people in five provinces, including Huijin. In this way, the power of Western Shu was even weaker.

古文：十年，安位死，无嗣，族属争立。
现代文：十年，安位死，没有儿子继嗣，其宗族的亲属争夺承袭权。
English: After ten years of reverence, the emperor died and there were no descendants. People of the same race competed for the throne.

古文：朝议欲乘其敝郡县之。
现代文：朝廷想乘其内乱之时在此地设置郡县，废除土司。
English: The imperial court wanted to take advantage of the time of civil unrest to set up counties in this place and abolish local magistrates.

古文：燮元奏未可骤，乃传檄土目，谕以威德，诸苗争纳土献印。
现代文：朱燮元上奏说不可骤然行此举措，朝廷便传檄文给当地的土目，将朝廷的天威和恩德谕告他们，当地苗人争相向朝廷纳土献印。
English: Zhu Rongyuan made a speech saying that this measure should not be carried out suddenly, and the imperial court then sent an imperial edict to the local clans, telling them of the imperial court's benevolence and grace, and the local Miao people scrambled to present seals to the imperial court.

古文：贵阳甫定，而明亦旋亡矣。
现代文：贵阳刚刚平定，而明朝不久也灭亡了。
English: Guiyang had just been pacified, and the Ming Dynasty soon perished.

