古文：或问曰： 贤圣之空生，必有以用其心。
现代文：有的人问： 贤圣不写没有目的性的文章，写书一定有其用心之所在。
English: Some people ask: Since the sages do not write aimless articles, writing books must have a purpose.

古文：上自孔、墨之党，下至苟、孟之徒，教训必作垂文。
现代文：上至孔子、墨子这类人，下至荀子、孟子这些人，为教诲训导后人一定写有文章留下来，这是为的什么呢？ 
English: People such as Confucius and Mozi, and people such as Xun Zi and Mencius, must have written articles to teach and instruct future generations. What is the reason for this?

古文：何也？ 对曰：圣人作经，艺者传记，匡济薄俗，驱民使之归实诚也。
现代文：回答说：圣人写经，贤人写传记，是为了纠正挽救不良的风俗，驱使老百姓让他的回复到质朴纯厚的风俗上来。
English: He replied, "Sages write sutras, sages write biographies, in order to correct and save bad customs, and drive the common people to let him return to the simple and pure customs.

古文：案六略之书，万三千篇，增善消恶，割截横拓，驱役游慢，期便道善，归政道焉。
现代文：考察《六略》上著录的书达一万三千卷，全是表彰善行的制止恶迹的，阻止横行放纵的。驱使游手好闲的，希望有利于引导人们向善，回归到正道上来。
English: An examination of the 13,000 volumes of books recorded in the "Six Abbreviations" shows that all of them commend good deeds, stop evil deeds, prevent rampant indulgence, and drive idlers. Hope is conducive to guiding people to do good and return to the right path.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，周民弊也。
现代文：孔子之所以写《春秋》，是因为周代的民风败坏了。
English: The reason why Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" was because the folk customs of the Zhou Dynasty had been corrupted.

古文：故采求毫毛之善，贬纤介之恶，拨乱世，反诸正，人道浃，王道备，所以检押靡薄之俗者，悉具密致。
现代文：所以表彰很细微的善事，贬斥极细小的恶行，整顿乱世，使它返回正道，伦理道德周全，王者治天下之道完备，用以矫正奢侈轻薄风俗的制度，规定得极为完备详尽。
English: Therefore, the system of commending very small good deeds, denouncing very small evil deeds, rectifying the chaotic world and returning it to the right path, ethics and morality are complete, the way for kings to rule the world is complete, and the system for correcting extravagant and frivolous customs is extremely complete and detailed.

古文：夫防决不备，有水溢之害；网解不结，有兽失之患。
现代文：河堤决了口而不修筑，就有洪水泛滥的灾害；网破了洞而不织补，就有野兽奔逃出来的危险。
English: If a dyke breaks and is not repaired, there is a danger of flooding; if a net breaks and is not repaired, there is a danger of wild animals escaping.

古文：是故周道不弊，则民不文薄；民不文薄，《春秋》不作。
现代文：所以周代的礼制不败坏，周代的老百姓就不会浮华轻薄；老百姓不浮华轻薄，孔子就不会著《春秋》。
English: Therefore, if the Zhou Dynasty's etiquette is not corrupted, the Zhou Dynasty's people will not be flashy and frivolous; if the people are not flashy and frivolous, Confucius will not write "Spring and Autumn."

古文：杨、墨之学不乱义，则孟子之传不造；韩国不小弱，法度不坏废，则韩非之书不为；高祖不辨得天下，马上之计未转，则陆贾之语不奏；众事不失实，凡论不坏乱，则桓谭之论不起。
现代文：如果杨朱、墨翟的学说没有搞乱经传的本义，那么孟子也就不会著书了；如果韩国不弱小，法度没有废坏，那么韩非也就不著书了；汉高祖不争论得天下的道理，使用武力的主张没有转变，那么陆贾的《新语》就不会写出来了；各种事情的记载如果不失实，各种观点如果不坏乱，那么桓谭的《新论》就没有写作的缘起了。
English: If the teachings of Yang Zhu and Mozi had not confused the original meaning of the scriptures, then Mencius would not have written a book; if Korea had not been weak and small, and the laws had not been destroyed, then Han Fei would not have written a book; if the ancestors of the Han Dynasty had not disputed the truth of the world, and the use of force had not changed, then Lu Jia's "Xinhua" would not have been written; if the records of various things were not distorted, and if various opinions were not chaotic, then Kuan Tan's "Xinhua" would not have been written.

古文：故夫贤圣之兴文也，起事不空为，因因不妄作。
现代文：所以贤圣们著书，引用事实不凭空编造，言必有据而不胡乱编写。
English: That is why sages and saints write books. They quote facts and do not fabricate them out of thin air. Their words must be well-founded and not written in a haphazard manner.

古文：作有益於化，化有补於正。故汉立兰台之官，校审其书，以考其言。
现代文：写的东西有益于教化，教化施行有益于政治，所以汉代设立了兰台官吏，校勘审定其中的书籍，考订书中的文字。
English: What is written is beneficial to enlightenment, and the implementation of enlightenment is beneficial to politics, so the Han Dynasty set up the Lantai officials to check and verify the books and examine the words in the books.

古文：董仲舒作道术之书，颇言灾异政治所失，书成文具，表在汉室。
现代文：董仲舒写的天人感应、灾异迷信的书，大多讲的是灾异的出现是政治败坏造成的，书写完备以后，就呈献给汉朝廷。
English: Most of Dong Zhongshu's books on supernatural phenomena and superstitions are about the appearance of supernatural phenomena caused by political corruption. After the book was completed, it was presented to the Han Dynasty.

古文：主父偃嫉之，诬奏其书。
现代文：主父偃痛恨他，就诬告这部书。
English: My father hated him, so he made a false accusation against the book.

古文：天子下仲舒於吏，当谓之下愚。
现代文：汉武帝把董仲舒交给司法官吏审理，判决书认为董仲舒目无法度。
English: Emperor Hanwu handed Dong Zhongshu over to judicial officials for trial, and the verdict held that Dong Zhongshu's eyes could not be read.

古文：仲舒当死，天子赦之。
现代文：董仲舒被判处死刑，汉武帝赦免了他。
English: Dong Zhongshu was sentenced to death, but Emperor Wu of Han pardoned him.

古文：夫仲舒言灾异之事，孝武犹不罪而尊其身，况所论无触忌之言，核道实之事，收故实之语乎！
现代文：董仲舒大讲灾变怪异的事情，汉武帝仍然不判他的罪反而很尊重他本人，何况我所发的议论并没有触犯朝廷的言论，只是对事情是否符合实际道理进行考核，收集史实的说法呢？
English: Dong Zhongshu talked a lot about catastrophic and strange things, and Emperor Hanwu still did not condemn him, but respected him very much. What's more, the comments I made did not violate the words of the imperial court, but only assessed whether the matter was in line with the actual truth and collected historical facts.

古文：故夫贤人之在世也，进则尽忠宣化，以明朝廷；退则称论贬说，以觉失俗。
现代文：所以贤人生活在社会上，做官就尽忠宣扬教化，以显扬朝廷的圣德；不当官就著书评论是非，纠正不良的风气。
English: Therefore, wise men live in society, and when they become officials, they faithfully preach enlightenment to show the sacredness of the imperial court; when they do not become officials, they write books to comment on the rights and wrongs and correct the bad culture.

古文：俗也不知还，则立道轻为非；论者不追救，则迷乱不觉悟。
现代文：世俗如果还不知道回到正道上来，就应该伸张道义指斥作坏事的人；著书的人如果不补救，迷失正道的人就不会觉察醒悟过来。
English: If the world does not know how to return to the right path, it should be moral to denounce those who do bad things; if writers do not remedy, those who have lost the right path will not wake up.

古文：是故《论衡》之造也，起众书并失实，虚妄之言胜真美也。
现代文：因此《论衡》的写作，起源于许多书的记载已经失实，虚妄的言辞超过了真美的言辞。
English: Therefore, the writing of "On Balance" originated from the records of many books have been distorted, and the false words have exceeded the true and beautiful words.

古文：故虚妄之语不黜，则华文不见息；华文放流，则实事不见用。
现代文：所以虚妄的言语不废除，华而不实的文章就不会被制止；华而不实的文章泛滥，实事求是的文章就不会被采纳。
English: Therefore, if false words are not abolished, pompous articles will not be stopped; if pompous articles are rampant, factual articles will not be adopted.

古文：故《论衡》者，所以铨轻重之言，立真伪之平，非苟调文饰辞，为奇伟之观也。
现代文：所以《论衡》这部书，是用来权衡是非之言，确立判断真伪标准的，并不是随意玩弄笔墨修饰文辞，故作奇伟的样子。
English: Therefore, the book "On Balance" is used to weigh the pros and cons and establish the criteria for judging authenticity, and is not a random play with pen and ink to modify the wording and make it look fantastic.

古文：其本皆起人间有非，故尽思极心，以世俗。
现代文：写作它的根源全起因于人间有许多错误，所以我用尽心思，以此来讥刺社会上的不良风俗。
English: The root of writing it all stems from the fact that there are many mistakes in the human world, so I tried my best to ridicule the bad habits of society.

古文：世俗之性，好奇怪之语，说虚妄之文。
现代文：社会风俗的特性，是喜好奇异怪诞之语，喜欢虚假荒诞的文章。
English: The characteristics of social customs are that they like strange and bizarre words, and like false and absurd articles.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：实事不能快意，而华虚惊耳动心也。
现代文：实事求是的言论不能快人心意，华而不实的言辞文章却能使人惊耳动心。
English: Statements that seek truth from facts are not pleasing to people's hearts, but flashy rhetoric articles can be shocking and moving.

古文：是故才能之士，好谈论者，增益实事，为美盛之语；用笔墨者，造生空文，为虚妄之传。
现代文：所以有才能的人，喜好谈论的人，夸大实事，故作美盛的言辞；写文著书的人，编造毫无根据的文字，作虚假不实的解释。
English: Therefore, talented people, people who like to talk about things, exaggerate the facts, and pretend to make beautiful words; people who write books, make up baseless words, and make false and untrue explanations.

古文：听者以为真然，说而不舍；览者以为实事，传而不绝。
现代文：听的人认为确实如此，就不停地谈论；贤人认为是真实的事情，就久传而不断绝。
English: What the listener believes to be true, he goes on talking about; what the wise man believes to be true, he passes on.

古文：不绝，则文载竹帛之上；不舍，则误入贤者之耳。
现代文：久传不绝，那么文字就记载在竹帛之上；谈论不止，那么就会误入贤者之耳。
English: If it is passed down for a long time, then the text is recorded on the bamboo pole; if it is talked about, then it will fall into the ears of the wise.

古文：至或南面称师，赋奸伪之说；典城佩紫，读虚妄之书。
现代文：至于有些当老师的人，宣扬的是奸伪的解释；各级官吏，读的都是虚妄不实的书。
English: As for some people who are teachers, they are preaching false interpretations; officials at all levels are reading false books.

古文：明辨然否，疾心伤之，安能不论？
现代文：明辨了这些是与非，我痛心忧伤，怎么不加以评论呢？
English: Having ascertained the rights and wrongs of this, I am heartbroken, how can I not comment on it?

古文：孟子伤杨、墨之议大夺儒家之论，引平直之说，褒是抑非，世人以为好辩。
现代文：孟子痛惜杨朱、墨子的议论大大压倒了儒家的议论，援引公平正直的论说，赞扬正确的贬斥错误的，世人却认为他好争辩。
English: Mencius deplored the fact that Yang Zhu and Mozi's arguments greatly overwhelmed the arguments of Confucianism, invoked fair and honest arguments, praised the right and disparaged the wrong, but the world thought he was argumentative.

古文：孟子曰： 予岂好辩哉？
现代文：孟子说： 难道我好争辩吗？
English: Mencius said: Do I really like debate?

古文：予不得已！ 
现代文：我是不得已啊！ 
English: I had to do it!

古文：今吾不得已也！
现代文：现在我也是不得已啊！
English: Now I have no choice but to go!

古文：虚妄显於真，实诚乱於伪，世人不悟，是非不定，紫失杂厕，瓦玉集糅，以情言之，岂吾心所能忍哉！
现代文：虚妄的比真实的更显眼，实诚的被虚伪的所迷乱，世人不醒悟，是与非分不清，紫色与朱红混杂在一起，瓦块和宝玉夹杂在一堆，凭情感而言，我的心怎么能忍受得了啊！
English: The false is more conspicuous than the true, the sincere is bewildered by the false, the world does not wake up, it is indistinguishable from the true, purple and vermilion are mixed together, tiles and gems are mixed in a pile, emotionally speaking, how can my heart bear it!

古文：卫骖乘者越职而呼车，恻怛发心，恐之危也。
现代文：卫国的陪车侍从超越职责而帮着叫喊赶马，他的痛惜忧伤发自内心，是唯恐主人有危险。
English: The carriage attendant who accompanies the imperial guard goes beyond his duties and helps to call out to the horses. His regret and sadness come from his heart, fearing that his master is in danger.

古文：夫论说者闵世忧俗，与卫骖乘者同一心矣。
现代文：论说的人忧虑世俗不良，同卫国的陪车侍从是同一种心情。
English: The commentator is worried about the evils of the world, and is in the same mood as the carriage attendant.

古文：愁精神而幽魂魄。动胸中之静气，贼年损寿，无益於性，祸重於颜回，违负黄、老之教，非人所贪，不得已，故为《论衡》。
现代文：精神忧愁魂魄苦闷，引动了胸中的静气，损伤了年寿，对生命毫无益处。灾祸比颜回更重，违背了黄、老的处世哲学，这并不是人们所要贪求的，迫不得已，所以写了《论衡》这本书。
English: The spirit is sad, the soul is distressed, the calmness in the chest is aroused, the longevity is damaged, and there is no benefit to life. The disaster is heavier than the beauty, and it violates the yellow and old philosophy of life. This is not what people want to covet, it is out of necessity, so I wrote the book "On Balance."

古文：文露而旨直，辞奸而情实。
现代文：文章浅显而思想正直，遣辞简约而感情真实。
English: The article is clear and honest, the words are concise and the feelings are real.

古文：其《政务》言治民之道。
现代文：其中的《政务》篇谈的是治理百姓的道理。
English: One of them, "Political Affairs," is about the principle of governing the people.

古文：《论衡》诸篇，实俗间之凡人所能见，与彼作者无以异也。
现代文：《论衡》中的各篇文章，所论的问题实际上是社会上一般人都能识别的，与作者本人没有什么不同。
English: The problems discussed in the articles of "On Balance" are actually problems that can be recognized by the general public, and are no different from the author himself.

古文：若夫九《虚》、三《增》、《论死》、《订鬼》，世俗所久惑，人所不能觉也。
现代文：如像九虚、三增、《论死》、《订鬼》等篇文章，谈的是世俗间长久迷惑的问题，是一般人所不能觉察的。
English: For example, articles such as "The Nine Defects," "The Three Increases," "On Death" and "Fixing Ghosts" are about long-term problems in the secular world, which cannot be perceived by the average person.

古文：人君遭弊，改教於上；人臣愚惑，作论於下。
现代文：君王遇到世风败坏，就要在上面改变政教；臣下遇到疑惑，就要在下面作出评论。
English: When a prince encounters the corruption of the world, he must change the government and religion above; when a vassal encounters doubts, he must comment below.

古文：实得，则上教从矣。
现代文：如果臣下的议论符合实际的道理，那么君王改变政教时就会采纳它了。
English: If what his subjects say is true, it will be adopted by the king when he changes his religion.

古文：冀悟迷惑之心，使知虚实之分。
现代文：希望能唤醒那些受到迷惑的心，使他们知道虚与实的区别。
English: It is hoped that it will awaken the minds of those who have been deceived, so that they will know the difference between what is true and what is false.

古文：实虚之分定，而华伪之文灭。华伪之文灭，则纯诚之化日以孽矣。
现代文：实与虚的区别确定了，浮华虚假的文章就会绝灭；浮华虚假的文章绝灭了，那么纯诚的教化就会日渐增长。
English: The distinction between the real and the imaginary has been established, and the flashy and false articles will disappear; if the flashy and false articles disappear, then the pure and sincere enlightenment will gradually increase.

古文：或曰： 圣人作，贤者述。
现代文：有人说： 圣人创作，贤人阐述。
English: Some people say: "Sages create, sages expound."

古文：以贤而作者，非也。
现代文：以贤人的身分而从事创作，是不对的。
English: It is not right to engage in creation as a sage.

古文：曰：作也，亦非述也，论也。
现代文：《论衡》、《政务》，却可以说是创作啊。 
English: "Discussion and Balance" and "Political Affairs," however, can be said to be creative works.

古文：论者，述之次也。《五经》之兴，可谓作矣。
现代文：回答说：《论衡》、《政务》不是创作，也不是阐述别人的东西，而是发表议论。五经的产生，才可以称为创作。
English: He replied: "On Balance" and "Political Affairs" are not creations, nor are they elaborations of other people's things, but rather the publication of discussions. Only the production of the Five Classics can be called a creation.

古文：太史公《书》、刘子政《序》、班叔皮《传》，可谓述矣。
现代文：太史公的书、刘子政的序、班叔皮的传，可以称为阐述别人的东西。
English: The book of Taishi Gong, the preface of Liu Zizheng, and the biography of Ban Shupi can be called the exposition of others' things.

古文：桓君山《新论》、邹伯奇《检论》，可谓论矣。
现代文：桓君山的《新论》、邹伯奇的《检论》，可以称为议论。
English: Huan Junshan's "New Theory" and Zou Boqi's "Prosecution Theory" can be called discussions.

古文：今观《论衡》、《政务》，桓、邹之二论也，非所谓作也。
现代文：现在来看《论衡》和《政务》，是和桓、邹二人的议论是同类的，并不是所说的创作。
English: Now, looking at "On Balance" and "Political Affairs," it is the same kind of discussion between Huan and Yao, and it is not the said creation.

古文：造端更为，前始未有，若仓颉作书，奚仲作车是也。
现代文：开创性的另作，从前根本没有的，如仓颉创造文字，奚仲造车这才是创作。
English: It is the creation of another groundbreaking work, which was previously not at all, such as the creation of words by Cang Wei, and the creation of a car by Zou Zhong.

古文：《易》言伏羲作八卦，前是未有八卦，伏羲造之，故曰作也。
现代文：《易》说伏羲制作八卦，在此以前没有八卦，伏羲制作了它，所以称为创作。
English: "Yi" said that Fuxi made gossip, there was no gossip before this, Fuxi made it, so it is called creation.

古文：文王图八，自演为六十四，故曰衍。谓《论衡》之成，犹六十四卦，而又非也。
现代文：周文王把八卦画出来，自己推演成六十四卦，所以称为推衍，说《论衡》的写成，像推演六十四卦一样，但又不是如此。
English: Zhou Wenwang drew the Eight Trigrams and deduced the Sixty-Four Trigrams himself, so it is called deduction. It is said that the writing of "On the Balance" is like deducing the Sixty-Four Trigrams, but it is not so.

古文：六十四卦以状衍增益，其卦溢，其数多。
现代文：六十四卦是根据图象扩展而增生出来的，它的卦增加，它的数就多了。
English: The sixty-four hexagrams are the result of the expansion of images. The more hexagrams there are, the more numbers there are.

古文：今《论衡》就世俗之书，订其真伪，辩其实虚，非造始更为，无本於前也。
现代文：现在《论衡》只是针对世俗之书，考订它们的真伪，辨别它们的虚实，并不是始创另作，在之前毫无依据。
English: Now, "On Balance" is only aimed at secular books, examining their authenticity and distinguishing their falsity. It is not an original work, and it had no basis before.

古文：儒生就先师之说，诘而难之；文吏就狱之事，覆而考之，谓《论衡》为作，儒生、文吏谓作乎？
现代文：儒生对先师的说法追问责难，文书律令之吏对狱卿的判案覆核考查，说《论衡》是创作，那么儒生、文吏的做法也是创作吗？
English: It is difficult for Confucians to hold their predecessors accountable for what they said, and the clerks of the clerical code have reviewed and examined the judgment of the warden, saying that "On Balance" is a creation, so is the practice of Confucians and clerks also a creation?

古文：上书奏记，陈列便宜，皆欲辅政。
现代文：给皇帝、上司写奏章、报告，陈述应采取的政策措施，都是想有助于政治。
English: To write a report, a report, a statement of the policy measures to be taken to the emperor, the boss, is to help politics.

古文：今作书者，犹书奏记，说发胸臆，文成手中，其实一也。
现代文：当今写书的人，如同写奏章、报告一样，主张发自内心，文章写成于手中，它们的实质是同样的。
English: People who write books today, like those who write musical scores and reports, advocate from the heart, the articles are written in the hands, and their essence is the same.

古文：夫上书谓之奏记，转易其名谓之书。
现代文：上书称为 奏 ，奏记换一个名称就叫 书 。
English: The upper book is called 奏, and the lower book is called 書.

古文：建初孟年，中州颇歉，颍川、汝南民流四散，圣主忧怀，诏书数至。
现代文：建初初年，中原一带收成很不好，颍川、汝南的老百姓流离失所四处逃荒。圣主心中忧虑，屡次下诏免租。
English: In the first year of the construction, the harvest in the Central Plains was very poor, and the people in the Beichuan and the South of the Yunnan were displaced and fled everywhere. Concerned in the heart of the Holy Lord, he repeatedly decreed rent exemption.

古文：《论衡》之人，奏记郡守，宜禁奢侈，以备困乏。
现代文：《论衡》的作者，向郡守写报告，认为应该严禁奢侈，以防备困乏。
English: The author of "On Balance" wrote a report to the county magistrate, arguing that extravagance should be strictly prohibited in order to prevent poverty.

古文：言不纳用，退题记草，名曰《备乏》。
现代文：建议不受采用，回来就在奏记草稿上加一个标题，叫做《备乏》。
English: If the suggestion is not adopted, come back and add a title to the draft report, called "preparation for shortages."

古文：酒縻五谷，生起盗贼，沉湎饮酒，盗贼不绝，奏记郡守，禁民酒。
现代文：酿酒浪费五谷，容易产生盗贼，嗜酒无度，盗贼就不会断绝，又向郡守报告，严禁老百姓酿酒。
English: Wine-making wastes valuable grain, easily produces thieves, alcoholism is excessive, thieves will not break, and report to the county magistrate, strictly prohibit ordinary people from making wine.

古文：退题记草，名曰《禁酒》。
现代文：回来在报告草稿上加一个标题，叫做《禁酒》。
English: He returned to add a heading to the draft report, calling it "Prohibition."

古文：由此言之，夫作书者，上书奏记之文也。记谓之造作上书，上书奏记是作也？
现代文：由此说来，写作书，就是写奏章、报告一类的文章，说它是创作，那么写奏章、报告也都该叫创作了。
English: From this perspective, writing a book means writing a musical composition, a report, and other types of articles. If it is called creation, then writing a musical composition and a report should also be called creation.

古文：晋之乘，而楚之檮杌，鲁之春秋，人事各不同也。
现代文：晋国的史书《乘》，楚国的史书《梼杌》，鲁国的史书《春秋》，都是史书，只是记的人和事不同而已。
English: Jin's history book "Improvement," Chu's history book "Cormorant," and Lu's history book "Spring and Autumn" are all history books, but the people and things they record are different.

古文：《易》之乾坤，《春秋》之 元 ，杨氏之 玄 ，卜气号不均也。
现代文：《易》的 乾坤 ，《春秋》的 元 ，扬雄《太玄》中的 玄 ，讲的都是气，只是赋予气的称呼不同罢了。
English: Qiankun in Yi, Yuan in Chunqiu, and Xuan in Yangxiong's Taixuan are all about qi, but the names of those who bestow qi are different.

古文：由此言之，唐林之奏，谷永之章，《论衡》、《政务》，同一趋也。
现代文：由此说来，唐林、谷永的奏章，和《论衡》、《政务》是同一种意旨的东西。
English: From this, Tanglin's and Gu Yong's "Song of Songs" and "On Balance" and "Political Affairs" have the same meaning.

古文：汉家极笔墨之林，书论之造，汉家尤多。
现代文：汉代的文人多极了，书论的写作，在汉代特别的多。
English: There were a lot of writers in the Han Dynasty, and there was a lot of writing about books, especially in the Han Dynasty.

古文：阳成子张作 乐 ，扬子云造 玄 ，二经发於台下，读於阙掖，卓绝惊耳，不述而作，材疑圣人，而汉朝不讥。
现代文：阳成子张写《乐经》，扬子云著《太玄经》，两种经产生于兰台之中，诵读于宫廷之内，奇异杰出惊人耳目，不是阐述而是创作，才智可与圣人相比，而在汉朝并没有人讥刺他们。
English: Yang Cheng Zi Zhang wrote the "Song of Songs," Yang Zi Yun wrote the "Mysterious Song of Songs." The two sutras originated in the Lantai, and were read in the court. They were strangely outstanding and amazing. They were not elaborated, but created. Their intelligence was comparable to that of saints, and no one ridiculed them in the Han Dynasty.

古文：况《论衡》细说微论，解释世俗之疑，辩照是非之理，使後进晓见然否之分，恐其废失，著之简牍，祖经章句之说，先师奇说之类也。
现代文：何况《论衡》只是细说微论，解释世俗的疑惑，辩明是与非的道理，让后辈读书做官的人，明白对与错的区别，唯恐这些废弃散失，就写在简牍之上，它和祖述经书的章句之学以及前辈老师与众不同的议论同属一类，是极常见的东西。
English: What's more, "On Balance" is just a detailed discussion, explaining worldly doubts, arguing the truth of right and wrong, and letting the younger generation of readers and officials understand the difference between right and wrong. In order to avoid these waste and loss, it is written on the plain paper. It belongs to the same category as the study of the chapters and verses of the ancestral scriptures and the distinctive discussions of the senior teachers. It is a very common thing.

古文：其言伸绳，弹割俗传。
现代文：它的议论是为伸张法度，批判剖析庸俗的书传。
English: Its argument is to extend the rule of law and critically analyze the vulgar book.

古文：俗传蔽惑，伪书放流，贤通之人，疾之无已。孔子曰： 诗人疾之不能默，丘疾之不能伏。 
现代文：伪书泛滥，贤明通达的人，痛恨不已。孔子说： 诗人痛恨它不能沉默不语，我痛恨它不能藏在心中不说。 
English: Confucius said: "A poet hates it so much that he cannot keep silent about it. I hate it so much that I cannot hide it in my heart and not talk about it."

古文：是以论也。
现代文：因此我要发表议论。
English: That is why I want to make a speech.

古文：玉乱於石，人不能别。或若楚之王尹以玉为石，卒使卞和受刖足之诛。
现代文：宝玉和石头混杂在一起，一般人不能识别；就像楚国的玉尹把宝玉当作石头，终于使卞和遭受了刖足的刑罚。
English: Precious jewels and stones are mixed together, and the average person cannot recognize them; just as Yu Yin of the State of Chu treated precious jewels as stones, and finally subjected Yu He to the punishment of lameness.

古文：是反为非，虚转为实，安能不言？
现代文：对的反而变在成了错的，虚假的反倒成了真实的，怎么能不发表议论呢？
English: What is right becomes wrong, what is false becomes true, and how can one not speak out?

古文：俗传既过，俗书之伪。
现代文：庸俗的传闻已经错了，庸俗的书当然又是假的。
English: The vulgar rumor is false, and the vulgar book is certainly false.

古文：若夫邹衍谓今天下为一州，四海之外有若天下者九州。
现代文：就如邹衍说现今中国只是一个州，四海之外有如中国这样的州有九州。
English: Just as Yu Yan said that nowadays China is just a province, there is a province like China in Kyushu beyond the four seas.

古文：《淮南书》言共工与颛顼争为天子，不胜，怒而触不周之山，使天柱折，地维绝。
现代文：《淮南子》上说共工与颛顼争当天子，没有获胜，生了气而撞不周山，使天柱折断，地绳拉断。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said that the son of a co-worker and the son of a concubine, who did not win, got angry and hit the mountain, causing the pillar to break and the rope to break.

古文：尧时十日并出，尧上射九日；鲁阳战而日暮，援戈麾日，日为却还。
现代文：尧时十个太阳一同出来，尧从天上射下九个太阳。鲁阳公与人交战太阳偏西了，便向太阳挥戈，太阳因此而回到中天。
English: At that time, ten suns came out at the same time, and the dragon shot down nine suns from the sky. Lu Yang Gong fought with people. When the sun was westward, he waved to the sun, and the sun returned to the middle of the sky.

古文：世间书传，多若等类，浮妄虚伪，没夺正是。
现代文：社会上的著作，大多如上述这类事例一样，浮妄虚伪的说法，淹没和压倒了正确的事实。
English: Most of the social writings, like the above-mentioned cases, are full of pretentiousness and hypocrisy, drowning out and overwhelming the correct facts.

古文：心渍涌，笔手扰，安能不论？
现代文：思潮喷涌而出，手握笔疾书，怎么能不发议论呢？
English: How can you write a book with a pen in your hand and not talk about it?

古文：论则考之以心，效之以事，浮虚之事，辄立证验。
现代文：发议论时对问题用心加以思考，用事实加以证明，浮夸虚假的事情，马上就会检验出来。
English: When making an argument, think about the problem with your heart, prove it with facts, and exaggerate false things, and you will be tested immediately.

古文：若太史公之书，据许由不隐，燕太子丹不使日再中。读见之者，莫不称善。
现代文：如太史公书，证实许由没有归隐，燕太子丹也没有使西偏的太阳再回到中天，读到见到的人，没有谁不称赞好的。
English: For example, the official history book of the Taishi confirmed that Xu You did not go into seclusion, and Yan Taizi Dan did not make the west-facing sun return to the middle of the sky. No one who saw it would not praise it.

古文：《政务》为郡国守相、县邑令长陈通政事所当尚务，欲令全民立化，奉称国恩。
现代文：《政务》这篇文章是为郡国守相、县邑令长陈述应当重视而勉力从事的问题，要让守、相、令、长做到养护百姓树立教化，从而颂扬朝廷的恩德。
English: "Government Affairs" This article is for the county and state governors, ministers, and prefectural governors to state the issues that should be paid attention to and diligently engaged in, so that governors, ministers, ministers, and governors can protect the people, establish enlightenment, and thus praise the benevolence of the imperial court.

古文：《论衡》九《虚》三《增》，所以使浴务实诚也；《论死》、《订鬼》，所以使浴薄丧葬也。
现代文：《论衡》中的九虚、三增等篇，目的是使一般人努力做到实事求是；《论死》、《订鬼》两篇，目的是使社会上俭约办理丧葬。
English: The purpose of the nine-figure, three-increase and other articles in "On Balance" is to make ordinary people strive to seek truth from facts; the purpose of the two articles "On Death" and "On Ghosts" is to make the society frugal about funeral.

古文：孔子径庭丽级，被棺敛者不省。刘子政上薄葬，奉送藏者不约。光武皇帝草车茅马，为明器者不奸。
现代文：孔子穿过庭院跨上台阶，是由于被装进棺材的随葬品没有俭省；刘子政上书给皇帝提倡薄葬，而拿去埋葬的器物并没有因此而节约；汉光武称赞古人用草车茅马随葬，专做殉葬器物的人却不仿制。
English: Confucius crossed the courtyard and stepped onto the steps, because the funeral goods that were loaded into the coffin were not frugal; Liu Zizheng wrote a letter to the emperor advocating a thin burial, but the burial utensils were not spared for this reason; Han Guangwu praised the ancients for using grass carts and horses for burial, but those who specialize in funerary utensils did not imitate.

古文：何世书俗言不载？
现代文：为什么世俗书中不记载这些事呢？
English: Why are these things not recorded in secular books?

古文：信死之语汶浊之也。
现代文：是因为相信人死后变鬼的胡言乱语使人们受了蒙蔽。
English: It's because people have been hoodwinked into believing the nonsense about people turning into ghosts when they die.

古文：今著《论死》及《死伪》之篇，明死无知，不能为鬼，冀观览者将一晓解约葬，更为节俭。
现代文：现在我写了《论死》及《死伪》这两篇文章，阐明人死无知不能变鬼的道理，希望读者会因此了解一点薄葬的意义，变得更为节俭。
English: Now I have written two articles, "On Death" and "On the Falsity of Death," to clarify the truth that ignorance cannot turn people into ghosts. I hope that readers will understand the meaning of thin burial and become more frugal.

古文：斯盖《论衡》有益之验也。
现代文：这就是《论衡》这部书有益于社会的证明。
English: This is the proof that "On Balance" is beneficial to society.

古文：言苟有益，虽作何害？
现代文：这些言论如果有益于社会，即使创作出来又有什么害处呢？
English: If these statements are beneficial to society, even if they are created, what is the harm?

古文：仓颉之书，世以纪事；奚仲之车，世以自载；伯余之衣，以辟寒暑；桀之瓦屋，以辟风雨。
现代文：仓颉造的文字，社会上用来纪事；仲奚造的车，社会上用来运载；伯余发明的衣服，人们用来防御寒暑；桀发明的用瓦盖屋，人们用来躲避风雨。
English: The characters made by Cangyu were used by the society for chronicles; the cars made by Zhongyu were used by the society for transportation; the clothes invented by Bo Yu were used by the people for protection against cold and heat; the houses made of tiles invented by Zou were used by the people for sheltering from wind and rain.

古文：夫不论其利害，而徒讥其造作，是则仓颉之徒有非，《世本》十五家皆受责也。
现代文：不考虑它是有利还是有害，只是讥讽他们的创作，这样的话仓颉这些人就有错，《世本》中记载的十五个发明家全都要受到指责了。
English: Without considering whether it is beneficial or harmful, just ridicule their creation. In this case, it is wrong to panic these people, and all the fifteen inventors recorded in the World Book will be blamed.

古文：故夫有益也，虽作无害也。
现代文：如果是对社会有益的，即使创作了也没有什么害处。
English: If it is beneficial to society, there is no harm in creating it.

古文：虽无害，何补？
现代文：如果没有益处，虽然无害，又有什么用呢？
English: If there is no benefit, although harmless, what is the use?

古文：古有命使采爵，欲观风俗知下情也。
现代文：古代有派使臣到各地采集民诗的事情，这是君王想以此来了解各地风俗和老百姓的情况。
English: In ancient times, emissaries were sent to various regions to collect folk poems. This was a way for kings to learn about the customs and people of various regions.

古文：《诗》作民间，圣王可云 汝民也，何发作 ，囚罪其身，殁灭其诗乎？
现代文：诗创作于民间，难道圣王能够说 你们是老百姓，为什么也要作诗 ，因而囚禁降罪于他们，消灭他们作的诗吗？
English: Poems are written by ordinary people. Can the holy king say, "You are ordinary people, why do you write poems?" and therefore imprison and punish them and destroy the poems they write?

古文：今已不然，故《诗》传今。
现代文：现在已经证明情况不是这样，所以《诗》一直流传到今天。
English: Now it has been proved that this is not the case, so the poem has been passed down to this day.

古文：《论衡》、《政务》，其犹《诗》也，冀望见采，而云有过。
现代文：《论衡》、《政务》，它们如同诗一样。希望能够被采集，而说它有什么错。
English: "On Balance" and "Political Affairs," they are like poems. I hope they can be collected, but what's wrong with it?

古文：斯盖《论衡》之书所以兴也。
现代文：这就是我写《论衡》这部书的起因。
English: This is the reason why I wrote the book "On Balance."

古文：且凡造作之过，意其言妄而谤诽也。
现代文：大凡写书的错误，想必是因为其中言论荒谬而又有诽谤君王的地方吧。
English: The great mistake of writing a book, presumably because of the absurd statements in it and the place where the king is slandered.

古文：《论衡》实事疾妄，《齐世》、《宣汉》、《恢国》、《验符》、《盛褒》、《须颂》之言，无诽谤之辞。
现代文：《论衡》实事求是，痛斥虚妄，《齐世》、《宣汉》、《恢国》、《验符》、《盛褒》、《须颂》中的议论，没有诽谤的言辞。
English: "On Balance" seeks truth from facts, denounces falsehood, and there are no slanderous words in the discussions in "Qixing," "Proclamation of Han," "Restoration of the State," "Verification of Characters," "Glorious Praise," and "Suzong."

古文：造作如此，可以免於罪矣。
现代文：写作书能做到这样，就可以免于降罪了。
English: Writing a book can do this, you can be exempt from surrender.

