古文：崔铉
现代文：崔铉
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：崔铉，元略之子。
现代文：崔铉，是崔元略的儿子。
English: Cui Wei is the son of Cui Yuanliu.

古文：京兆参军卢甚之死，铉之致也，时议冤之。
现代文：京兆参军卢甚的死，就是他造成的。当时，人们议论纷纷，说是冤枉了卢甚。
English: He was responsible for the death of Lu Chi, a member of the Jing Zhao army. At the time, people argued that he had wronged Lu Chi.

古文：铉子沆，乾符中，亦为丞相。
现代文：崔铉的儿子崔沆，乾符年间，也是丞相。
English: Cui Wei's son, Cui Wei, was also the prime minister during the Qianfu era.

古文：黄巢乱，赤其族，物议以为甚之报焉。
现代文：黄巢作乱时，灭了他的族人。人们议论认为是卢甚冤魂在报复。
English: When Huang Chao started a riot, his people were wiped out. It was rumored that Lu Ji's evil spirit was taking revenge.

古文：初崔瑄虽谏官，婚姻假回，私事也；甚虽府职，乃公事也。
现代文：当初崔瑄虽然是谏官，结婚请假，那是私事；卢甚虽然在府里担任职务，为的是公事。
English: At the beginning, although Cui Yao was a eunuch, it was a private matter for him to get married and take a leave of absence; although Lu Zhi held a post in the government, it was for official business.

古文：相与争驿厅。甚既下狱，与宰相书，则以己比孟子。而方瑄钱凤。
现代文：两个人在驿厅争执起来，卢甚入狱后，给宰相一封信，把自己比为孟子，把崔瑄比为钱凤。
English: The two men got into an argument in the Great Hall of the People. After Lu Zhi was imprisoned, he wrote a letter to the prime minister, comparing himself to Mencius, and comparing Cui Yu to Qian Feng.

古文：瑄既朋党宏大，莫不为尽力。
现代文：崔瑄的同党很多，没有不为他尽力的。
English: There are a lot of people in the same party as Choe Son, and they all do their best for him.

古文：甚者出于单微，加以铉亦瑄之门生，方为宰相，遂加诬罔奏焉。
现代文：卢甚势单力孤，加上崔铉也是崔瑄的门生，正做宰相，于是就上奏诬陷卢甚。
English: Lu Jizhe was all alone, and Cui Zhe, who was also Cui Zhe's protégé, was serving as prime minister, so Lu Jizhe was framed.

古文：瑄自左补阙出为阳翟宰，甚行及长乐坡，赐自尽。
现代文：崔瑄从左补缺升为阳翟宰。卢甚走到长乐坡，被赐自尽。
English: Cui Jian was promoted from the position of left assistant to the position of impotence. Lu Ji walked to the Changle slope and was given the power to commit suicide.

古文：中使适回，遇瑄，囊出其喉曰：补阙，此卢甚结喉也。 
现代文：宫中使者恰好回来，遇上崔瑄，从口袋里拿出卢甚的喉咙说： 补缺，这是卢甚的喉结。 
English: An emissary from the palace happened to come back and met Cui Yao. He took Lu Chi's throat out of his pocket and said, "This is Lu Chi's throat knot.

古文：瑄殊不怿。
现代文：崔瑄非常不高兴。
English: Choi Min was very unhappy.

古文：京城不守，崔氏之子亦血其族。
现代文：京城没守住，崔家的人也全被杀掉了。
English: The capital was not defended, and everyone in the Cui family was killed.

古文：呜呼！谓天道高，何其明哉！
现代文：唉，都说天道高远，多么明显啊！
English: Alas, they all say that the way of heaven is high and far away, how obvious!

古文：王铎
现代文：王铎
English: Wang Yao

古文：故相晋国公王铎为丞郎时，李骈判度支。
现代文：前宰相晋国公王铎做丞郎时，李骈兼任度支，每年从长江淮河一带运米到京城。
English: When the former prime minister of Jin Guo Wang Zhe was the chancellor, Li Zhe also served as the provincial branch, transporting rice from the Yangtze River Huai River area to Beijing every year.

古文：每年江淮运米至京，水陆脚钱，斗计七百。
现代文：水陆运费，一斗米需七百钱。京城米价，每斗才四十钱。
English: A barrel of rice costs 700 yuan for land and water transportation. The price of rice in Beijing is only 40 yuan per barrel.

古文：议欲令江淮不运米，但每斗纳钱七百。
现代文：李骈建议想让江淮一带不再运米来，只需每斗交七百钱。
English: Li Wei suggested that if you want the Jianghuai area to stop shipping rice, you only need to pay seven hundred yuan per bucket.

古文：铎曰： 非计也。
现代文：王铎说： 这不是办法。
English: Wang Yao said, "This is not the way.

古文：若干京国籴米，必耗京国之食；若运米实关中，自江淮至京，兼济无限贫民也。 
现代文：如果从京城买米，一定减少京城的粮食。如果运米充实关中，那么从江淮到京城，沿途可以救济许多贫苦百姓。 
English: If you buy rice from Beijing, you will definitely reduce the grain in Beijing. If the rice is transported to Guanzhong, then from Jianghuai to Beijing, many poor people can be relieved along the way.

古文：时籴米之制业已行，竟无敢沮其议者。
现代文：当时买米的制度已经推行，竟然没有敢阻止这种主张的。
English: At that time, the system of buying rice had already been implemented, and no one dared to stop this idea.

古文：都下官籴，米果大贵。
现代文：京城里官方买粮，粮食价格果然猛涨。
English: The government bought grain in the capital, and grain prices soared.

古文：未经旬，而度支请罢，以民无至者故也。
现代文：不到十天，李骈请求罢免度支，因为没有人来卖粮的缘故。
English: Less than ten days later, Li Yao requested that Du Si be removed because no one had come to sell grain.

古文：于是识者，乃服铎之察事矣。铎卒以此大用。
现代文：因此有见识的人都佩服王铎的明察能力，王铎也终于因此被重用。
English: Therefore, people with insight admire Wang Yao's ability to see clearly, and Wang Yao was finally reused.

古文：李蠙
现代文：李蠙
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李蠙与王铎进士同年，后俱得路，尝恐铎之先相，而己在其后也。迨路岩出镇，益失其势。
现代文：李蠙与王铎同年中进士，后来都步入仕途。李蠙常怕王铎先做了宰相，自己落在他的后面，等到路岩出任镇将，更失去了优势。
English: Li Yao and Wang Yao were promoted in the same year, and later both entered the career. Li Yao often feared that Wang Yao became the prime minister first, and he fell behind him, and when Lu Yan became the town commander, he lost his advantage.

古文：铎柔弱易制，中官爱焉。洎韦保衡将欲大拜，不能先于恩地。
现代文：王铎性格柔顺容易领导，朝廷中的官都很喜欢他，到韦保衡将被提升，因不能比恩人升得早，就得任命王铎。
English: Wang Yao's personality is soft and easy to lead. The officials in the court are very fond of him. Wei Bo Heng will be promoted. Since he cannot be promoted earlier than his benefactor, Wang Yao must be appointed.

古文：将命铎矣，蠙阴知之。挈一壶家酒诣铎曰： 公将登庸矣，吾恐不可以攀附也。愿先事少接左右，可乎？ 
现代文：李蠙暗地知道后，提一壶家酒到王铎处说： 你将要被选拔重用了，我恐怕不能依附你，想事先交接你的左右，行吗。 
English: After Li Yao secretly knew, he brought a pot of house wine to Wang Yao and said: You will be selected for heavy use, I'm afraid I can't rely on you, I want to hand over your right and left in advance, okay?

古文：即命酒以饮。
现代文：接着让斟满畅饮。
English: Then let it brew and drink.

古文：铎妻李氏疑其堇焉，使女奴传言于铎曰： 一身可矣，愿为妻儿谋。 
现代文：王铎妻子李氏怀疑他的诚意，派女仆传话给王铎说： 你一个人也就罢了，希望你替妻子儿女着想。 
English: Mr. Li, Wang Yao's wife, suspected his sincerity and sent a maid to Wang Yao with a message: "You are all alone. I hope you will think about your wife and children."

古文：蠙惊曰： 以吾斯酒为鸩乎？ 
现代文：李蠙惊讶地说道： 以为我的酒是毒酒吗？ 
English: Surprised, Li Yao said, "Did you think my wine was poisoned?"

古文：即命一大爵，自引满，饮之而去。
现代文：就让拿来一个大酒杯，自己斟满，喝完后走了。
English: He asked for a large wine glass, filled it himself, drank it and then left.

古文：韦保衡
现代文：韦保衡
English: Wei Baoheng

古文：韦保衡欲除裴修为省郎。
现代文：韦保衡想要任命裴修为省郎。
English: Wei Baoheng wants to appoint Pei Xiu as minister.

古文：时李璋为右丞，韦先遣卢望来申意，探其可否。
现代文：当时李璋是右丞相，韦保衡先派卢望去表明想法，探测李璋的看法。
English: At that time, Li Yong was the Minister of the Right, and Wei Baoheng first sent Lu Wang to express his thoughts and probe Li Yong's views.

古文：李曰： 相公但除，不合先问某。 
现代文：李璋说： 相公只管任命，不应该先问我。 
English: Li Yao said, "My father-in-law only appoints me, he should not ask me first.

古文：卢以时相事权，设为李所沮，则伤威重。因劝韦勿除。
现代文：卢望认为当时是宰相掌权，如果被李璋阻止，会损伤威严，就劝韦保衡不要任命裴修。
English: Lu Wang thought that it was the prime minister who was in power at that time, and if he was blocked by Li Ye, it would damage the authority, so he advised Wei Baoheng not to appoint Pei Xiu.

古文：衲衣道人
现代文：衲衣道人
English: People of Sui Province

古文：唐有士人退朝诣友生，见衲衣道人在坐，不怿而去。
现代文：唐时有个士人退朝后去看朋友，看到有个穿补丁衣服的道人在座，不高兴地走了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a scholar retreated to see a friend. Seeing a Taoist wearing patched clothes, he left in displeasure.

古文：他日，谓友生曰： 公好毳褐夫何也？
现代文：另一天，他对朋友说： 你为什么喜欢穿毛毡衣服的人呢？
English: The other day, he said to his friend: Why do you like people in felt clothes?

古文：吾不知其言，适且觉其臭。 
现代文：我没听到他的话，只闻到了他的臭味。 
English: I didn't hear him, I just smelled him.

古文：友生答曰： 毳褐之外也，岂甚铜乳。
现代文：朋友回答： 毛毡衣物的气味是外在的，难道比铜乳还厉害吗？
English: The friend replied: The smell of woolen clothing is external, is it stronger than copper milk?

古文：铜乳之臭，并肩而立，接迹而趋。公处其间，曾不嫌耻，乃讥予与山野有道之士游乎？
现代文：铜乳的臭味，并肩站着，前后走着都能闻到，你和他们在一起，不觉得可耻，怎么竟然讥讽我和山野中有学问的人交往呢？
English: The stench of copper milk, standing side by side, can be smelled when walking back and forth, you are with them, do not feel ashamed, how dare you ridicule me for associating with learned people in the mountains?

古文：南朝高人，以蛙鸣及蒿菜胜鼓吹。
现代文：南朝的高尚之人，认为蛙鸣和草野之音，胜过正式乐队演奏的音乐。
English: The noble people of the Southern Dynasty believed that the frogs' song and the sounds of the grassland were better than the music played by the formal band.

古文：吾视毳褐，愈于今之朱紫远矣。 
现代文：我看那毛毡衣服，超出今天的朱紫官服很远。 
English: When I look at that felt dress, it is far superior to today's vermilion official dress.

古文：路群、卢弘正
现代文：路群、卢弘正
English: Lu Qun, Lu Hongzheng

古文：中书舍人路群与给事中卢弘正，性相异而相善。
现代文：中书舍人路群和给事中卢弘正，性格各异却相处得很好。
English: Lu Hongzheng, one of the most popular and influential scholars in China, has different personalities, but they get along very well.

古文：路清瘦古淡，未尝言市朝；卢魁梧富贵，未尝言山水。
现代文：路群清瘦脱俗，不慕荣利，不曾谈论集市；卢弘正魁梧富贵，不曾谈过山水。
English: Lu Hongzheng is tall and handsome, and he has never talked about the landscape.

古文：路日谋高卧，有制草，则就宅视之；卢未尝请告，有客旅，则就省谒之。
现代文：路群每天都想安闲无事，有起草皇帝诏令的任务就拿回家完成；卢弘正不曾请示，有客人，就在官署里接待。
English: Lu Hongzheng did not ask for instructions, but received guests at the government office.

古文：虽所好不同，而相亲至。
现代文：虽然各自喜好不同，却互相亲善。
English: Although their preferences are different, they are friendly with each other.

古文：一日都下大雪，路在假，卢将晏入，道过新昌第，路方于南垣茅亭，肆目山雪。
现代文：一天京城下大雪，路群在休假，卢弘正天将晚回家途中路过新昌第，路群正在南垣茅草亭中欣赏山中雪景。
English: One day, it was snowing heavily in Beijing. Lu Qun was on vacation. Lu Hongzhengtian was going home late. On his way home, he passed through Xinchang. Lu Qun was enjoying the snowy scenery in the mountains at the Nanqi thatched pavilion.

古文：鹿巾鹤氅，构火命觞，以赏嘉致。
现代文：鹿皮围巾鹤毛大氅，拢火喝酒，欣赏雪中佳景。
English: A deerskin scarf and a crane's feather duster, drinking wine by the fire and enjoying the beautiful scenery in the snow.

古文：闻卢至，大喜曰： 适我愿兮。 
现代文：路听说卢弘正来了，高兴地说： 正合我的心意啊！ 
English: When Lu Lu heard that Lu Hongzheng was coming, he said happily, "It's just what I wanted!"

古文：亟命迎入。
现代文：立即叫人请进来。
English: Get someone in here right now.

古文：卢金紫华焕，意气轩昂；路道服而坐，情趣孤洁。
现代文：卢弘正穿着艳丽富贵的衣服，意气昂扬；路群穿道服坐着，情趣孤洁。
English: Lu Hongzheng is wearing bright and rich clothes, and his spirits are high; Lu Qun is sitting in his street clothes, and his mood is lonely.

古文：路曰： 卢六，卢六，曾莫顾我，何也？ 
现代文：路群说： 卢六，卢六，你竟敢不来看我？ 
English: Lu Qun said: Lu Lu, Lu Lu, how dare you not come to see me?

古文：卢曰： 月限向满，家食相仍。日诣相庭，以图外任。 
现代文：卢弘正说： 一个月的期限就要到了，家里又跟着要吃的，每天都到相府去，图个地方官当当。 
English: Lu Hongzheng said: "The one-month deadline is approaching, and my family needs to eat, so I go to the government office every day and pretend to be a local official.

古文：路色惨曰： 驾肩权门，何至于是？
现代文：路群脸色凄惨地说： 身在权门，何至于这样？
English: With a gloomy face, Lu Qun said: Being at the gate of power, why is this?

古文：且有定分，徒劳尔形。
现代文：而且要有个定分，何苦白白浪费精力。
English: And there must be a certain point, what a waste of energy.

古文：家酿稍醇，能一醉否？ 
现代文：家里有刚酿好的酒，喝个大醉怎么样？ 
English: You have freshly brewed wine at home. How about getting really drunk?

古文：卢曰： 省有急事，俟吾决之。 
现代文：卢弘正说： 省府有急事，等我裁决。 
English: Lu Hongzheng said: The provincial government has an urgent matter, wait for my ruling.

古文：路又呼侍儿曰： 卢六欲去，特早来药糜分二器，我与卢六同食。 卢振声曰： 不可。 
现代文：路群叫侍从说： 卢六要走，快盛两碗药粥来，我和卢六一块吃饭。 卢六大声说： 不行。 
English: Lu Qun called the attendant and said: Lu Lu wants to leave, quickly bring two bowls of porridge, and I will eat with Lu Lu. Lu Lu said loudly: No.

古文：路曰： 何也？ 
现代文：路群问： 为什么？ 
English: Lu Qun asked: Why?

古文：卢曰： 今旦饭冷，且欲遐征，家馔已食炮炙矣。 
现代文：卢弘正说： 今天饭太凉了，而且要出远门，在家里吃饭时已吃过烤肉了。 
English: Lu Hongzheng said: Today's meal is too cold, and I have to go far away. When I eat at home, I have already eaten grilled meat.

古文：时人闻之，以为路之高雅，卢之俊迈，各尽其性。
现代文：当时人听说这事后，认为路群的高雅，卢弘正的英俊出众，充分体现了出来。
English: When people heard about this, they thought that Lu Hongzheng's elegance and Lu Hongzheng's outstanding good looks were fully reflected.

古文：毕諴
现代文：毕諴
English: Bye-bye

古文：毕諴家本寒微，咸通初，其舅尚为太湖县伍伯。
现代文：毕諴家原本贫寒，咸通初年，他的舅舅还是太湖县伍长，毕諴感到很羞耻。
English: Bi Yu's family was originally poor. In the first year of Hamdang Tong, his uncle was still a Taihu County Corporal. Bi Yu felt very ashamed.

古文：諴深耻之，常使人讽令解役，为除官。
现代文：常常派人婉转地劝他辞去差事，为他授官。
English: He often sent people to gently persuade him to quit his job and give him a promotion.

古文：反复数四，竟不从命。
现代文：劝了多次舅舅也没听他的。
English: After much persuasion, my uncle did not listen to him.

古文：乃特除选人杨载为太湖令，諴延至相第，嘱之为舅除其猥藉，津送入京。
现代文：就特任命候选官员杨载为太湖县令。毕諴把他邀到相府，嘱咐他替舅舅解除卑贱的身份，乘船送入京城。
English: Yang Jie, a candidate official, was specially appointed as the Taihu County magistrate. Bi Yu invited him to the government office and ordered him to relieve his uncle of his lowly status and take him to Beijing by boat.

古文：杨令到任，具达諴意。
现代文：杨载到任，详细转达了毕諴的意图。
English: Yang Zai arrived at the post and conveyed Bi Gan's intention in detail.

古文：伍伯曰： 某贱人也，岂有外甥为宰相耶？ 
现代文：伍长说： 我是一个卑微的人，怎么会有外甥当宰相？ 
English: The corporal said: I am a humble man, how can I have a nephew as prime minister?

古文：杨坚勉之，乃曰： 某每岁秋夏，恒相享六十千事例钱，苟无败缺，终身优足，不审相公欲除何官耶？ 
现代文：杨载一再劝他，他就说： 我在每年秋夏，都能平稳地享受六十千钱的事例钱，如无错误，一辈子就很优厚满足了，不明白还要升什么官？ 
English: Yang Zai advised him again and again, and he said, "I can enjoy sixty thousand yuan of case money smoothly every autumn and summer. If there are no mistakes, I will be very rich and satisfied for the rest of my life. I don't know what position I should be promoted to."

古文：杨乃具以闻諴，諴亦然其说，竟不夺其志也。
现代文：杨载都告诉了毕諴。毕諴也认为舅舅说得对，再也没有勉强他。
English: Yang Zai told Bi Yao. Bi Yao also thought that his uncle was right, and never forced him again.

古文：王蜀伪相庾传素与其从弟凝绩，曾宰蜀州唐兴县。
现代文：前蜀伪宰相庾传素和他的堂弟凝绩，曾任蜀州唐兴县宰。
English: Former Shu pseudo-chancellor Zou Chuansu and his cousin Gao Jian, once served as the chancellor of Tangxing County, Shu.

古文：郎吏有杨会者微有才用，庾氏昆弟念之。
现代文：有个叫杨会的郎吏稍有才干，庾氏兄弟记住了他。
English: There was a slightly talented steward called Yang Kai who was remembered by Mr. Zou's brothers.

古文：洎迭秉蜀政，欲为杨会除马长以酧之。
现代文：等到二人轮流掌管蜀州政权时，想任杨会为马长来酬谢他。
English: When the two men take turns to run the Shuzhou government, Yang would like to reward Ma for his leadership.

古文：会曰： 某之吏役，远近皆知。忝冒为官，宁掩人口。
现代文：杨会说： 我的这份差使，远近皆知，硬是去做什么官，无宁去堵人家的嘴。
English: Yang would say: My mission is well-known far and wide. I have no choice but to do what officials do, and I have no qualms about silencing people.

古文：岂可将数千家供侍，而博一虚名马长乎？ 
现代文：怎敢用几千家的供奉侍候，换得一个马长的虚名？ 
English: How dare he use the offerings and services of thousands of families in exchange for a horse-length fake name?

古文：后虽假职名，止除检校官，竟不舍县役矣。
现代文：以后虽然挂上官衔，也只是任检校官，竟不放弃县役的职务。
English: Later, although he was given an official title, he was only appointed as a school inspector, but he did not give up his duties as a prefectural official.

古文：李师望
现代文：李师望
English: Li Shifang

古文：李师望，乃宗属也，自负才能，欲以方面为己任。
现代文：李师望，是皇帝同族，有才而自负，想自己担任一方的军政事务。
English: Li Shifang, a member of the same family as the emperor, was talented and conceited, and wanted to be in charge of the military and political affairs of one side.

古文：因旅游邛蜀，备知南蛮勇怯，遂上书，请割西川数州，于临邛建定边军节度。
现代文：他到邛州蜀州游历，深知南蛮英勇。于是上奏书，请求割取西川几个州，在临邛建定边军节度。
English: He traveled to Bozhou, Shuzhou, and was well aware of the bravery of the Southern barbarians. So he submitted a petition, requesting the confiscation of several states in the West River and the establishment of a border army in Linyi.

古文：诏旨允之，乃以师望自凤翔少尹，擢领此任。
现代文：皇帝下诏应允，就把李师望从凤翔少尹提升为定边军节度使。
English: In response to the emperor's edict, Li Shibang was promoted from Feng Xiang Shao Yin to the commander of the Dingbian Army.

古文：于时西川大将嫉其分裂巡属，阴通南诏。
现代文：当时西川大将憎恨他分裂自己的属地，就偷偷和南诏勾通。
English: At that time, General Saikawa hated him for splitting his territory, so he secretly colluded with Nanzhao.

古文：于是蛮军为近界乡豪所道，侵轶蜀川，戎校窦滂，不能止遏。师望亦因此受黜焉。
现代文：因此南蛮军队被近界的乡豪引导着，侵犯蜀川。戎校窦滂，不能阻止，李师望因此被罢黜。
English: Therefore, the southern barbarian army was led by the local heroes in the vicinity and invaded the Shu River. The military school Douyi could not stop it, and Li Shifang was dismissed as a result.

古文：高骈
现代文：高骈
English: Takatsuki

古文：渤海王太尉高骈镇蜀日，因巡边，至资中郡，舍于刺史衙。
现代文：渤海王太尉高骈镇守蜀地时，因为巡视边界，到了资中郡，住在刺史衙门。
English: Because he was patrolling the border when he was guarding Shu, the Bokkai Wangtaifu Gaojun Town, he went to Zhizhong County and lived in Shishimen.

古文：对郡山顶有开元佛寺，是夜黄昏，僧徒礼赞，螺呗间作。
现代文：资中郡对面山顶上，有个开元佛寺，这天黄昏，僧侣礼赞，法螺与念经声交替出现。
English: On the top of the mountain opposite Zizhong County, there is a Kaiyuan Buddhist Temple. At dusk on this day, the monks' praise, conch and chanting appeared alternately.

古文：渤海命军候悉擒械之，来晨，笞背斥逐。
现代文：渤海王命令军候将他们全都抓住拘系起来。第二天早晨，鞭打后背并驱逐他们。
English: The king of Bohai ordered the soldiers to arrest them all and detain them. The next morning, they whipped their backs and expelled them.

古文：召将吏而谓之曰： 僧徒礼念，亦无罪过。
现代文：又召来将士吏卒对他们说： 僧侣做礼赞，也没有什么罪过。
English: And he called the officers and said to them, "There is no blame on the priests if they celebrate it.

古文：但以此寺，十年后，当有秃子数十作乱，我故以是厌之。 
现代文：只是这个佛寺，十年以后，会有几十个秃子作乱，我因此镇压他们。 
English: It's just that this Buddhist temple, ten years from now, will have dozens of bald men running riot, so I'm suppressing them.

古文：其后土人皆髡执兵号大髡小髡，据此寺为寨。
现代文：那以后，当地人都剃了头拿着兵器号称 大髡  小髡 ，把这个佛寺作为军营。
English: Since then, the locals have shaved their heads and armed themselves with weapons known as "daesang xiaodong" (大小), using this Buddhist temple as a military camp.

古文：韦宙
现代文：韦宙
English: Wei Zhuo

古文：相国韦宙善治生，江陵府东有别业，良田美产，最号膏腴；积稻如坻，皆为滞穗。
现代文：相国韦宙善谋生计，江陵府东有他的别墅，良田美产，最为肥沃。堆积的稻子像小陆地，都是成熟的稻穗。
English: Weizhou, the partner country, is good at making a living, the east of Gangneung has his villa, and Liangda is the most fertile. The accumulated rice is like a small land, all of which are mature rice ears.

古文：咸通初，授岭南节度使。
现代文：咸通初年，他被授为岭南节度使。
English: In the first year of Hamdang Tong, he was awarded the post of Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：懿宗以番禺珠翠之地，垂贪泉之戒。
现代文：懿宗认为番禺是出珍珠翡翠的地方，告戒他不要贪婪。
English: Shizong believed that Panyu was the place where pearls and emeralds came from, and warned him not to be greedy.

古文：宙从容奏曰： 江陵庄积谷，尚有七千堆，固无所贪矣。 
现代文：韦宙从容启奏道： 江陵庄积蓄的粮食，还有七千堆，所以没有什么可贪的。 
English: Wei Zhuo calmly replied: There are still seven thousand piles of grain stored in Jiangling Village, so there is nothing to be greedy about.

古文：帝曰： 此所谓足谷翁也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这真是个多粮的老头。 
English: The emperor said, "This is really an old man with plenty of grain.

古文：王氏子
现代文：王氏子
English: Prince Ojiji

古文：京辇自黄巢退后，修葺残毁之处。
现代文：京都从黄巢退兵后，开始修补被毁坏的地方。
English: After Kyoto withdrew from the Yellow Nest, it began to repair the damaged areas.

古文：时定州王氏有一儿，俗号王酒胡，居于上都，巨富，纳钱三十万贯，助修朱雀门。
现代文：当时定州王氏有一个儿子，绰号 王酒胡 ，住在上都，是大富翁，交付三十万贯钱，资助重修朱雀门。
English: At that time, the Dingzhou Wang family had a son, nicknamed Wang Jiuhu, who lived in Shangdu and was a millionaire. He donated 300,000 yuan to fund the reconstruction of Suzakumon Gate.

古文：僖宗诏令重修安国寺毕，亲降车辇，以设大斋。
现代文：僖宗下诏重修安国寺，修完后，亲自乘辇而来，设置大斋。
English: Under the Shingon sect, it was decided to rebuild Ankoku-ji Temple. After the renovation was completed, he personally came to the temple and set up a grand banquet.

古文：乃扣新钟十撞，舍钱一万贯。
现代文：敲了新挂的钟十下，施舍一万贯钱。
English: The newly hung bell was rung ten times, and a donation of 10,000 Korean won was made.

古文：命诸大臣，各取意而击。
现代文：让各位大臣，各按自己的意思去敲钟。
English: Let the ministers ring the bells as they wish.

古文：上曰： 有能舍一千贯文者，即打一槌。 
现代文：皇帝说： 有能施舍一千贯钱的，就敲一下钟。 
English: The emperor said, "If there is anyone who can give a thousand crowns, let him ring the bell."

古文：斋罢，王酒胡半醉入来，径上钟楼，连打一百下。便于西市运钱十万入寺。
现代文：吃斋之后，王酒胡半醉半醒地来了，径直走到钟楼，连敲一百下，就到西市运钱十万贯送到安国寺。
English: After the meal, Wang Jiuhu came in half-drunk and half-awake, went straight to the bell tower, knocked a hundred times, and went to Xicheng to transport 100,000 yuan to Anguo Temple.

古文：刘蜕
现代文：刘蜕
English: Liu Xuan

古文：刘蜕，桐庐人，早以文学进士。
现代文：刘蜕，是桐庐人，早年凭辞章修养考中进士。
English: Liu Wei, a native of Tonglu, was promoted to junior high school in his early years with the help of a resignation letter.

古文：其父尝戒之曰： 任汝举进取，穷之与达，不望于汝。
现代文：他父亲曾告诫说： 任凭你科考上进，困窘与发达，不寄希望于你。
English: His father once admonished, "If you do not do well in the entrance examination, you will be miserable and underdeveloped. Don't pin your hopes on yourself.

古文：吾没后，慎勿祭祀。 
现代文：我死后，千万不要祭祀。
English: After my death, don't make any sacrifices.

古文：乃乘扁舟，以渔钓自娱，竟不知其所适。
现代文：就乘上一叶小船，以钓鱼自我娱乐，最终竟不知他到哪里去了。
English: He took a small boat, fished for his own amusement, and ended up not knowing where he was.

古文：蜕后登华贯，出典商于，霜露之思，于是乎止。
现代文：刘蜕后来登上了显贵而重要的高位，出朝掌管商於地区，归隐的想法就停止了。
English: Liu Ye later ascended to a prominent and important high-ranking position, and the idea of returning to seclusion stopped.

古文：临终，亦戒其子，如先考之命。
现代文：临死，也告诫他的儿子，像他父亲告诫他的一样。
English: On his deathbed, he warned his son, just as his father had warned him.

古文：蜀礼部尚书纂，即其息也，常为同列言之。
现代文：蜀地礼部尚书刘纂，就是他的儿子，曾和同伴们说起这件事。
English: His son, Shangshu Liu Cong, of the Shu Di Ritual Department, once talked about this with his companions.

古文：君子曰： 名教之家重丧祭，刘氏先德，是何人斯？
现代文：君子说： 有名望有教养的家庭重视丧礼祭祀。刘家有德行的前辈，是什么样人呢？
English: The gentleman said, "Famous and cultured families attach great importance to funeral rites. What kind of people are the virtuous predecessors of the Liu family?

古文：以蜕之通人，抑有其说，时未谕也。 
现代文：像刘蜕那样的博通古今的人，也有那种说法，当时人很不理解。 
English: People like Liu Bei, who was a polymath from ancient times to the present, also had that kind of saying, but people didn't really understand it at the time.

古文：皮日休
现代文：皮日休
English: Skin day off

古文：咸通中，进士皮日休上书两通。
现代文：咸通年中，进士皮日休两次上奏书。
English: In the middle of the year, Jin Shi Pi took two days off to deliver a report.

古文：其一，请以孟子为学科。
现代文：第一次，要求把《孟子》作为学习科目。
English: For the first time, "Mencius" was required to be taught as a subject.

古文：其略云：臣闻圣人之道，不过乎经。经之降者，不过乎史。
现代文：大致是说： 我听说圣人的道理，没有超过经书的；次于经书的是史书，次于史书的是诸子文章。
English: Roughly speaking: I have heard that the teachings of the saints do not surpass the scriptures; next to the scriptures are the history books, and next to the history books are the children's articles.

古文：史之降者，不过乎子。子不异道者，孟子也。
现代文：诸子文章不离开圣人之道的，是《孟子》。
English: It is "Mencius" that the children's articles do not depart from the sage's way.

古文：舍是而诸子，必斥乎经史，圣人之贼也。文多不载。
现代文：除此而外的各派学者，一定排斥经书史书，是圣人的灾害，文献上大多不记载。
English: In addition to this, scholars of all schools, must exclude the books of scripture and history, is the disaster of saints, mostly not recorded in the literature.

古文：请废庄列之书，以孟子为主，有能通其义者，科选请同明经。
现代文：请求废除《庄子》、《列子》之类的书，而以《孟子》为主。有能贯通它的义理的，经过明经考试进行科举选拔。 
English: Requests that books such as "Zhuang Zi" and "Lie Zi" be abolished, and that "Men Zi" be used as the main text. Those who are able to penetrate its meaning will be selected through the Mingjing examination.

古文：其二，请以韩愈配飨太学。
现代文：第二次，他请求让韩愈在太学里享受祭祀。
English: The second time, he asked that Han Yu be allowed to enjoy the sacrificial rites in Taegu.

古文：其略曰：臣闻圣人之道，不过乎求用。
现代文：大致是说： 我听说圣人的主张不过是要求有用。
English: In other words: I've heard that the sage's advice is merely helpful.

古文：用于生前，则一时可知也；用于死后，则万世可知也。
现代文：活着时用了，一时可以知道；死后用了，万代相传都可以知道。 
English: If you use it while you are alive, you can know it for a while; if you use it after you die, you can know it for generations to come.

古文：又云：孟子、荀卿，翼辅孔道，以至于文中子。
现代文：又说： 孟子、荀卿，保护辅佐孔子学说，传到文中子王通。
English: He also said: Mencius and Zou Qing, protect and support Confucius's theory, and pass it on to Wang Tong.

古文：文中子之道旷矣，能嗣其美者，其唯韩愈乎！ 
现代文：文中子的学说太阔大了，能继承他的精华的，大概只有韩愈吧！ 
English: Wen Zhongzi's doctrine is too broad, and only Han Yu can inherit his essence.

古文：日休字袭美，襄阳竟陵人，幼攻文，隐于鹿门山，号醉吟先生。
现代文：皮日休字袭美，是襄阳竟陵人，自幼钻研文章，隐居在鹿门山，号 醉吟先生 。
English: He is a native of Xiangyang, studied literature from a young age, lived in seclusion in Lumen Mountain, and is known as Mr. Drunkard.

古文：初至场中，礼部侍郎郑愚以其貌不扬，戏之曰： 子之才学甚富，其如一日何？ 
现代文：初次到官场中，礼部侍郎郑愚为他长相难看，戏弄说： 你很有才学，但又能对一个 日 怎么样呢？ 
English: The first time he came to the government, Zheng Yu, a waiter from the Ministry of Ceremonies, teased him for his ugly appearance, saying, "You are very talented, but how can you be good for one day?

古文：对曰： 侍郎不可以一日而废二日。 
现代文：皮回答说： 侍郎不可因为一个 日 而废掉两个 日 。 
English: Pi answered, "A steward must not lose two days for one day."

古文：谓不以人废言也，举子咸推伏之。官至国子博士，寓苏州。与陆龟蒙为文友，著《文薮》十，《皮子》三卷，人多传之。
现代文：举子们都很佩服他。皮日休任国子博士时，住在苏州，和陆龟蒙是文学朋友。著有《文薮》十，《皮子》三卷，人们争相传颂。
English: His children all admire him. When Pi Rih retired from his position as Dr. Kuniko, he lived in Suzhou and was a literary friend of Turtle Meng. He was the author of ten volumes of "Wen Yao" and three volumes of "Pi Zi," and people are competing to eulogize him.

古文：为钱镠判官。
现代文：当时做了节度使钱镠的判官。
English: At that time, he was the judge who made the money.

古文：郭使君
现代文：郭使君
English: Guo Jikun

古文：江陵有郭七郎者，其家资产甚殷，乃楚城富民之首。
现代文：江陵有个叫郭七郎的，他家很有钱，是楚城有钱人的首户。
English: There is a man in Gangneung named Guo Shichiro. His family is very rich, and they are the first family of rich people in Chuxing.

古文：江淮河朔间，悉有贾客仗其货买易往来者。
现代文：长江、淮河、黄河以北之间，都有商人靠着他的货来经商。
English: Between the Yangtze River, the Huai River and the north of the Yellow River, there are merchants who rely on his goods to do business.

古文：乾符初年，有一贾者在京都，久无音信。
现代文：乾符初年，他有一个商人在京城，很久没有音信，郭七郎就亲自去查找。
English: In the first year of Kianpu, he had a businessman in Beijing, and after not hearing from him for a long time, Guo Shichiro went to look for him in person.

古文：郭氏子自往访之，既相遇，尽获所有，仅五六万缗。
现代文：见面后，把他所有的钱财身都要了过来，多达五六万吊。
English: After meeting him, she took all his money and possessions, as much as fifty or sixty thousand dollars.

古文：生耽悦烟花，迷于饮博，三数年后，用过太半。
现代文：郭七郎迷上了妓女，沉湎于饮酒、赌博。三四年后，把钱花掉一大半。
English: Guo Shichiro fell in love with a prostitute and indulged in drinking and gambling. Three or four years later, he had spent most of his money.

古文：是时唐季，朝政多邪，生乃输数百万于鬻爵者门，以白丁易得横州刺史，遂决还乡。
现代文：这时是唐朝末年，朝廷坏人专权。郭七郎用几百万钱送给卖官的人，由一个白丁变成了横州刺史。于是决定回家。
English: At this time, it was the end of the Tang Dynasty, and the imperial court had exclusive power over bad people. Guo Shichiro used millions of money to give it to the person who sold the official, and from a commoner he turned into a yokoshu sashimi. So he decided to go home.

古文：时渚宫新罹王仙芝寇盗，里闾人物，与昔日殊。
现代文：当时江陵刚刚被王仙芝攻打过，街道上的人，与以前很不一样了。
English: At that time, Jiangling had just been attacked by Wang Xianzhi, and the people on the streets were very different from before.

古文：生归旧居，都无舍宇，访其骨肉，数日方知。弟妹遇兵乱已亡，独母与一二奴婢，处于数间茅舍之下，囊橐荡空，旦夕以纫针为业。
现代文：郭七郎回到旧房，房屋都没了；打听亲人，几天后才知道弟弟妹妹碰上乱兵已死了；只有母亲带一两个丫环住在几间茅草房里，钱袋里空无一文，靠白天夜里做针线活过日子。
English: Guo Shichiro returned to his old house, but the houses were all gone. After inquiring about his relatives, he learned a few days later that his younger brother and sister had been killed by soldiers. Only his mother and one or two maids lived in a few thatched houses, with no money in their pockets, and made a living doing needlework day and night.

古文：生之行李间，犹有二三千缗，缘兹复得苏息，乃佣舟与母赴秩。
现代文：郭七郎的行李中，还有二三千吊钱，因此生活才算得以好转。就雇船和母亲一道去上任。
English: Guo Shichiro still had two or three thousand hanging money in his luggage, so his life could be considered to have improved. He hired a boat with his mother to go to work.

古文：过长沙，入湘江，次永州北江。
现代文：经过长沙，进入湘江，停泊在永州北江。
English: After Changsha, it entered the Hunan River and anchored in the Yongzhou Beijiang River.

古文：墂有佛寺名兜率，是夕宿于斯，结缆于大槦树下。
现代文：岸上有一座庙叫兜率寺。当晚就住在船上，把船系在大槦树下边。
English: There's a temple on the shore called Takurazu-ji Temple. That night, we stayed on the boat and moored it under a large camphor tree.

古文：夜半。忽大风雨，波翻岸崩，树卧枕舟，舟不胜而沉。
现代文：半夜，忽然刮大风下大雨，波浪翻滚冲毁了河岸，大树倒了压住了船，船经受不住就沉没了。
English: In the middle of the night, a strong wind suddenly blew and it rained heavily. The rolling waves washed away the riverbanks, the trees fell down and crushed the boat. The boat could not stand it and sank.

古文：生与一梢工，拽母登岸，仅以获免。
现代文：郭七郎同一个船公把母亲拽到岸上，保住了性命。
English: Guo Shichiro, together with the boatman, dragged his mother to the shore and saved her life.

古文：其余婢仆生计，悉漂于怒浪。
现代文：其余的奴仆东西都被波涛卷走了。
English: The rest of the slaves were swept away by the waves.

古文：迟明，投于僧室，母氏以惊得疾，数日而殒。
现代文：天亮后，到了庙里，母亲受惊得病，几天后死了。
English: After dawn, when she arrived at the temple, her mother was so shocked that she fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：生慞惶，驰往零陵，告州牧。
现代文：郭七郎一筹莫展，跑到零陵，把情况告诉了州牧。
English: Guo Shichiro was at a loss for a solution and ran to the cemetery to tell Shumu about the situation.

古文：州牧为之殡葬，日复赠遗之。
现代文：州牧为他安葬了母亲，并且又赠给他一些钱。
English: The governor buried his mother for him and gave him some money.

古文：既丁忧，遂寓居永郡。
现代文：既为母亲守丧，就在永郡租房住下来。
English: After attending his mother's funeral, he moved into a rented house in Yeong-gun.

古文：孤且贫，又无亲识，日夕厄于冻馁。
现代文：孤身一人，很穷又没亲戚熟人，早晚为吃穿发愁。
English: Alone, very poor and with no relatives or acquaintances, he worries about food and clothing day and night.

古文：生少小素涉于江湖，颇熟风水间事，遂与往来舟船执梢，以求衣食。
现代文：郭七郎从小就来往于江湖之上，很熟悉行船这一套，于是就给来往的船只掌舵，解决衣食。
English: Guo Shichiro has been traveling across the country and the lake since he was a child. He is very familiar with sailing, so he steers the ships that come and go to solve the problem of food and clothing.

古文：永州市人，呼为捉梢郭使君，自是状貌异昔，共篙工之党无别矣。
现代文：永州街上的人，叫他捉梢郭使君。从此，他的面貌和以前大不一样，同船工们没有什么区别了。
English: The people on the streets of Yongzhou told him to catch Guo Zhijun. From then on, his appearance was very different from before, and there was no difference between him and the shipworkers.

古文：李德权
现代文：李德权
English: Li Dequan

