古文：节义
现代文：《易》说： 立身的途径，称作仁和义。 
English: "Yi" said: The way to stand up is called benevolence and righteousness.

古文：盖士之成名，在斯二者。
现代文：大概士人成就美名，就在这两个方面。
English: It is in these two aspects that great men are most likely to achieve fame.

古文：故古人以天下为大，方身则轻；生为重矣，比义则轻。
现代文：所以，古人把天下之事视为大事，而对自身则看得轻；生存是重要的，但和义相比较就轻了。
English: Therefore, the ancients regarded the things of the world as important, but regarded themselves as light; survival is important, but it is light compared to righteousness.

古文：然则死有重于太山，贵其理全也；生有轻于鸿毛，重其义全也。
现代文：这样说的话，有的死比泰山还重，贵在其理全备；有的生比鸿毛还轻，重在其义全备。
English: Saying this, some deaths are weightier than Mount Tai, precious in their reason and completeness; some lives are lighter than a feather, precious in their meaning and completeness.

古文：故生无再得，死不可追。
现代文：所以，人生只有一次，死了不能复生。
English: So, you only have one life, and you can't come back from the dead.

古文：而仁道不远，则杀身以徇；义重于生，则捐躯而践。
现代文：而仁爱之道不远，就舍弃自身求仁爱之道；义理比生存更重要，就捐弃身躯而实行义理。
English: But when the path of benevolence is not far away, he abandons the path of seeking benevolence; when righteousness is more important than survival, he abandons his body to practice righteousness.

古文：龙逢殒命于夏癸，比干竭节于商辛，申蒯断臂于齐庄，弘演纳肝于卫懿，汉之纪信、栾布，晋之向雄、嵇绍，并不惮于危亡，以蹈忠贞之节。
现代文：龙逢为夏桀丧命，比干为殷纣尽节，申蒯为齐庄公而断臂，弘演为卫懿公而献出肝脏，汉朝的纪信、栾布，晋朝的向雄、嵇绍，都不畏惧危险和死亡，以实践忠诚坚贞的节操。
English: Long Feng died for Xia Yao, Bi Gan died for Yin Yao, Shen Yao broke his arm for Qi Zhuang, and Hong Xuan gave his liver for Wei Yao. The Han Dynasty's Ji Xin, Zibo, and the Jin Dynasty's Xiang Xiong and Zou Shao were not afraid of danger and death, and practiced the discipline of loyalty and steadfastness.

古文：虽功未存于社稷，力无救于颠坠。然视彼苟免之徒，贯三光而洞九泉矣。
现代文：虽然其对国家社稷没有功劳，对倾覆毁坠无救助之力，但是和那些苟且偷生的人相比，他们气贯长虹，光照九泉。
English: Although they have no merit to the national society, and have no power to help the collapse, but compared with those who are still alive, they are like a rainbow, shining in every direction.

古文：凡在立名之士，莫不庶几焉。
现代文：凡是意在树立名望的人，没有人不希望这样的。
English: No one who is trying to make a name for themselves would want that.

古文：然至临难忘身，见危授命，虽斯文不坠，而行之盖寡。
现代文：然而，至于面对灾难忘记自身，面临危险不顾性命，虽然不失斯文之风，但能够行动的人大概很少。
English: However, when it comes to forgetting oneself in the face of disaster, and disregarding one's own life in the face of danger, there are probably very few people who can act, although they do not lose their grace.

古文：固知士之所重，信在慈乎。
现代文：因此知道士人重视的，确实在于这一点。
English: Therefore, I know that what scholars attach importance to is indeed this.

古文：非夫内怀铁石之心，外负陵霜之节，孰能行之若命，赴蹈如归者乎！
现代文：不是内有铁石心肠，外有高洁节操的人，谁能行动起来像有命令一样，赴汤蹈火像回家一样呢？
English: Who can act as if he had orders, and go through the fire as if he were returning home, unless he has a heart of stone within and a noble and disciplined spirit without?

古文：自魏讫隋，年余二百，若乃岁寒见松柏，疾风知劲草，千载之后，懔懔犹生。
现代文：自魏到隋，二百多年，就像在最寒冷的时候发现松柏耐寒，在迅疾的狂风中知道坚韧的草不可摧折一样，千百年之后，他们凛凛然虽死犹生，岂只是听说了那个不食周粟的伯夷的事迹。
English: From Wei to Sui, for more than two hundred years, just as in the coldest time they discovered the cold resistance of pine and cypress, and in the fierce wind they knew that the tough grass was indestructible, thousands of years later, although they were still alive, they only heard about the story of Bo Yi, who did not eat cornflowers.

古文：岂独闻彼伯夷，懦夫立志，亦冀将来君子，有所庶几。
现代文：怯懦的人才会树立志向，也希望将来的君子和他们有所接近。
English: It is only the cowardly who aspire and hope that the gentleman of the future will be close to them.

古文：《魏书》序于什门、段进、石文德、汲固、王玄威、娄提、刘渴侯、硃长生、马八龙、门文爱、晁清、刘侯仁、石祖兴、邵洪哲、王荣世、胡小彪、孙道登、李几、张安祖、王闾以为《节义传》，今又检得郭琰、沓龙超、乙速孤佛保，及《周书孝节传》李棠、杜叔毗附之。
现代文：《魏书》叙述于什门、段进、石文德、汲固、王玄威、娄提、刘渴侯、朱长生、马八龙、门文爱、晁清、刘仁侯、石祖兴、邵洪哲、王荣世、胡小彪、孙道登、李几、张安祖、王闾等人的事迹为《节义传》，如今又搜集到郭琰、沓龙超、乙速孤佛保，和《周书·孝节传》中的李棠、杜叔毗附录之。
English: The "Weishu" described the deeds of Yu Shimen, Duan Jin, Shi Wende, Qi Guo, Wang Xuanwei, Xing Ti, Liu Qi Hou, Zhu Changsheng, Ma Bailong, Men Wen Ai, Yu Qing, Liu Renhou, Shi Zu Xing, Shao Hongzhe, Wang Rongshi, Hu Xiaobiao, Sun Daodeng, Li Qi, Zhang Anzu, Wang Qi and others as "Seasonal Virtue Biography," and now it has collected Guo Gan, Yao Longchao, Yi Hao Liao Bu Bao, and the appendix of Li Tang and Du Shubi in "Zhou Shu ·

古文：又案《齐书》不立此篇，而《隋书》序刘弘、皇甫诞、游元、冯慈明、张须阤、杨善会、独孤盛、元文都、卢楚、刘子翊、尧君素为《诚节传》。
现代文：另案，《齐书》不设立《节义传》，而《隋书》叙述刘弘、皇甫诞、游元、冯慈明、张须陀、杨善会、独孤盛、元文都、卢楚、刘子翊、尧君素等人的事迹为《诚节传》。
English: On the other hand, "Qi Shu" does not set up "Xie Yi Chuan," while "Sui Shu" describes the deeds of Liu Hong, the birthday of the emperor, Yu Yuan, Feng Ciming, Zhang Suda, Yang Shan Hui, Du Guosheng, Yuan Wendu, Lu Chu, Liu Ziqi, and Sui Junsu as "Zhengyi Chuan."

古文：帝甚嘉之，赠银青光禄大夫，拜其子仁宗为正议大夫、弋阳郡通守。张须陀，弘农阌乡人也。性刚烈，有勇略。
现代文：如今皇甫诞、冯慈明、独孤盛、元文都各附录其家传，其余诸人都附录在这一篇中，又搜录《隋书·孝义传》中的郎方贵、郭世俊也附录在这里，以充备《节义传》云云。张须陀，弘农阌乡人。生性刚直，有勇有谋。
English: Nowadays, Wang Fuxi, Feng Ciming, Du Guosheng, and Yuanwen have all appended their family histories, and the rest of the people have been appended in this article, and Lang Fang Gui and Guo Shijun from "Suishu · Xiaoyi Biography" have also been appended here, so as to fully prepare the "Xieyi Biography." Zhang Suda, a rural villager in Hongnongyi, was born with an upright nature and was brave and resourceful.

古文：弱冠从史万岁讨西爨，以功授仪同。
现代文：还没成年就跟随史万岁征讨西爨，因军功授仪同。
English: He followed Shi Wanlian to conquer Xidi before he was an adult, and was awarded the medal for his military service.

古文：后从杨素击平汉王谅，加开府。
现代文：后来，又跟从杨素平定汉王杨谅，加授开府。
English: Later, King Yang Pengding of Han followed Yang Su in opening the capital.

古文：大业中，为齐郡赞务。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，任齐郡赞务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui and Qin, he was appointed to the Zangwu of Qi County.

古文：会兴辽东之役，岁饥，须陀将开仓赈给。
现代文：适逢辽东之战开始，年成歉收，张须陀准备打开粮仓赈济饥民。
English: When the Battle of Liaodong began and the harvest was poor, Zhang Suda was preparing to open the granary to feed the hungry.

古文：官属咸曰： 须待诏敕。 
现代文：僚属都说 ：必须等待诏书敕令。 
English: Colleagues and relatives all said: we must wait for the imperial edict.

古文：须陀曰： 如待报至，当委沟壑。
现代文：张须陀说 ：如果等待诏书到来，百姓就会饿死在沟溪丘壑了。
English: Zhang Suda said, "If we wait for the imperial edict to arrive, the people will starve to death and die in the ditches."

古文：吾若以此获罪，死无所恨。 
现代文：我如果因为这个而得罪，死了也没什么遗憾的。 
English: If I die because of this, I won't regret it.

古文：先开仓而后状，帝嘉而不责。
现代文：先开仓赈济饥民，而后上报朝廷，炀帝嘉奖他而不加责备。
English: He first opened a granary to feed the hungry, and then reported to the imperial court. Emperor Xizong praised him without reproach.

古文：天下既承平日久，多不习兵。
现代文：天下既已长期安定，大多不熟悉战事。
English: The world has been stable for a long time, and most people are not familiar with war.

古文：须陀独勇决善战，又长抚驭，得士卒心，号为名将。
现代文：只有张须陀英勇果决，勇猛善战，又善于安抚治理，很得士兵的拥戴，号为名将。
English: Only Zhang Suda is heroic and decisive, brave and good at fighting, and good at pacifying and governing. He is very popular with soldiers and is known as a famous general.

古文：时贼帅王薄北连豆子贼孙宣雅、石祗阇、郝孝德等，众十余万，攻章丘。
现代文：当时贼兵元帅王薄北连豆子贼孙宣雅、石祗、郝孝德等，有十多万人，进攻章丘。
English: At that time, the robber marshal Wang Bo Beibei, along with the bean thief Sun Xuanya, Shijie, Zou Xiaode, and others, with more than one hundred thousand people, attacked Zhang Qiu.

古文：须陀大破之，露布以闻。
现代文：张须陀大败贼兵，张贴布告广告众人。
English: Zhang Suda's great defeat of the bandits, and the announcement of the announcement to the public.

古文：帝大悦，优诏褒扬，令使者图画其形容奏之。
现代文：炀帝非常高兴，广颁诏令，加以表彰，令使者画张须陀的画像上奏。
English: Emperor Xuan was very pleased, and issued a decree to commend him, ordering the emissary to paint a portrait of Zhang Suda.

古文：其年，贼裴长才，石子河等奄至城下，须陀与战，长才败走。
现代文：这一年，盗贼裴长才、石子河等突然袭击到城下，张须陀与贼兵交战，裴长才等人败逃。
English: In that year, thieves such as Pei Changcai and Shi Zi He suddenly attacked the city, Zhang Suta fought with the thieves, and Pei Changcai and others fled.

古文：后数旬，贼帅秦君弘、郭方预等园北海，须陀倍道而进，大败之。
现代文：此后过了几十天，贼兵元帅秦君弘、郭方预等围攻北海，张须陀兼程进军，大败贼兵。
English: A few dozen days later, the bandits led by Marshal Qin Junhong and Guo Fangpu besieged the North Sea, and Zhang Suda marched into the North Sea, defeating the bandits.

古文：司隶刺史裴操之上状，帝遣使劳问之。
现代文：司隶刺史裴操之将其情况上奏，炀帝派遣使者慰劳张须陀。
English: The imperial official, Shishi Peizhong, reported the situation to the emperor, who sent an envoy to comfort Zhang Suda.

古文：十年，贼左孝友屯蹲狗山，须陀列八营以逼之。
现代文：大业十年，贼将左孝友屯聚在蹲狗山，张须陀排列八座营寨进逼左孝友。
English: In the tenth year of the great undertaking, the thieves gathered Zuo Xiaoyou in Squatting Dog Mountain, and Zhang Suda arranged eight encampments to force Zuo Xiaoyou out.

古文：孝友窘迫，面缚来降。
现代文：左孝友困窘急迫，自己捆绑起来前来投降。
English: In desperation, Zuo Xiaotong tied himself up and came to surrender.

古文：其党解象、王良、郑大彪、李脘等众各万计，须陀平之，威振东夏。
现代文：其党羽解象、王良、郑大彪、李脘各拥兵以万计，张须陀将他们全部平定，威势震动东部中国。
English: His followers, Wang Liang, Zheng Dabiao and Li Xi, each had tens of thousands of followers. Zhang Suda subdued them all, shaking eastern China with his power.

古文：以功迁齐郡通守，领河南道十二郡黜陟讨捕大使。
现代文：因功升任齐郡通守，兼领河南道十二郡黜陟讨捕大使。
English: For his merits, he was promoted to the governor of Qi County, and also led the twelve counties of Henan Province to arrest the ambassador.

古文：俄而贼卢明月众十余万将寇河北，次祝阿。
现代文：不久，贼盗卢明月率领十多万人准备进犯河北，驻扎在祝阿。
English: Soon, the bandit Lu Mingyue led more than one hundred thousand people to prepare to invade Hebei and stationed in Zhua.

古文：须陀邀击，杀数千人。
现代文：张须陀率兵阻击，杀敌数千人。
English: Zhang Suda led the troops to block the attack, killing thousands of the enemy.

古文：贼吕明星、师仁泰、霍小汉等众各万余，扰济北，须陀击走之。
现代文：贼盗吕明星、师仁泰、霍小汉等各率一万多人，骚扰济北，张须陀率兵出战，贼兵逃走。
English: The bandits Lv Xingxing, Shi Rintai, Huo Xiaohan and others each led more than ten thousand people to harass Jibei, Zhang Suda led the soldiers to fight, and the bandits fled.

古文：寻将兵拒东郡贼翟让，前后三十余战，每破走之。
现代文：不久，率兵抗击东郡贼兵翟让，前后打了三十多仗，每次都大破贼兵。
English: Soon, he led his soldiers to fight against the bandits in Dong County, and fought more than 30 battles back and forth, each time defeating the bandits.

古文：转荣阳通守。
现代文：改任荥阳通守。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Shenyang.

古文：时李密说让取洛口仓，遂逼来荥阳。
现代文：这时，李密劝说翟让夺取洛口仓，于是就进逼荥阳。
English: At this time, Li Mi persuaded Yu to let him seize the Lokou warehouse, so he entered and forced Yuyang.

古文：须陀拒之，让惧而退，须陀乘之。
现代文：张须陀迎战翟让，翟让畏惧而退兵。张须陀乘机追击。
English: Zhang Suda fought against Zhang Zhen, but Zhang Zhen was afraid and withdrew. Zhang Suda took the opportunity to pursue Zhang Zhen.

古文：密先伏数千人邀击之，须陀败，被围，溃辄出，左右不能尽出，复入救之，往来数四，众皆败。
现代文：李密事先埋伏几千人狙击张须陀。张须陀战败被围，突破重围逃了出去，身边的人没有能都冲出来，就又杀入重围解救他们，来回四次，众人都被打败。
English: Li Mi ambushed several thousand people in advance to snipe at Zhang Suda. Zhang Suda was defeated and besieged, broke through the encirclement and escaped, the people around him could not all rush out, so he killed them again in the encirclement and rescued them, four times back and forth, everyone was defeated.

古文：乃仰天曰： 兵败如此，何面见天子乎！ 
现代文：张须陀就仰天叹息道 ：打仗败成这个样子，还有什么脸面见天子呢？ 
English: Zhang Suta looked up to heaven and sighed, "To be defeated in battle like this, what other face is there to see the Son of Heaven?"

古文：乃下马战死。
现代文：就下马战死。
English: He dismounted and died.

古文：因执至临川城下，使告城中云 帝崩 。
现代文：张须陀手下的士兵昼夜痛哭，数日哭声不止。
English: The soldiers under Zhang Suda cried bitterly day and night, and their cries continued for several days.

古文：子翊乃易其言，于是见害。
现代文：炀帝命令张须陀的儿子张元备总领父亲的兵马。
English: Emperor Yao ordered Zhang Suda's son, Zhang Yuan Bei, to lead his father's army.

古文：尧君素，魏郡汤阴人也。
现代文：张元备当时在齐郡，因与贼兵遭遇，竟然没有成行。尧君素，魏郡汤阴人。
English: At that time, Zhang Yuanbei was in Qi County, but he did not make the trip due to his encounter with the bandits. He was a native of Tangyin, Wei County.

古文：炀帝为晋王时，君素为左右。
现代文：隋炀帝做晋王的时候，尧君素在炀帝身边供职。
English: When the Emperor Sui and the Emperor Jintao were the kings of Jin, Jijun used to serve at the Emperor Jintao's side.

古文：帝嗣位，累迁鹰扬郎将。
现代文：炀帝继位，逐步升迁至鹰扬郎将。
English: Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, and was gradually promoted to Eagle Yang Lang general.

古文：大业末，从骁卫大将军屈突通拒义师于河东。
现代文：大业末年，跟随骁卫大将军屈突通在河东抗拒义军。
English: In the last years of the Taiei era, he followed General Nie Wei in resisting the rebels in Hedong.

古文：俄而通引兵南遁，置君素领河东通守。
现代文：很快，屈突通带领兵马南逃，留置尧君素代领河东通守。
English: Soon, Qu Du Tong led the soldiers and horses to flee south, leaving Yu Jun Su to lead the east of the river.

古文：义师遣将吕绍宗、韦义节等攻之不克。
现代文：义军派遣将军吕绍宗、韦义节等攻城，未能攻克。
English: The rebels sent generals such as Lü Shao Zong and Wei Yi Jie to attack the city, but failed to conquer it.

古文：及通军败，至城下呼之。
现代文：到了屈突通的军队被打败，屈突通到城下呼喊尧君素。
English: When the army of Qu Juntong arrived, it was defeated, and Qu Juntong went to the foot of the castle and shouted, "Shi Junsu!"

古文：君素见通，歔欷流涕，悲不自胜，左右皆哽咽。
现代文：尧君素见到屈突通，痛哭流涕，非常悲痛，身边的人都哽咽起来。
English: Xing Jun had seen Qu suddenly pass away, wept bitterly, was very sad, and people around him choked.

古文：通亦泣下沾襟，因说君素早降以取富贵。
现代文：屈突通也流下泪来，因而劝说尧君素早早投降以取富贵。
English: Qu Jutong also shed tears, so he persuaded Yao Jun to surrender early in order to get rich.

古文：君素以名义责之曰： 公纵不能远惭主上，公所乘马，即代王所赐也，公何面目乘之哉！ 
现代文：尧君素用君臣名义责备屈突通说： 你即使对主上不能感到羞愧，你所骑的马，就是代王赐给你的，你有何面目骑它呢？ 
English: Su Jun used to reproach Qu Zhutong in the name of a prince and minister, saying, "Even if you cannot be ashamed before the Lord, the horse you are riding was given to you by the king. What kind of face do you have riding it?

古文：通曰： 吁！
现代文：屈空通说 ：唉！
English: Kukutsu said: Alas!

古文：君素！
现代文：君素！
English: Kim Soo!

古文：我力屈而来。 
现代文：我是力量尽了而来的。 
English: I've come as far as I can.

古文：君素曰： 方今力犹未屈，何用多言！ 
现代文：尧君素说 ：如今你的力量还没有用尽，何必多说！ 
English: Zhai Junsu said: Now your strength has not been exhausted, why do you need to say more!

古文：通惭而退。
现代文：屈突通羞愧地退下了。
English: Qu Jutong retreated in shame.

古文：时围甚急，行李断绝。
现代文：当时，围攻非常紧急，音讯断绝。
English: At the time, the siege was so intense that communications were cut off.

古文：君素乃为木鹅，置表于颈，具论事势，浮之黄河，沿流而下。
现代文：尧君素就制作木鹅，把上表放在木鹅的脖颈中，详论事情的形势，漂浮在黄河中，顺流而下。
English: Su Jun used to make a wooden goose, put the upper table in the neck of the wooden goose, discuss the situation in detail, float in the Yellow River, and float down the river.

古文：河阳守者得之，达于东都。
现代文：河阳守卫得到木鹅，送达东都洛阳。
English: The wooden goose was given to the guards in the city of Heyang and delivered to the eastern capital of Luoyang.

古文：越王侗见而叹息，乃承制拜君素为金紫光禄大夫，密遣行人劳之。
现代文：越王侗见到上表而叹息，就秉承皇帝旨意授予尧君素金紫光禄大夫之职，秘密派遣使者慰劳尧君素。
English: Seeing the above table, the King of Yue sighed and, adhering to the emperor's will, conferred the position of the doctor of the gold and purple light to the jade jade jade jade, and secretly sent an envoy to comfort the jade jade jade.

古文：监门直阁庞玉、武卫将军皇甫无逸前后自东都归义，俱造城下，为陈利害。
现代文：监门直阁庞玉、武卫将军皇甫无逸先后自东都投奔义军，二人一起来到成下，向尧君素陈说利害。
English: The prison warden, Zhiaguan Pangyu, and the general of the imperial guard, Wang Fu Muxiyu, successively joined the rebel army from the east. The two of them came to Chengde together and expressed their interests to Zou Jun.

古文：朝廷又赐金券，待以不死。
现代文：朝廷又赐给他金券，答应免除死罪。
English: The court also gave him a golden ticket and promised to exempt him from the death penalty.

古文：君素卒无降心。
现代文：尧君素始终没有投降的意思。
English: Yu Jun never had any intention of surrendering.

古文：其妻又至城下，谓曰： 隋室已亡，何苦取祸？ 
现代文：他的妻子又来到城下，对他说： 隋朝已经灭亡，何必要自取灾祸？ 
English: His wife also came to the outskirts of the city and said to him: "The Sui Dynasty has already perished, why take the misfortune upon yourself?

古文：君素曰： 天下事非妇人所知。 
现代文：尧君素说： 天下之事不是女人所能知道的。 
English: Zou Jun always said, "A woman cannot know everything in the world."

古文：引弓射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：拉弓射其妻，其妻应声倒地。
English: He pulled a bow and shot his wife, who fell to the ground.

古文：君素亦知事必不济，每言及隋国，未尝不歔欷。
现代文：尧君素也知道事情必定难以成功，每次说起隋朝，无不痛哭流涕。
English: Xing Jun also knew that things would be difficult to succeed. Every time he spoke of the Sui Dynasty, he would weep bitterly.

古文：常谓将士曰： 吾是籓邸旧臣，至于大义，不得不死。
现代文：他经常对将士说： 我是诸侯王府第的老臣，说到大义，是不能不死。
English: He often said to his generals: I am an old minister of the princes and kings, and when it comes to justice, it is impossible not to die.

古文：今谷支数年，食尽，足知天下之事。
现代文：如今粮食够支应数年，把粮食吃完的时候，足以知天下之事的结局了。
English: Now there is enough grain to last several years, and when the grain is finished, it is enough to know the end of the world.

古文：必隋室倾败，天命有归，吾当断头以付诸君。 
现代文：隋朝若必定倾覆败亡，是天命有所归与，我应该砍下头来交给你们。 
English: If the Sui Dynasty must be overthrown and defeated, it is the destiny of heaven that I should cut off my head and give it to you.

古文：后颇得江都倾覆消息，又粮尽，男女相食，众心离骇。
现代文：后来，经常得到江都覆灭的消息，粮食又吃完了，人们是交换儿女而食，人心离散惊惧。
English: Later, they often received the news of the destruction of Jiangdu, the grain was finished, people exchanged children for food, and the hearts of the people were scattered and frightened.

古文：白虹降于府门，兵器之端，夜皆光见。
现代文：白虹降临府门之上，兵器的锋端，夜里都闪现光芒。
English: The white rainbow descends on the gate of the palace, the front end of the weapon flashes in the night.

古文：月余，君素为左右所害。
现代文：一个多月后，尧君素被身边的人杀害了。
English: More than a month later, Yan Junsu was killed by someone close to him.

