古文：项籍者，下相人也，字羽。
现代文：项籍，下相人，字羽。
English: A family name, a lower-ranking consort, and a crest.

古文：初起时，年二十四。
现代文：开始起兵时二十四岁。
English: He was twenty-four years old when he joined the army.

古文：其季父项梁，梁父即楚将项燕，为秦将王翦所戮者也。
现代文：他的叔父是项梁，项梁的父亲就是楚将项燕，被秦将王翦所杀的那个人。
English: His uncle is Xiang Liang. Xiang Liang's father is the Chu general Xiang Yan, who was killed by the Qin general Wang Xi.

古文：项氏世世为楚将，封於项，故姓项氏。
现代文：项氏世代为楚将，封在项地，所以姓项氏。
English: The generation of the Xiang clan was the Chu generals, sealed in the Xiang land, so the surname Xiang was born.

古文：项籍少时，学书不成，去。
现代文：项籍小时候，学习认字写字，没有学成。
English: When I was a child, I learned to read and write, but I didn't succeed.

古文：学剑，又不成。
现代文：放弃了学字，改学击剑，又没有学成。
English: He gave up studying calligraphy and switched to fencing, but he did not succeed.

古文：项梁怒之。
现代文：项梁很生他的气。
English: Xiang Liang was very angry with him.

古文：籍曰： 书足以记名姓而已。
现代文：项籍说： 字只不过用来记记姓名而已。
English: The article said: "The characters are just used to record names.

古文：剑一人敌，不足学，学万人敌。 
现代文：剑也只能抵敌一人，不值得学，要学能抵抗万人的。 
English: A sword can only be used against one enemy. It is not worth learning. One must learn to be able to resist everyone.

古文：於是项梁乃教籍兵法，籍大喜，略知其意，又不肯竟学。
现代文：于是项梁就教项籍兵法，项籍非常高兴，粗略地知道了兵法大意，但又不肯认真学完。
English: So Xiang Liang began to teach Xiang Zi the Art of War. Xiang Zi was very happy, he knew the general idea of the Art of War roughly, but he did not want to finish studying it seriously.

古文：项梁尝有栎阳逮，乃请蕲狱掾曹咎书抵栎阳狱掾司马欣，以故事得已。
现代文：项梁曾因栎阳罪案受到牵连，就请蕲县狱掾曹咎写信给栎阳狱掾司马欣，因此事情得到了结。
English: Xiang Liang had been implicated in the Fenyang crime, so he asked Fenyang County Prison Warden Cao Wei to write to Fenyang Prison Warden Ma Xin, so the matter was concluded.

古文：项梁杀人，与籍避仇於吴中。
现代文：项梁杀了人，和项籍到吴中躲避仇家。
English: Xiang Liang killed someone, and Xiang Zi went to Wuzhong Middle School to avoid his enemies.

古文：吴中贤士大夫皆出项梁下。
现代文：吴中有才能的士大夫都比不上项梁。
English: All the talented scholars and magistrates in Wu are no match for Xiang Liang.

古文：每吴中有大繇役及丧，项梁常为主办，阴以兵法部勒宾客及子弟，以是知其能。
现代文：每当吴中有大规模的繇役和丧葬，项梁常常主持办理，暗中用兵法部署调度宾客和子弟，因此了解了每个人的能力。
English: Whenever there were large-scale funerals and funerals in Wuzhong, Xiang Liang often presided over the proceedings, secretly using military methods to deploy and dispatch guests and children, thus understanding the ability of each person.

古文：秦始皇帝游会稽，渡浙江，梁与籍俱观。
现代文：秦始皇帝巡游会稽，渡过浙江，项梁和项籍一同去观看。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang's parade passed through Zhejiang, and Xiang Liang and Xiang Zhi went to watch it together.

古文：籍曰： 彼可取而代也。 
现代文：项籍说： 那个皇帝，我可以取而代之。 
English: That emperor, I can replace him.

古文：梁掩其口，曰： 毋妄言，族矣！ 
现代文：项梁捂住他的嘴，说： 不许胡说八道，当心全族要杀头啊！ 
English: Xiang Liang covered his mouth and said, "Don't talk nonsense, beware that the whole family will be killed!"

古文：梁以此奇籍。
现代文：项梁因此觉得项籍不同于一般人。
English: Therefore, Cao Liang felt that he was different from ordinary people.

古文：籍长八尺馀，力能扛鼎，才气过人，虽吴中子弟皆已惮籍矣。
现代文：项籍身高八尺有余，力能举鼎，才气过人，吴中子弟都已经敬畏他了。
English: He was more than eight feet tall, with great strength and talent. Wu Zhongzhi's younger brothers were already in awe of him.

古文：秦二世元年七月，陈胜等起大泽中。
现代文：秦二世元年七月，陈涉等人在大泽乡起义。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Qin II, Chen Zang and others revolted in Osawa Township.

古文：其九月，会稽守通谓梁曰： 江西皆反，此亦天亡秦之时也。
现代文：这一年九月，会稽郡守殷通对项梁说 江西都造反了，这也是上天灭亡秦朝的时候。
English: In September of that year, the county auditor Yin Tong told Xiang Liang that Jiangxi had rebelled, which was also the time when the Qin Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：吾闻先即制人，後则为人所制。
现代文：我听说先发则能制人，后发则为人所制。
English: I've heard that if you start first, you can beat people, but if you start later, people will beat you.

古文：吾欲发兵，使公及桓楚将。 
现代文：我想发兵，派你和桓楚带领。 
English: I want to send an army and send you and Kanchu to lead it.

古文：是时桓楚亡在泽中。
现代文：当时桓楚逃亡到泽中。
English: At that time, Kancho fled to Sawacho.

古文：梁曰： 桓楚亡，人莫知其处，独籍知之耳。 
现代文：项梁说： 桓楚亡匿在外，人们不知道他的下落，只有项籍知道。 
English: Xiang Liang said: Huan Chu died in hiding. People don't know his whereabouts, only Xiang Qi knows.

古文：梁乃出，诫籍持剑居外待。
现代文：项梁走出来，吩咐项籍持剑在外面等候。
English: Xiang Liang came out and ordered Xiang Qi to wait outside with a sword.

古文：梁复入，与守坐，曰： 请召籍，使受命召桓楚。 守曰： 诺。 
现代文：项梁又走进去，与郡守一块儿坐着。项梁说： 请允许我叫项籍进来，让他接受命令召回桓楚。 郡守说： 好吧。 
English: Xiang Liang went in again and sat with the county magistrate. Xiang Liang said, "Please allow me to call Xiang Zi to come in and have him accept the order to recall Huan Chu." The county magistrate said, "Okay."

古文：梁召籍入。
现代文：项梁招呼项籍进来。
English: Xiang Liang called Xiang Zheng to come in.

古文：须臾，梁眴籍曰： 可行矣！ 
现代文：不一会儿，项梁使眼色给项籍说： 可以行动了！ 
English: After a while, Xiang Liang winked at Xiang Qi and said, "It's time to act!"

古文：於是籍遂拔剑斩守头。
现代文：于是项籍拔出剑来砍掉了郡守的脑袋。
English: So Xiang pulled out his sword and chopped off the head of the county governor.

古文：项梁持守头，佩其印绶。
现代文：项梁拿着郡守的脑袋，身上系上郡守的官印。
English: Cao Liang held the head of the county magistrate and wore the official seal of the county magistrate.

古文：门下大惊，扰乱，籍所击杀数十百人。
现代文：郡守的侍从护卫大为惊慌，一片混乱，项籍杀死了百十来人。
English: The attendants of the county governor's escort panicked, there was chaos, and about a hundred people were killed.

古文：一府中皆慴伏，莫敢起。
现代文：全府中的人都慌惧畏服，没有人敢动手反抗。
English: People throughout the prefecture were panicked and cowed, and no one dared to resist.

古文：梁乃召故所知豪吏，谕以所为起大事，遂举吴中兵。
现代文：项梁就召集昔日所熟悉的有胆识的豪吏，把所要做的起兵反秦这件事情向大家讲清楚，于是征集吴中士卒起义。
English: Cao Liang called together the courageous officials he was familiar with in the past and made it clear to everyone what he wanted to do, which was to raise an army against the Qin Dynasty. He then recruited Sergeant Wu to lead the uprising.

古文：使人收下县，得精兵八千人。
现代文：派人搜罗下属各县丁壮，得到精兵八千人。
English: He sent someone to collect the subordinate counties of Ding Zhuang, and got eight thousand elite soldiers.

古文：梁部署吴中豪杰为校尉、候、司马。
现代文：项梁安排吴中豪杰为校尉、候、司马。
English: Cao Liang arranged for Wu Zhonghao Jie to be the school captain, waiter, and secretary.

古文：有一人不得用，自言於梁。
现代文：有一人没有得到任用，自己去向项梁申述。
English: One person did not get the appointment and went to Xiang Liang to complain.

古文：梁曰： 前时某丧使公主某事，不能办，以此不任用公。 
现代文：项梁说： 前些时候有一丧事，让你主办一件事，你不能办，因此不任用你。 
English: Xiang Liang said: Some time ago, there was a funeral, and you were asked to host an event, but you can't do it, so I won't appoint you.

古文：众乃皆伏。
现代文：于是大家都很佩服项梁。
English: As a result, everyone admired Xiang Liang.

古文：於是梁为会稽守，籍为裨将，徇下县。
现代文：项梁为会稽郡守，项籍为裨将。镇抚下属县邑。
English: Xiang Liang is the county magistrate of the association, and Xiang Zeki is the county magistrate. Zhenfu is a subordinate county town.

古文：广陵人召平於是为陈王徇广陵，未能下。
现代文：广陵人召平这时为陈王略地广陵，没有降服。
English: At this time, the Guangling people called for peace for Chen Wangliang's Guangling, but did not surrender.

古文：闻陈王败走，秦兵又且至，乃渡江矫陈王命，拜梁为楚王上柱国。
现代文：听说陈王战败逃走，秦兵又将要到达，就渡江假托陈王的命令，拜项梁为楚王的上柱国。
English: Hearing that King Chen had been defeated and fled, and that the Qin soldiers were about to arrive, they crossed the river under the pretense of carrying out King Chen's orders, and worshipped Xiang Liang as the pillar state of King Chu.

古文：曰： 江东已定，急引兵西击秦。 
现代文：召平说： 江东已经平定，赶快引兵西进攻打秦军。 
English: Zhao Ping said, "The eastern part of the Yangtze River has been pacified. Quickly bring in troops to attack the west and fight the Qin Army."

古文：项梁乃以八千人渡江而西。
现代文：项梁就以八千人渡江向西进发。
English: So Xiang Liang set out west with eight thousand people to cross the river.

古文：闻陈婴已下东阳，使使欲与连和俱西。
现代文：他听说陈婴已经攻下东阳，便派遣使者，想要与陈婴联合西进。
English: When he heard that Chen Ying had captured Dongyang, he sent an envoy to join Chen Ying and go west.

古文：陈婴者，故东阳令史，居县中，素信谨，称为长者。
现代文：陈婴这个人，原来是东阳令史，在县里一向诚实谨慎，人们称之为忠厚长者。
English: Chen Ying this person, originally Dongyang Lingshi, has always been honest and prudent in the county, and people call him a loyal elder.

古文：东阳少年杀其令，相聚数千人，欲置长，无適用，乃请陈婴。
现代文：东阳的青年杀死了他们的县令，聚合了几千人，想要选举一个首领，没有找到可用的人，就请陈婴来担任。
English: The youth of Dongyang killed their county magistrate, gathered several thousand people, and wanted to elect a leader. When they couldn't find anyone suitable, they asked Chen Ying to take on the role.

古文：婴谢不能，遂彊立婴为长，县中从者得二万人。
现代文：陈婴推辞说不能胜任，大家就强行推立他做首领，县中随从的有二万人。
English: Chen Ying resigned, saying he was not competent, and everyone forced him to be the leader, with twenty thousand followers in the county.

古文：少年欲立婴便为王，异军苍头特起。
现代文：青年们打算推举陈婴就便称王，士兵为了同其他各路军队相区别，头上裹以青巾，表示异军突起。
English: When the young men wanted to promote Chen Jiao, they called him the king. In order to distinguish themselves from the other armies, the soldiers wrapped their heads in blue scarves to show that they were a separate army.

古文：陈婴母谓婴曰： 自我为汝家妇，未尝闻汝先古之有贵者。
现代文：陈婴的母亲对陈婴说： 自从我做了陈家的媳妇，未曾听说你的前辈有过高官贵爵。
English: Chen Jiao's mother said to Chen Jiao: Since I became the daughter-in-law of the Chen family, I have never heard that your predecessors had high-ranking officials and noblemen.

古文：今暴得大名，不祥。
现代文：现在突然得到很大的名声，不是好兆头。
English: Now all of a sudden it's getting a lot of notoriety, which is not a good sign.

古文：不如有所属，事成犹得封侯，事败易以亡，非世所指名也。 
现代文：不如有所归属，事情成功了，犹能得到封侯，事情失败了，也容易逃脱，因为并不受世人瞩目。 
English: It's better to have something to belong to. If something succeeds, you can still get a fiefdom. If something fails, it's easy to escape, because it doesn't attract the attention of the world.

古文：婴乃不敢为王。
现代文：因此陈婴不敢为王。
English: Therefore, Chen Ying did not dare to become king.

古文：谓其军吏曰： 项氏世世将家，有名於楚。
现代文：对他的军吏说： 项家世代为将，有名于楚。
English: He said to his officers, "The Xiang family have been generals for generations, and they are famous in Chu.

古文：今欲举大事，将非其人，不可。
现代文：现在想要干成大事，将帅不得其人不行。
English: If you want to achieve great things now, you have to be the best.

古文：我倚名族，亡秦必矣。 
现代文：我们依附名门大族，一定能使秦朝灭亡。 
English: By adhering to the great noble families, we can surely bring about the downfall of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：於是众从其言，以兵属项梁。
现代文：于是大家听从他的话，把军队归属项梁。
English: So everyone listened to his words and assigned the army to Xiang Liang.

古文：项梁渡淮，黥布、蒲将军亦以兵属焉。
现代文：项梁渡过淮水，黥布、蒲将军也率军归附。
English: Xiang Liang crossed Huai Shui, and General Zeng Bu and General Pu also led their armies to annexation.

古文：凡六七万人，军下邳。
现代文：项梁共有六七万人，驻扎在下邳。
English: There were a total of 670,000 people in Xiangliang, stationed in the lower moat.

古文：当是时，秦嘉已立景驹为楚王，军彭城东，欲距项梁。
现代文：这时，秦嘉已立景驹为楚王，驻扎彭城东面，想要抵挡项梁。
English: At this time, Qin Jia had set up Jingyu as the king of Chu, stationed in the east of Pengcheng, and wanted to resist Xiang Liang.

古文：项梁谓军吏曰： 陈王先首事，战不利，未闻所在。
现代文：项梁对军吏说： 陈王首先起事，作战不利，不知道下落。
English: Cao Liang said to the military officials: Chen Wang was the first to start the war, the war was unfavorable, and he did not know where he was.

古文：今秦嘉倍陈王而立景驹，逆无道。 
现代文：现在秦嘉背叛陈王而立景驹，大逆不道。 
English: Now Qin Jia has betrayed Chen Wang and set up Jingyao, which is an act of high treason.

古文：乃进兵击秦嘉。
现代文：项梁就进兵攻打秦嘉。
English: Cao Liang marched in and attacked Qin Jia.

古文：秦嘉军败走，追之至胡陵。
现代文：秦嘉的军队败逃，项梁追到胡陵。
English: Qin Jia's army was defeated and fled, and Xiang Liang chased them to Huling.

古文：嘉还战一日，嘉死，军降。
现代文：秦嘉回军打了一天，秦嘉阵亡，士卒投降。
English: Qin Jia Hui's army fought for one day, Qin Jia was killed, and his soldiers surrendered.

古文：景驹走死梁地。
现代文：景驹逃走，死在梁地。
English: Jingyao fled and died in Liangdi.

古文：项梁已并秦嘉军，军胡陵，将引军而西。
现代文：项梁已经合并了秦嘉的军队，驻扎在胡陵，将要引军西进。
English: Cao Liang has merged with Qin Jia's army, stationed in Huling, and will lead the army westward.

古文：章邯军至栗，项梁使别将硃鸡石、馀樊君与战。
现代文：章邯的军队到达栗县，项梁派别将朱鸡石、余樊君和他交战。
English: Zhang Ye's army arrived in Li County, and Xiang Liang's faction fought Zhu Jishi and Yu Xiqun.

古文：馀樊君死。硃鸡石军败，亡走胡陵。
现代文：余樊君战死，朱鸡石军败，逃跑到胡陵。
English: Yu Yingjun was killed in battle, Zhu Jishi's army was defeated, and he fled to Huling.

古文：项梁乃引兵入薛，诛鸡石。
现代文：项梁便带兵进入薛县，杀了朱鸡石。
English: Cao Liang then led soldiers into Xue County and killed Zhu Jishi.

古文：项梁前使项羽别攻襄城，襄城坚守不下。
现代文：项梁在这之前派项羽另率一军攻打襄城，襄城坚守不降。
English: Prior to this, Cao Liang sent Cao Yu to lead another army to attack Xiangcheng, and Xiangcheng held out.

古文：已拔，皆阬之。还报项梁。
现代文：攻克以后，全部坑杀了守城军民，回来报告项梁。
English: After the conquest, he killed all the soldiers and civilians guarding the city, and returned to report to Zhang Liang.

古文：项梁闻陈王定死，召诸别将会薛计事。
现代文：项梁听说陈王确实死了，召集各路将领会合到薛县商讨大事。
English: When Cao Liang heard that Chen Wang had indeed died, he called a meeting of generals from all walks of life to Xue County to discuss the matter.

古文：此时沛公亦起沛，往焉。
现代文：这时沛公也起兵于沛，前往薛县。
English: At this time, Pei Gong also raised an army and went to Xue County.

古文：居鄛人范增，年七十，素居家，好奇计，往说项梁曰： 陈胜败固当。
现代文：居鄛人范增，七十岁了，一向住在家里，喜欢奇策妙计。他去游说项梁说： 陈胜失败本来是应该的。
English: Fan Zeng, a 70-year-old resident of Jiuyuan, who has always lived at home and is fond of conjuring up schemes, went to lobby Xiang Liang and said: Chen Sheng's failure was inevitable.

古文：夫秦灭六国，楚最无罪。
现代文：秦灭六国，楚国最没有过错。
English: Qin destroyed six countries, and Chu had the fewest mistakes.

古文：自怀王入秦不反，楚人怜之至今，故楚南公曰 楚虽三户，亡秦必楚 也。
现代文：自从楚怀王入秦不返，楚人至今还想念他。所以楚南公说 楚虽三户，亡秦必楚 。
English: Ever since King Chu Huai entered Qin and never returned, the people of Chu still miss him. Therefore, Chu Nankong said, "Although Chu has three households, Qin must die."

古文：今陈胜首事，不立楚後而自立，其势不长。
现代文：如今陈胜首先起事，没有立楚国的后裔而自立为王，他的局面不会长久。
English: Now Chen Sheng is the first to rise up, and without the descendants of the state of Chu to establish himself as king, his situation will not last long.

古文：今君起江东，楚蜂午之将皆争附君者，以君世世楚将，为能复立楚之後也。 
现代文：现在你起兵江东，楚地将领有如群蜂纵横，都争先恐后地归附你的缘故，是因为项家世代为楚将，能够再立楚国的后裔。 
English: Now that you have raised an army to the east of the river, the generals of Chu are like a swarm of bees, all scrambling to join you. This is because the Xiang family has been the generals of Chu for generations, and can re-establish the descendants of the country of Chu.

古文：於是项梁然其言，乃求楚怀王孙心民间，为人牧羊，立以为楚怀王，从民所望也。
现代文：项梁认为他说的对，就在民间寻访到了楚怀王的孙子心，他在给人放羊，项梁立他为楚怀王，顺从人民的愿望。
English: Xiang Liang thought that what he said was right, and he searched for the grandson of King Chu Huai among the people. He was herding sheep for people, and Xiang Liang set him up as King Chu Huai, obeying the wishes of the people.

古文：陈婴为楚上柱国，封五县，与怀王都盱台。
现代文：陈婴做楚上柱国，封地有五个县，和楚怀王一起，建都盱台。
English: Chen Zhi was the Chu Shangzhu country, the fief had five counties, and together with Chu Hui Wang, he built the capital Xingtai.

古文：项梁自号为武信君。
现代文：项梁自称为武信君。
English: Xiang Liang calls himself Wu Xinjun.

古文：居数月，引兵攻亢父，与齐田荣、司马龙且军救东阿，大破秦军於东阿。
现代文：过了几个月，项梁带兵攻打亢父，与齐国田荣、司马龙且的军队一起援救东阿，在东阿大败秦军。
English: A few months later, Xiang Liang led an army to attack his father, and together with the army of Qi Guotian Rong and Sima Longqi, he rescued Dong'a and defeated the Qin army in Dong'a.

古文：田荣即引兵归，逐其王假。
现代文：田荣率军回到旧地，赶跑了齐王田假。
English: Tian Rong led the army back to the old place and chased away Qi Wang Tian Fu.

古文：假亡走楚。
现代文：田假逃到楚国。
English: Tanaka fled to Chu.

古文：假相田角亡走赵。
现代文：田假的相国田角逃到赵国。
English: Tianfui's brother-in-law, Tian Jiao, fled to Zhao.

古文：角弟田间故齐将，居赵不敢归。
现代文：田角的弟弟田间原来是齐国的将领，留在赵国不敢回去。
English: Tian's younger brother, Tianma, was originally a general in Qi, and he did not dare to go back to Zhao.

古文：田荣立田儋子市为齐王。
现代文：田荣立了田儋的儿子田市为齐王。
English: Tian Rong made Tian Yao's son, Tian Shi, the king of Qi.

古文：项梁已破东阿下军，遂追秦军。
现代文：项梁已经打垮了东阿方面的秦军，就追击。
English: Cao Liang had already defeated the Qin army on the East African side, so he pursued them.

古文：数使使趣齐兵，欲与俱西。
现代文：屡次派遣使者催促齐国军队，打算与它联兵西进。
English: He repeatedly sent emissaries to urge the Qi army, intending to march westward with it.

古文：田荣曰： 楚杀田假，赵杀田角、田间，乃发兵。 
现代文：田荣说： 楚国杀了田假，赵国杀了田角、田间，我就出兵。 
English: Tian Rong said, "Chu killed Tian Fu, Zhao killed Tian Kok and Tian Ma, so I sent troops."

古文：项梁曰： 田假为与国之王，穷来从我，不忍杀之。 
现代文：项梁说： 田假是楚国友好国家的国王，走投无路才来依附我，不忍心杀他。 
English: Cao Liang said, "Tan Guo is the king of a friendly country of Chu. He came to me when he was desperate, and I couldn't bear to kill him.

古文：赵亦不杀田角、田间以市於齐。
现代文：赵国也不杀田角、田间作为与齐交换的条件。
English: Zhao was also unwilling to use the killing of fields and fields to make deals with Qi.

古文：齐遂不肯发兵助楚。
现代文：于是齐国不肯发兵帮助楚国。
English: As a result, Qi refused to send troops to help Chu.

古文：项梁使沛公及项羽别攻城阳，屠之。
现代文：项梁派沛公和项羽另率一支军队攻打城阳，屠毁了县城。
English: Cao Liang sent Pei Gong and Cao Yu to lead another army to attack Chengyang and destroyed the county seat.

古文：西破秦军濮阳东，秦兵收入濮阳。
现代文：向西在濮阳东面击破了秦军，秦军收兵进入濮阳。
English: To the west, the Qin army was defeated in the east of Fenyang, and the Qin army withdrew into Fenyang.

古文：沛公、项羽乃攻定陶。
现代文：沛公、项羽就攻打定陶。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu attacked Ding Tao.

古文：定陶未下，去，西略地至雝丘，大破秦军，斩李由。
现代文：没有攻下定陶，率军离去，西进略地，到达雍丘，大破秦军，杀了李由。
English: Did not capture Dingtao, led the army to leave, advanced slightly westward, reached Yongqiu, defeated the Qin army, and killed Li Yu.

古文：还攻外黄，外黄未下。
现代文：回军攻打外黄，没有攻下来。
English: The Hui attacked Waihuang, but failed to take it.

古文：项梁起东阿，西，至定陶，再破秦军，项羽等又斩李由，益轻秦，有骄色。
现代文：项梁自东阿出发，向西进军，等到到达定陶，又一次打败秦军，项羽等又杀了李由，因此，项梁越来越轻视秦军，面有骄色。
English: Xiang Liang set out from Dong'a and marched westward, and when he reached Dingtao, he defeated the Qin army again, and Xiang Yu and others killed Li Yu. Therefore, Xiang Liang despised the Qin army more and more, and his face was proud.

古文：宋义乃谏项梁曰： 战胜而将骄卒惰者败。
现代文：宋义就劝告项梁说： 打了胜仗而将领骄傲、士卒懈怠的就要失败。
English: Song Yi advised Xiang Liang: "If you have won the war, but your generals are proud and your soldiers are slack, you will fail.

古文：今卒少惰矣，秦兵日益，臣为君畏之。 
现代文：现在士卒稍有懈怠，秦兵日益增多，我替你担心。 
English: Now the soldiers are slacking a little, and the Qin soldiers are increasing day by day. I'm worried about you.

古文：项梁弗听。
现代文：项梁不听劝告。
English: Xiang Liang did not listen to the advice.

古文：乃使宋义使於齐。
现代文：就派宋义出使齐国。
English: So Song Yi sent an envoy to Qi.

古文：道遇齐使者高陵君显，曰： 公将见武信君乎？ 
现代文：路上遇到齐国使者高陵君显，问他： 你将要去见武信君吗？ 
English: On the way, he met Gao Ling Junxuan, the envoy of the State of Qi, and asked him: Are you going to see Wu Xinjun?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：回答说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 臣论武信君军必败。
现代文：宋义说： 我断定武信君的军队一定失败。
English: Song Yi said: I conclude that the army of Wuxin must have failed.

古文：公徐行即免死，疾行则及祸。 
现代文：你慢走就可以免死，快走就要遭殃。 
English: If you walk slowly, you can avoid death, but if you walk fast, you will suffer.

古文：秦果悉起兵益章邯，击楚军，大破之定陶，项梁死。
现代文：秦果然发动全部兵力增援章邯，攻打楚军，大破楚军于定陶，项梁战死。
English: Qin really launched all the troops to reinforce Zhang Ye, attacked the Chu army, defeated the Chu army in Dingtao, and Xiang Liang died in battle.

古文：沛公、项羽去外黄攻陈留，陈留坚守不能下。
现代文：沛公、项羽离开外黄攻打陈留，陈留坚兵固守，不能攻下。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu left Waiguang to attack Chen Liu, but Chen Liu's soldiers held fast and could not be captured.

古文：沛公、项羽相与谋曰： 今项梁军破，士卒恐。 
现代文：沛公、项羽互相商量说： 如今项梁的军队垮了，士卒恐惧。 
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu consulted with each other and said: Now Xiang Liang's army has collapsed, and the soldiers are afraid.

古文：乃与吕臣军俱引兵而东。
现代文：于是就领兵同吕臣的军队一起向东进发。
English: Therefore, he led his soldiers to march eastward together with the army of Lü Chen.

古文：吕臣军彭城东，项羽军彭城西，沛公军砀。
现代文：吕臣驻扎在彭城东面，项羽驻扎在彭城西面，沛公驻扎在砀。
English: Lv Chen was stationed in the east of Pengcheng, Xiang Yu was stationed in the west of Pengcheng, and Pei Gong was stationed in Zhuo.

古文：章邯已破项梁军，则以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河击赵，大破之。
现代文：章邯已经打垮了项梁的军队，以为楚地的敌人不用担心了，就渡过黄河攻打赵地，大破赵军。
English: Zhang Ye had already defeated Xiang Liang's army. Thinking that the enemy in Chu had nothing to worry about, he crossed the Yellow River to attack Zhao Di and defeated Zhao's army.

古文：当此时，赵歇为王，陈馀为将，张耳为相，皆走入钜鹿城。
现代文：这个时候，赵歇为赵王，陈馀为将，张耳为相，都跑进了巨鹿城。
English: At this time, Zhao Xie was the king of Zhao, Chen Yu was the general, and Zhang Er was the official, and they all ran into the Giant Deer City.

古文：章邯令王离、涉间围钜鹿，章邯军其南，筑甬道而输之粟。
现代文：章邯命令王离、涉间围攻巨鹿，章邯驻扎在巨鹿南面，修筑甬道为王、涉军队输送粮食。
English: Zhang Ye ordered Wang Li and Wanzhong to besiege the giant deer. Zhang Ye was stationed in the south of the giant deer, building a road for Wang and the army to transport grain.

古文：陈馀为将，将卒数万人而军钜鹿之北，此所谓河北之军也。
现代文：陈馀作为将领，统率士卒数万人驻扎在巨鹿的北面，这就是所说的河北之军。
English: As a general, Chen Yu led tens of thousands of soldiers stationed in the north of the giant deer, which is called the army of Hebei.

古文：楚兵已破於定陶，怀王恐，从盱台之彭城，并项羽、吕臣军自将之。
现代文：楚军在定陶打了败仗，楚怀王很恐惧，从盱台前往彭城，合并了项羽、吕臣的军队亲自统率。
English: The Chu army was defeated in the Battle of Dingtao. King Chu Huai was very afraid and traveled from Xingtai to Pengcheng, where he joined forces with Xiang Yu and personally led Lv Chen's army.

古文：以吕臣为司徒，以其父吕青为令尹。
现代文：以吕臣为司徒，用他的父亲叶青为令尹。
English: He took Lv Chen as his disciple and his father Ye Qing as his regent.

古文：以沛公为砀郡长，封为武安侯，将砀郡兵。
现代文：以沛公为砀郡长，封为武安侯，统率砀郡的军队。
English: With Pei Gong as the governor of Handan County and Wu An Hou as the vassal, he led the army of Handan County.

古文：初，宋义所遇齐使者高陵君显在楚军，见楚王曰： 宋义论武信君之军必败，居数日，军果败。
现代文：以前宋义所遇到的齐国使者高陵君显还在楚国的军队里，他见到楚怀王说： 宋义断定武信君的军队一定失败，过了几天，他的军队果然失败了。
English: Song Yi had previously met Gao Ling Junxian, an emissary of the State of Qi, who was still in the army of the State of Chu. When he saw King Chu Huai, he said, "Song Yi concluded that the army of King Wuxin must have failed. A few days later, his army did indeed fail."

古文：兵未战而先见败徵，此可谓知兵矣。 
现代文：军队没有开战而先看到了失败的征兆，这可说是懂得军事了。 
English: The army did not go to war, but first saw the signs of defeat, which can be said to understand the military.

古文：王召宋义与计事而大说之，因置以为上将军，项羽为鲁公，为次将，范增为末将，救赵。
现代文：楚怀王召见宋义，和他商量事情，大为高兴，因此委任为上将军，项羽为鲁公，担任次将，范增为末将，去援救赵国。
English: King Chu Huai summoned Song Yi to discuss the matter with him, and was very pleased. Therefore, he appointed him as the senior general, Xiang Yu as the deputy general, and Fan Zeng as the last general to rescue Zhao.

古文：诸别将皆属宋义，号为卿子冠军。
现代文：各路别将都统属于宋义，宋义号为卿子冠军。
English: All the road races belong to Song Yi, and Song Yi is the champion.

古文：行至安阳，留四十六日不进。
现代文：走到安阳，停留四十六天不前进。
English: He walked to Anyang and stayed there for forty-six days.

古文：项羽曰： 吾闻秦军围赵王钜鹿，疾引兵渡河，楚击其外，赵应其内，破秦军必矣。 宋义曰： 不然。
现代文：项羽说： 我听说秦军把赵王围在巨鹿，赶快带兵渡河，楚军从外面攻打，赵军在内响应，一定能打垮秦军。 宋义说： 不是的。
English: Xiang Yu said, "I heard that the Qin Army encircled King Zhao in the Giant Deer, and quickly took the soldiers across the river. The Chu Army attacked from the outside, and the Zhao Army responded from within, which will surely defeat the Qin Army." Song Yi said, "No."

古文：夫搏牛之虻不可以破虮虱。今秦攻赵，战胜则兵罢，我承其敝；不胜，则我引兵鼓行而西，必举秦矣。
现代文：咬牛的牛虻不能伤害虱子，现在秦军攻打赵军，打胜了则兵疲力尽，我们乘秦军疲惫；打不胜，我们就率领军队鸣鼓西进，一定打垮秦军。
English: The calf that bites the ox cannot hurt the mule. Now the Qin Army is attacking the Zhao Army. If the Qin Army wins, the soldiers will be exhausted. We are tired of the Qin Army. If we do not win, we will lead the army to march westward with drums, and we will definitely defeat the Qin Army.

古文：故不如先斗秦赵。
现代文：所以不如先让秦、赵相斗。
English: So let Qin and Zhao fight it out first.

古文：夫被坚执锐，义不如公；坐而运策，公不如义。 
现代文：身披甲胄，手执利器，冲锋陷阵，宋义不如你；坐下来运筹划策，你不如宋义。 
English: Wearing armor, holding a sharp weapon, charging into battle, Song Yi is not as good as you; sitting down to plan operations, you are not as good as Song Yi.

古文：因下令军中曰： 猛如虎，很如羊，贪如狼，彊不可使者，皆斩之。 
现代文：因此向军中下令说： 凶猛如虎，狠戾如羊，贪婪如狼，倔强不听指挥的人，一律斩首。 
English: Therefore, he issued an order to the troops: "Behead anyone who is ferocious like a tiger, cruel like a sheep, greedy like a wolf, or stubborn and disobeys orders."

古文：乃遣其子宋襄相齐，身送之至无盐，饮酒高会。
现代文：宋义又派遣他的儿子宋襄去辅助齐国，亲自送他到无盐，摆酒设筵，大会宾客。
English: Song Yi also sent his son Song Xiang to assist Qi Guo, personally sending him to the salt-free, wine-serving, and banquet guests.

古文：天寒大雨，士卒冻饥。
现代文：天寒大雨，士卒冻饿交加。
English: The weather was cold and rainy, and the soldiers were cold and hungry.

古文：项羽曰： 将戮力而攻秦，久留不行。
现代文：项羽说： 本来打算并力攻秦，却长期停留不进。
English: Xiang Yu said: I originally planned to attack Qin together, but I couldn't advance for a long time.

古文：今岁饥民贫，士卒食芋菽，军无见粮，乃饮酒高会，不引兵渡河因赵食，与赵并力攻秦，乃曰 承其敝 。
现代文：现在年荒岁饥，人民贫困，士卒只吃半升豆子，军中没有存粮，宋义却还设酒宴，会宾客，不率领军队渡河就地取用赵国的粮食，而说什么 等待秦军疲惫 。
English: Now the years are barren, the people are poor, the soldiers only eat half a liter of beans, and there is no grain stored in the army. However, Song Yi still held a wine banquet, invited guests, and did not lead the army to cross the river to use the grain of Zhao on the spot, but said that he was waiting for the Qin army to get tired.

古文：夫以秦之彊，攻新造之赵，其势必举赵。
现代文：以秦那样强大的兵力，进攻新建立的赵国，形势发展的结果必定是秦军打垮赵国的军队。
English: With such a powerful army as Qin attacking the newly established Zhao state, the development of the situation will surely result in the Qin army defeating the army of Zhao state.

古文：赵举而秦彊，何敝之承！
现代文：赵国的军队被打垮了，而秦军更加强大，还有什么疲惫的机会可乘！
English: Zhao's army was defeated, while Qin's army was more powerful. What a chance to take advantage of fatigue!

古文：且国兵新破，王坐不安席，埽境内而专属於将军，国家安危，在此一举。
现代文：而且楚军最近被打败，国王坐不安席，把国内的所有兵力都集中起来统属于上将军，国家安危，在此一举。
English: Moreover, the Chu army was recently defeated, and the king did not sit idly by, but concentrated all the troops in the country and subordinated them to the general. The country's safety was in danger.

古文：今不恤士卒而徇其私，非社稷之臣。 
现代文：如今不体恤士卒，而徇情营私，不是与国家同休共戚之臣。 
English: Today, they do not feel sorry for their subordinates, but for themselves. They do not share the same fate as the country.

古文：项羽晨朝上将军宋义，即其帐中斩宋义头，出令军中曰： 宋义与齐谋反楚，楚王阴令羽诛之。 
现代文：项羽早晨参见上将军宋义，就在他的帐幕中割下了宋义的脑袋，出来发令军中说： 宋义和齐国阴谋反楚，楚王秘密命令我杀死他。 
English: In the morning, Xiang Yu went to General Song Yi, cut off Song Yi's head in his tent, and issued an order to the army, saying, "Song Yi and the State of Qi are plotting against Chu, and King Chu has secretly ordered me to kill him."

古文：当是时，诸将皆慴服，莫敢枝梧。
现代文：这时，将领们都恐惧屈服，没有敢抗拒的。
English: At this time, the generals were afraid to give in and did not dare to resist.

古文：皆曰： 首立楚者，将军家也。
现代文：都说： 创建楚国的，是将军一家。
English: They all say: It was the general's family that founded the state of Chu.

古文：今将军诛乱。 
现代文：现在又是将军处死了叛乱的人。 
English: Now it's the generals who are executing the rebels.

古文：乃相与共立羽为假上将军。
现代文：将领们就共同推立项羽为代理上将军。
English: The generals jointly promoted Xiang Yu to acting general.

古文：使人追宋义子，及之齐，杀之。
现代文：派人去追宋义的儿子，在齐国赶上了，杀死了他。
English: He sent someone to chase after Song Yi's son, caught up with him in Qi Province, and killed him.

古文：使桓楚报命於怀王。
现代文：项羽派桓楚向楚怀王报告。
English: Cao Yu sent Kan Chu to report to King Chu Huai.

古文：怀王因使项羽为上将军，当阳君、蒲将军皆属项羽。
现代文：楚怀王就让项羽做上将军，当阳君、蒲将军都归属项羽。
English: King Chu Huai made Xiang Yu the general, and Dang Yangjun and General Pu both belonged to Xiang Yu.

古文：项羽已杀卿子冠军，威震楚国，名闻诸侯。乃遣当阳君、蒲将军将卒二万渡河，救钜鹿。
现代文：项羽已经杀了卿子冠军，威震楚国，名闻诸侯，他便派遣当阳君、蒲将军带领两万士卒渡河，援救巨鹿。
English: He sent Dangyangjun and Pu Zhengyuan, who led 20,000 soldiers across the river, to rescue the giant deer.

古文：战少利，陈馀复请兵。
现代文：战事稍有胜利，陈馀又向项羽请求增兵。
English: The war was slightly successful, and Chen Yu again asked Xiang Yu for more troops.

古文：项羽乃悉引兵渡河，皆沉船，破釜甑，烧庐舍，持三日粮，以示士卒必死，无一还心。
现代文：项羽就率领全军渡河，凿沉船只，砸破炊具，烧毁营舍，携带三天口粮，用以表示士卒拼死决战，没有一个有活着回来的打算。
English: Xiang Yu led the whole army across the river, scuttled boats, smashed cooking utensils, burned camps, and carried three days of rations to show that the soldiers fought to the death, and none of them had any intention of coming back alive.

古文：於是至则围王离，与秦军遇，九战，绝其甬道，大破之，杀苏角，虏王离。
现代文：军队一到就围困了王离，与秦军遭遇，打了九仗，截断了秦军的甬道，大破秦军。杀了苏角，俘虏了王离。
English: As soon as the army arrived, they besieged Wang Li, encountered the Qin Army, fought nine battles, cut off the Qin Army's supply route, and defeated the Qin Army. They killed Su Jiao and captured Wang Li.

古文：涉间不降楚，自烧杀。
现代文：涉间不向楚军投降，自焚而死。
English: Watanabe did not surrender to the Chu army and died by self-immolation.

古文：当是时，楚兵冠诸侯。
现代文：那时，楚军名冠诸侯。
English: At that time, the Chu army won the title of princes.

古文：诸侯军救钜鹿下者十馀壁，莫敢纵兵。
现代文：当时，各诸侯来救援赵国的军队有十几座大营，都不敢轻易出兵。
English: At that time, there were more than a dozen large battalions of the armies of the various lords who came to the rescue of Zhao, and they did not dare to send troops easily.

古文：及楚击秦，诸将皆从壁上观。
现代文：等楚军进攻时，诸侯将领都在营垒上观战。
English: When the Chu army attacked, the lords and generals watched the battle from the camp.

古文：楚战士无不一以当十，楚兵呼声动天，诸侯军无不人人惴恐。
现代文：楚军战士无不以一当十，楚兵喊声震天，诸侯军人人胆战心惊。
English: The soldiers of the Chu army were all outnumbered ten to one, the shouts of the Chu soldiers shook the heavens, and the soldiers of the princes were all afraid.

古文：於是已破秦军，项羽召见诸侯将，入辕门，无不膝行而前，莫敢仰视。
现代文：已经打垮了秦军，项羽召见各诸侯将领，他们进入辕门，个个都跪着前行，不敢抬头仰视。
English: Having defeated the Qin army, Xiang Yu summoned the generals of all the principalities. They entered the city gate, all of them kneeling, not daring to look up.

古文：项羽由是始为诸侯上将军，诸侯皆属焉。
现代文：项羽从此成为诸侯军的上将军，各路诸侯都归顺于他。
English: From then on, Xiang Yu became the commander-in-chief of the vassal army, and all the vassals submitted to him.

古文：章邯军棘原，项羽军漳南，相持未战。
现代文：章邯驻扎在棘原，项羽驻扎在漳水南岸，两军相持，没有交战。
English: Zhang Ye was stationed in Spine Plains, Xiang Yu was stationed on the south coast of Surabaya. The two armies were on the same side and did not engage in battle.

古文：秦军数卻，二世使人让章邯。
现代文：秦军多次退却，二世派人责让章邯。
English: The Qin army retreated several times, and the Second Emperor sent someone to order Zhang Ye to retreat.

古文：章邯恐，使长史欣请事。
现代文：章邯恐惧，派长史司马欣去请示。
English: Zhang Ye was afraid, and sent his commander Shi Simaxin to ask for instructions.

古文：至咸阳，留司马门三日，赵高不见，有不信之心。
现代文：到了咸阳，在房门外等候三天，赵高不接见，有不信任之意。
English: When he arrived in Xianyang, he waited outside the door for three days. Zhao Gao did not receive him, and he did not trust him.

古文：长史欣恐，还走其军，不敢出故道，赵高果使人追之，不及。
现代文：长史司马欣心里害怕，急忙逃回军中。没有敢走原路，赵高果然派人追赶他，没有追上。
English: Chief Secretary Sima Xin was afraid in his heart and hurriedly fled back to the army. He did not dare to follow the original path, but Zhao Gao sent someone to chase him, but he did not catch up.

古文：欣至军，报曰： 赵高用事於中，下无可为者。
现代文：司马欣到了军中，向章邯报告说： 赵高掌握朝中大权，下面的人不可能有所作为。
English: When Sima Xin got to the army, he reported to Zhang Ye: Zhao Gao holds the supreme power in the DPRK, and the people below him cannot make a difference.

古文：今战能胜，高必疾妒吾功；战不能胜，不免於死。
现代文：如今仗能打赢，赵高必定嫉妒我们的功劳；仗打不赢，免不了被处死。
English: Now that the war can be won, Zhao Gao must be jealous of our merits; if the war cannot be won, he will inevitably be executed.

古文：原将军孰计之。 
现代文：希望将军深思熟虑。 
English: Let's hope the general has thought this through.

古文：陈馀亦遗章邯书曰： 白起为秦将，南征鄢郢，北阬马服，攻城略地，不可胜计，而竟赐死。
现代文：陈余也送给章邯一封信说： 白起为秦将，向南攻拔鄢、郢，向北坑杀马服，攻城咯地，不可胜数，而最后竟然赐死。
English: Chen Yu also sent a letter to Zhang Xuan, saying: Bai Rong was a Qin general, and he attacked and plundered Yunnan and Shandong to the south, killed horses and horses to the north, and attacked the city and the countryside. There are countless numbers, and in the end, he even gave his life.

古文：蒙恬为秦将，北逐戎人，开榆中地数千里，竟斩阳周。
现代文：蒙恬为秦将，北逐匈奴，开辟榆中几千里的地域，最终竟然在阳周被杀。
English: Mengye was a Qin general who chased the Xiongnu northward, opening up thousands of miles of territory in the Yunnan Province, and was eventually killed in Yangzhou.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：功多，秦不能尽封，因以法诛之。
现代文：功劳太多，秦不能按功行封，因此用国法来杀死他们。
English: There was too much merit, so Qin couldn't award the title according to merit, so he used the country's laws to kill them.

古文：今将军为秦将三岁矣，所亡失以十万数，而诸侯并起滋益多。
现代文：现在将军为秦将三年了，所损失的士卒以十万计，而诸侯军同时并起，越来越多。
English: Now the general has been the general of Qin for three years, the loss of the soldiers is one hundred thousand, and the armies of the princes are increasing at the same time.

古文：彼赵高素谀日久，今事急，亦恐二世诛之，故欲以法诛将军以塞责，使人更代将军以脱其祸。
现代文：那个赵高一向谄谀，为时已久，眼下形势危急，也怕二世杀他，所以打算用国法杀死将军，借以推卸责任，别外派人替代将军，以此来摆脱祸患。
English: That Zhao Gao has been holding a grudge for a long time, the current situation is critical, and he is afraid that the second generation will kill him, so he intends to use the national law to kill the general, so as to shirk responsibility and not send someone abroad to replace the general, so as to get rid of the disaster.

古文：夫将军居外久，多内卻，有功亦诛，无功亦诛。
现代文：将军在外时日已久，朝廷中很多人与你有隔阂，有功也是被杀，无功也是被杀。
English: The general has been away for a long time, and many people in the imperial court have estranged themselves from you. Those who have contributed are also killed, and those who have not contributed are also killed.

古文：且天之亡秦，无愚智皆知之。
现代文：况且天要亡秦，无论是愚笨的人还是聪明的人全都知道。
English: Moreover, whether it is a stupid person or a smart person, everyone knows that the sky is about to die.

古文：今将军内不能直谏，外为亡国将，孤特独立而欲常存，岂不哀哉！
现代文：如今将军在内不能直言规谏，在外为即将灭亡的国家的将领，孤立无援又想长久容身，岂不悲哀！
English: Nowadays, generals can't speak their minds, and it's sad to be the general of a country that is on the verge of extinction, all alone and wanting to hide for a long time!

古文：将军何不还兵与诸侯为从，约共攻秦，分王其地，南面称孤；此孰与身伏鈇质，妻子为僇乎？ 
现代文：将军何不倒戈与各路诸侯联合，签订和约，共同攻秦，割地为王，南向而坐，称孤道寡；这同自己伏砧受戮，妻子被杀，哪个比较好一些呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the general turn his back on the rebels and unite with all the princes, sign a peace treaty, jointly attack Qin, conquer the land, sit in the south, and say that he is an orphan; which is better than being killed and his wife being killed?

古文：章邯狐疑，阴使候始成使项羽，欲约。
现代文：章邯犹豫不决，暗中派军候始成到项羽营中，想要签署和约。
English: Zhang Ye hesitated, and secretly sent the military commander Zhucheng to Xiang Yu's camp to sign a peace treaty.

古文：约未成，项羽使蒲将军日夜引兵度三户，军漳南，与秦战，再破之。
现代文：和约没有商妥，项羽让蒲将军昼夜领兵渡过三户津，扎营漳水南岸，与秦军交战，又一次打败了秦军。
English: There was no agreement on the peace treaty, and Xiang Yu let General Pu lead the troops across Sanjujin day and night, camped on the south bank of Surabaya, and fought with the Qin Army, once again defeating the Qin Army.

古文：项羽悉引兵击秦军汙水上，大破之。
现代文：项羽率领全军士卒在汙水上攻击秦军，把秦军打得大败。
English: Xiang Yu led all the non-commissioned officers to attack the Qin army on the sewage, and defeated the Qin army.

古文：章邯使人见项羽，欲约。
现代文：章邯派人去见项羽，打算订立和约。
English: Zhang Ye sent someone to see Xiang Yu, intending to conclude a peace treaty.

古文：项羽召军吏谋曰： 粮少，欲听其约。 
现代文：项羽召集军吏商量说： 军中粮少，想允许他签订和约。 
English: Xiang Yu called together the military officials for consultation and said, "The army is short of food, so I want to allow him to sign a peace treaty."

古文：军吏皆曰： 善。 
现代文：军吏都说： 好。 
English: And the officers said, All is well.

古文：项羽乃与期洹水南殷虚上。
现代文：项羽就与章邯相约在洹水南岸殷墟相见。
English: Xiang Yu and Zhang Ye met each other at Yin Market on the south bank of Surabaya.

古文：已盟，章邯见项羽而流涕，为言赵高。
现代文：已经缔结了盟约，章邯见到项羽，涕泪交下，向项羽诉说赵高的种种行径。
English: They have already concluded a covenant. When Zhang Ye saw Xiang Yu, he shed tears and told Xiang Yu about Zhao Gao's various actions.

古文：项羽乃立章邯为雍王，置楚军中。
现代文：项羽就立章邯为雍王，安置在楚军营中。
English: So Xiang Yu set up Zhang Ye as the Yong Wang and placed him in the Chu military camp.

古文：使长史欣为上将军，将秦军为前行。
现代文：使长史司马欣为上将军，率领秦军为先行部队。
English: The commander-in-chief, Shi Simakhin, became the commander-in-chief and led the Qin army as the advance troops.

古文：到新安。
现代文：军队到达了新安。
English: The army has arrived in Xin'an.

古文：诸侯吏卒异时故繇使屯戍过秦中，秦中吏卒遇之多无状，及秦军降诸侯，诸侯吏卒乘胜多奴虏使之，轻折辱秦吏卒。
现代文：诸侯军的官兵以前曾因服徭役、屯戍边地路过关中，秦士兵对他们多有凌辱。等到秦军投降了诸侯军，诸侯军的官兵乘战争胜利的机会，像对待奴隶和俘虏一样地驱使他们，随便折磨侮辱秦军官兵。
English: In the past, the officers and soldiers of the vassal states' armies used to pass through the middle of the pass on their way to and from duty, and the Qin soldiers used to humiliate them. When the Qin army surrendered to the vassal states' army, the vassal states' army officers and soldiers took the opportunity of the victory of the war to drive them like slaves and prisoners, and tortured and humiliated the Qin officers and soldiers.

古文：秦吏卒多窃言曰： 章将军等诈吾属降诸侯，今能入关破秦，大善；即不能，诸侯虏吾属而东，秦必尽诛吾父母妻子。 
现代文：秦军官兵多在私下议论说： 章将军等欺骗我们投降诸侯军。如今能够入关破秦，很好；如果不能，诸侯军俘虏我们东去；秦势必把我们的父母妻子全部处死。 
English: Most of the Qin officers and soldiers privately discussed: General Zhang and others deceived us into surrendering to the vassal army. Now it is good to be able to break through Qin; if not, the vassal army will capture us and go east; Qin is bound to execute all our parents and wives.

古文：诸侯微闻其计，以告项羽。
现代文：诸侯军的将领们暗中听到了他们的打算，报告了项羽。
English: The generals of the vassal army overheard their plans and reported them to Xiang Yu.

古文：项羽乃召黥布、蒲将军计曰： 秦吏卒尚众，其心不服，至关中不听，事必危，不如击杀之，而独与章邯、长史欣、都尉翳入秦。 
现代文：项羽就找来黥布、蒲将军商量说： 秦军官兵还很多，他们心里不服，到了关中不听从命令，事情必然岌岌可危，不如杀掉他们，而只与章邯、长史司马欣、都尉董翳一起入秦。 
English: Xiang Yu then sought out Zibo, and General Pu consulted and said: There are still many Qin officers and soldiers, they are not satisfied with their hearts, they do not follow orders when they reach the customs, things must be precarious, it is better to kill them, and only enter Qin with Zhang Ye, Chang Shi Sima Xin, and Lieutenant Dong Ye.

古文：於是楚军夜击阬秦卒二十馀万人新安城南。
现代文：于是楚军夜间把秦军士卒二十多万人处死掩埋在新安城南。
English: As a result, the Chu army executed more than 200,000 Qin soldiers and officers at night and buried them in the south of Xin'an.

古文：行略定秦地。
现代文：项羽将要攻取秦关中地带。
English: Xiang Yu is going to capture the central Qin Pass area.

古文：函谷关有兵守关，不得入。
现代文：函谷关有兵把守，不能进去。
English: Hakodate pass is guarded by soldiers, so you can't go in.

古文：又闻沛公已破咸阳，项羽大怒，使当阳君等击关。
现代文：又听说沛公已经攻破咸阳，项羽大怒，派当阳君等攻打关口。
English: He also heard that Pei Gong had defeated Xianyang, Xiang Yu was furious, and sent Dangyang Jun and others to attack the pass.

古文：项羽遂入，至于戏西。
现代文：项羽便进入了函谷关，到达戏水西岸。
English: They entered the Hakodate Pass and reached the west coast of Ozu.

古文：沛公军霸上，未得与项羽相见。
现代文：沛公驻军霸上，没有能够和项羽相见。
English: Pei Gong stationed troops on the hegemony, but was unable to meet Xiang Yu.

古文：沛公左司马曹无伤使人言於项羽曰： 沛公欲王关中，使子婴为相，珍宝尽有之。 
现代文：沛公左司马曹无伤派人对项羽说： 沛公想称王关中，使子婴为相，占有了全部珍宝。 
English: Pei Gong sent his left-hand man, Ma Cao Woundless, to say to Xiang Yu: "Pei Gong wants to be called Wang Guanzhong, to have a child as his consort, and to possess all the precious treasures.

古文：项羽大怒，曰： 旦日飨士卒，为击破沛公军！ 
现代文：项羽怒气冲天他说： 明天早晨饱餐士卒，将击溃沛公的军队！ 
English: Xiang Yu's anger boiled over, and he said, "Tomorrow morning, when the soldiers have had enough to eat, they will defeat Peiguo's army!"

古文：当是时，项羽兵四十万，在新丰鸿门，沛公兵十万，在霸上。
现代文：这时，项羽有兵四十万，驻扎在新丰鸿门，沛公有兵十万，驻扎在霸上。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu had 400,000 soldiers stationed in Xinfenghongmen, and Pei Gong had 100,000 soldiers stationed in Bagan.

古文：范增说项羽曰： 沛公居山东时，贪於财货，好美姬。
现代文：范增劝告项羽说： 沛公在山东时，贪财好色，喜爱美女。
English: Fan Zeng advised Xiang Yu: When Pei Gong was in Shandong, he was greedy for money, lustful, and loved beautiful women.

古文：今入关，财物无所取，妇女无所幸，此其志不在小。
现代文：现在进了关，不收财物，不亲近妇女，由此看来，他的志向不小。
English: Now that he is in prison, he does not collect money or belongings, and he does not get close to women. From this perspective, his aspirations are not small.

古文：吾令人望其气，皆为龙虎，成五采，此天子气也。
现代文：我叫人观望他上空的云气，都呈龙虎形状，五颜六色，这是天子之气。
English: I asked people to look at the clouds above him. They were all in the shape of dragons and tigers and had many colors. This was the breath of the Son of Heaven.

古文：急击勿失。 
现代文：赶快进击，不要失掉机会。 
English: Come on, don't miss your chance.

古文：楚左尹项伯者，项羽季父也，素善留侯张良。
现代文：楚国左尹项伯这个人，是项羽的叔父，一向和留侯张良相友好。
English: Zuo Yin Xiang Bo of Chu was Xiang Yu's uncle, and he had always been friendly with Zhang Liang.

古文：张良是时从沛公，项伯乃夜驰之沛公军，私见张良，具告以事，欲呼张良与俱去。
现代文：张良这时跟随着沛公，项伯就夜间骑马跑到沛公军营，私下见到张良，讲述了事情的经过，打算叫张良和他一起离去。
English: At this time, Zhang Liang followed Pei Gong, and Xiang Bo rode to Pei Gong's military camp at night. He saw Zhang Liang in private, told him about what had happened, and planned to ask Zhang Liang to leave with him.

古文：曰： 毋从俱死也。 
现代文：他说： 不要跟他们一起死掉。 
English: "Don't die with them," he said.

古文：张良曰： 臣为韩王送沛公，沛公今事有急，亡去不义，不可不语。 
现代文：张良说： 我受韩王命令护送沛公，现在沛公遇到，逃走太不讲道义，不能不告诉他。 
English: Zhang Liang said, "I was ordered by King Han to escort Pei Gong. Now, when Pei Gong encounters me, it is too immoral to run away, so I must tell him."

古文：良乃入，具告沛公。
现代文：张良就走了进去，把情况全部告诉了沛公。
English: Zhang Liang went inside and told Pei Gong the whole story.

古文：沛公大惊，曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：沛公大吃一惊，说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Pei Gong was taken aback and said, "What should we do?

古文：张良曰： 谁为大王为此计者？ 
现代文：张良说： 谁给大王出的这个主意？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: Who gave the great king this idea?

古文：曰： 鲰生说我曰 距关，毋内诸侯，秦地可尽王也 。
现代文：沛公说： 一个小子劝我说 守住函谷关，不要让诸侯军进来，秦地可以全部占为己有，在这里称王 。
English: Pei Gong said: A boy advised me to guard the Hangu Pass, not to let the armies of the princes come in. The Qin territory could be all his own, and he could be crowned king here.

古文：故听之。 
现代文：我听信了他的话。 
English: I took him at his word.

古文：良曰： 料大王士卒足以当项王乎？ 
现代文：张良说： 大王觉得以现在的军力足以抵挡项王吗？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: Does the great king think that the current military strength is enough to resist King Xiang?

古文：沛公默然，曰： 固不如也，且为之柰何？ 
现代文：沛公默然不语，说： 军力当然不如项羽，又该怎么办呢？ 
English: Pei Gong was silent and said, "Of course, the military strength is not as good as Xiang Yu, so what should we do?

古文：张良曰： 请往谓项伯，言沛公不敢背项王也。 
现代文：张良说： 请让我去告诉项伯，说沛公不敢背叛项王。 
English: Zhang Liang said, "Please let me go and tell Xiang Bo that Pei Gong does not dare to betray King Xiang."

古文：沛公曰： 君安与项伯有故？ 
现代文：沛公说： 你怎么与项伯有交情？ 
English: Pei Gong said: How do you have a friendship with Xiang Bo?

古文：张良曰： 秦时与臣游，项伯杀人，臣活之。
现代文：张良说： 秦未灭六国时，项伯和我交游，他杀了人，我救了他。
English: Zhang Liang said: When the Qin Dynasty conquered the Six Kingdoms, Xiang Bo and I became friends. He killed someone, and I saved him.

古文：今事有急，故幸来告良。 
现代文：现在事有危急，幸亏他来告诉我。 
English: Now it's critical, and it's good that he's here to tell me.

古文：沛公曰 孰与君少长？ 
现代文：沛公说： 项伯与你相比，谁年纪大？
English: Pei Gong said: Compared to you, who is older?

古文：良曰： 长於臣。 
现代文：谁年纪小？ 张良说： 他比我大。 
English: Who is younger? Zhang Liang said: He is older than me.

古文：沛公曰 君为我呼入，吾得兄事之。 
现代文：沛公说： 你替我叫他进来，我要对他兄长相待。 
English: Pei Gong said, "You call him in for me, and I'll treat his older brother the same way."

古文：张良出，要项伯。
现代文：张良走出来，邀请项伯。
English: Zhang Liang came out and invited Xiang Bo.

古文：项伯即入见沛公。
现代文：项伯就进去见沛公。
English: Xiang Bo went in to see Pei Gong.

古文：沛公奉卮酒为寿，约为婚姻，曰： 吾入关，秋豪不敢有所近，籍吏民，封府库，而待将军。
现代文：沛公向项伯举杯敬酒，约为儿女亲家。沛公说： 我入了关，丝毫利益不敢有所接近，造册登记吏民，封存府库，等待将军。
English: Pei Gong raised a toast to Xiang Bo and spoke about his children and relatives. Pei Gong said: I have entered the customs, I dare not get close to the slightest benefit, make a register of officials and citizens, seal the government treasury, and wait for the general.

古文：所以遣将守关者，备他盗之出入与非常也。
现代文：所以遣将守关，是为了防备别的盗贼出入和意外事件。
English: So he was sent to guard the gate in order to prevent other thieves from entering and leaving and accidents.

古文：日夜望将军至，岂敢反乎！
现代文：我日日夜夜盼望将军到来，哪里敢反叛！
English: Day and night I long for the arrival of the general, how dare I rebel!

古文：原伯具言臣之不敢倍德也。 
现代文：请伯兄向将军详细说明我是不敢忘恩负义的。 
English: Ask my uncle to explain to the general in detail that I dare not be ungrateful.

古文：项伯许诺。谓沛公曰： 旦日不可不蚤自来谢项王。 
现代文：项伯答应了，对沛公说： 明天早晨不可不早来向项王道歉。 
English: Xiang Bo agreed and said to Pei Gong: "You must come early tomorrow morning to apologize to Xiang Wang."

古文：沛公曰： 诺。 
现代文：沛公说： 好。 
English: Pei Gong said: Good.

古文：於是项伯复夜去，至军中，具以沛公言报项王。
现代文：于是项伯又当夜离去，回到军中，把沛公的话原原本本报告了项王。
English: So Xiang Bo left again that night, returned to the army, and reported Pei Gong's words to Xiang Wang.

古文：因言曰： 沛公不先破关中，公岂敢入乎？
现代文：随即向项羽说： 沛公不先攻破关中，你难道敢进来吗？
English: He then said to Xiang Yu: "Pei Gong, do you dare to enter without first breaking through the barrier?

古文：今人有大功而击之，不义也，不如因善遇之。 
现代文：如今人家立有大功而去攻打他，是不道义的，不如就此善待他。 
English: It would be immoral to attack him now that he has achieved so much. It would be better to treat him kindly.

古文：项王许诺。
现代文：项王答应了。
English: The king consented.

古文：沛公旦日从百馀骑来见项王，至鸿门，谢曰： 臣与将军戮力而攻秦，将军战河北，臣战河南，然不自意能先入关破秦，得复见将军於此。
现代文：次日早晨，沛公带着一百多名骑兵来见项王，到了鸿门，向项羽谢罪说： 我和将军并力攻秦，将军在河北作战，我在河南作战，然而我自己也没有想到先入关攻破秦地，能在这里又见到将军。
English: In the morning of the next day, Pei Gong brought more than a hundred cavalrymen to see Xiang Wang. When he arrived at Hongmen, he said to Xiang Yu Xie Sin: "I and the general fought against Qin together. The general fought in Hebei, and I fought in Henan. However, I myself did not think of breaking through Qin first, and I could see the general again here.

古文：今者有小人之言，令将军与臣有卻。 
现代文：现在有小人之言，使将军和我有了隔阂。 
English: Now there is a little man's words that have put the general and me at odds.

古文：项王曰： 此沛公左司马曹无伤言之；不然，籍何以至此。 
现代文：项王说： 这是你沛公左司马曹无伤说的，不然，我何至于如此。 
English: The king said, "This is what your brother-in-law, Sima Cao, said, otherwise, I would not have said it.

古文：项王即日因留沛公与饮。
现代文：项王当天就留沛公一同饮酒。
English: On the same day, Qiao Wang drank alcohol with Ruopeigong.

古文：项王、项伯东向坐。亚父南乡坐。
现代文：项王、项伯面朝东坐，亚父面朝南坐。
English: Xiang Wang and Xiang Bo sat facing east, while Asif sat facing south.

古文：亚父者，范增也。
现代文：亚父就是范增。
English: The second father is Fan Zeng.

古文：沛公北乡坐，张良西乡侍。
现代文：沛公面朝北坐，张良面朝西侍坐。
English: Pei Gong sat facing north, Zhang Liang sat facing west.

古文：范增数目项王，举所佩玉玦以示之者三，项王默然不应。
现代文：范增向项王多次使眼色，再三举起佩带的玉玦向项王示意，项王默然不应。
English: Fan Zeng winked at Xiang Wang several times and repeatedly raised the jade bracelet he was wearing to signal to Xiang Wang, but Xiang Wang remained silent.

古文：范增起，出召项庄，谓曰： 君王为人不忍，若入前为寿，寿毕，请以剑舞，因击沛公於坐，杀之。
现代文：范增起身出去找来项庄，对他说： 君王为人不狠，你进去上前祝酒，祝酒完了，请求舞剑，乘机在座上袭击沛公，杀死他。
English: Fan Zeng got up and went out to find Xiang Zhuang, and said to him: The king is not a cruel man. Go in and make a toast. When the toast is over, ask for a sword dance, and take the opportunity to attack Pei Gong and kill him.

古文：不者，若属皆且为所虏。 
现代文：不然的话，你们这些人都将被他俘虏。 
English: Otherwise, all of you will be captured by him.

古文：庄则入为寿，寿毕，曰： 君王与沛公饮，军中无以为乐，请以剑舞。 项王曰： 诺。 
现代文：项庄便进去祝酒。祝酒完了说： 君王和沛公饮酒，军中没有什么可供娱乐的，请允许我舞剑助乐。 项王说： 好吧。 
English: Then Xiangzhuang went in to make a toast. When the toast was over, he said: "The king and Pei Gong are drinking, there is nothing to entertain in the army, please allow me to dance with a sword to help the music." Xiang Wang said: "Okay."

古文：项庄拔剑起舞，项伯亦拔剑起舞，常以身翼蔽沛公，庄不得击。
现代文：项庄拔剑起舞。项伯也拔剑起舞。项伯常常用身体掩蔽沛公，项庄得不到刺杀机会。
English: Xiang Zhuang drew his sword and danced. Xiang Bo also drew his sword and danced. Xiang Bo often used his body to cover Pe Gong, and Xiang Zhuang did not get a chance to assassinate him.

古文：於是张良至军门，见樊哙。
现代文：这时张良来到军门，召见樊哙。
English: At this time, Zhang Liang came to the military gate and summoned Zou.

古文：樊哙曰： 今日之事何如？ 
现代文：樊哙说： 今天的事情怎么样了？ 
English: Zou said, "How are things today?"

古文：良曰： 甚急。
现代文：张良说： 极为危急。
English: Zhang Liang said: "It's extremely critical.

古文：今者项庄拔剑舞，其意常在沛公也。 
现代文：此刻项庄正在舞剑，他的用意时时在沛公身上。 
English: At this moment, Xiang Zhuang is dancing with a sword, and his intention is always on Pei Gong.

古文：哙曰： 此迫矣，臣请入，与之同命。 
现代文：樊哙说： 这可紧急了，请让我进去，与沛公同生共死。 
English: Zou said, "This is an emergency. Please let me go in and live and die with Pei Gong."

古文：哙即带剑拥盾入军门。
现代文：樊哙立即带着剑，手拥盾牌，进入军门。
English: Yao immediately entered the gate with his sword and shield in hand.

古文：交戟之卫士欲止不内，樊哙侧其盾以撞，卫士仆地，哙遂入，披帷西乡立，瞋目视项王，头发上指，目眦尽裂。
现代文：交乾守门的卫士打算阻拦，不让他进去，樊哙侧过他的盾牌撞击，卫士倒在地上，樊哙就进入了大帐，揭开帷帐，向西而立，圆睁怒目，看着项王，头发上指，眼眶破裂。
English: The guard who was guarding the gate tried to stop him from entering, but his shield knocked him sideways. The guard fell to the ground, and the dragonfly entered the great curtain. It opened the curtain and stood to the west, its eyes wide with anger, looking at the king with its finger in its hair and its eyelids bursting.

古文：项王按剑而跽曰： 客何为者？ 
现代文：项王按剑直起上身说； 来客是干什么的？ 
English: He straightened his upper body with his sword and said, "What are the guests here for?"

古文：张良曰： 沛公之参乘樊哙者也。 
现代文：张良说： 这是沛公的参乘樊哙。 
English: Zhang Liang said: This is Peigong's participation in the parade.

古文：项王曰： 壮士，赐之卮酒。 
现代文：项王说： 壮士！赏赐他一杯酒。 
English: The king said, "Mighty man, give him a cup of wine."

古文：则与斗卮酒。
现代文：左右就给他一大杯酒。
English: Just give him a large glass of wine.

古文：哙拜谢，起，立而饮之。
现代文：樊哙拜谢后起来，站着一饮而尽。
English: After bowing and thanking, he stood up and finished his drink.

古文：项王曰： 壮士，能复饮乎？ 
现代文：项王说： 赏给他猪腿。 左右就给一只生猪腿。
English: The king said, "Give him a pig's leg.

古文：樊哙曰： 臣死且不避，卮酒安足辞！
现代文：樊哙覆盾于地，把猪腿放在盾上，拔出剑来切肉吃。项王说： 壮士！能再喝酒吗？ 樊哙说： 我死都不怕，一杯酒哪里值得推辞！
English: He covered his shield with earth, put the pig's leg on his shield, and pulled out his sword to cut the meat to eat. King Xiang said, "Mighty man! Can you drink any more wine?" He said, "I'm not afraid of death. A glass of wine is worth refusing!"

古文：夫秦王有虎狼之心，杀人如不能举，刑人如恐不胜，天下皆叛之。
现代文：秦王有虎狼之心，杀人唯恐杀不尽，用刑唯恐刑不重，天下人都反叛他。
English: King Qin had the heart of a tiger and a wolf. He was afraid of killing but never killed anyone. He was afraid of using punishment but never used severe punishment. People all over the world rebelled against him.

古文：怀王与诸将约曰 先破秦入咸阳者王之 。
现代文：楚怀王和将领们约定说 先攻破秦地进入咸阳的做关中王 。
English: King Chu Huai and the generals agreed that the first to break through the Qin and enter the Xianyang would be the King of Guanzhong.

古文：今沛公先破秦入咸阳，豪毛不敢有所近，封闭宫室，还军霸上，以待大王来。
现代文：现在沛公先攻破了秦地进入咸阳，丝毫利益不敢有所接近，封闭宫室，回军霸上，等待大王到来。
English: Now, Pei Gong first broke through the Qin and entered the Xianyang, and did not dare to get close to the slightest benefit, closed the palace, returned to the military hegemony, and waited for the arrival of the great king.

古文：故遣将守关者，备他盗出入与非常也。
现代文：所以遣将守关，是为了防备别的盗贼和意外事件。
English: So he was sent to guard the gate in order to prevent other thieves and accidents.

古文：劳苦而功高如此，未有封侯之赏，而听细说，欲诛有功之人。
现代文：如此劳苦功高，没有得到封侯的赏赐，而你却听信闲言细语，要杀有功的人。
English: You have worked so hard and achieved so much, yet you have not been rewarded with a title of nobility, and yet you listen to idle gossip and want to kill people who have achieved something.

古文：此亡秦之续耳，窃为大王不取也。 
现代文：这是继承了已经灭亡的秦朝的道路，私以为，大王这样做是不可取的。 
English: This is the way of inheriting the Qin Dynasty, which has already perished. I think it is not advisable for the great king to do so.

古文：项王未有以应，曰： 坐。 
现代文：项王无辞以对，只说： 坐。 
English: The king could not help but say, "Sit down."

古文：樊哙从良坐。
现代文：樊哙在张良旁边坐下来。
English: Zou sat down next to Zhang Liang.

古文：坐须臾，沛公起如厕，因招樊哙出。
现代文：坐了不一会儿，沛公起来上厕所，乘机招呼樊哙出来。
English: After sitting for a while, Pei Gong got up to go to the toilet and took the opportunity to call out.

古文：沛公已出，项王使都尉陈平召沛公。
现代文：沛公出去后，项王派都尉陈平去叫沛公回来。
English: After Pei Gong went out, Xiang Wang sent Lieutenant Chen Ping to call Pei Gong back.

古文：沛公曰： 今者出，未辞也，为之柰何？ 
现代文：沛公说： 我们现在出去，没有辞行，怎么办呢？ 
English: Pei Gong said: What should we do if we go out now without resigning?

古文：樊哙曰： 大行不顾细谨，大礼不辞小让。
现代文：樊哙说： 做大事不顾忌细枝节，行大礼不讲究小谦让。
English: Zou said: To do big things without regard to the details, to make grand salutes without paying attention to small concessions.

古文：如今人方为刀俎，我为鱼肉，何辞为。 
现代文：如今人家为刀俎，我们为鱼肉，还辞别什么！ 
English: Nowadays, people use them for knives and forks, but we use them for fish and meat.

古文：於是遂去。
现代文：于是就不辞而去。
English: So he quit.

古文：乃令张良留谢。
现代文：沛公叫张良留下道谢。
English: Pei Gong told Zhang Liang to stay and thank him.

古文：良问曰： 大王来何操？ 
现代文：张良问： 大王来时带了什么？ 
English: Zhang Liang asked: What did the great king bring with him?

古文：曰： 我持白璧一双，欲献项王，玉斗一双，欲与亚父，会其怒，不敢献。
现代文：沛公说： 我带来一双白壁，想献给项王，一双玉斗，想送给亚父，正碰上他们生气，不敢进献。
English: Pei Gong said, "I brought a pair of white walls, which I wanted to dedicate to King Xiang, and a pair of jade swords, which I wanted to give to my father, but they got angry and didn't dare to present them.

古文：公为我献之 张良曰： 谨诺。 
现代文：你替我献给他们吧。 张良说： 遵命。 
English: Give it to them for me, Zhang Liang said.

古文：当是时，项王军在鸿门下，沛公军在霸上，相去四十里。
现代文：当时，项王的军队在鸿门，沛公的军队在霸上，相去四十里。
English: At that time, Xiang Wang's army was in Hongmen, and Pei Gong's army was in Baxian, forty miles apart.

古文：沛公则置车骑，脱身独骑，与樊哙、夏侯婴、靳彊、纪信等四人持剑盾步走，从郦山下，道芷阳间行。
现代文：沛公丢下车骑，一人骑马脱身而去，樊哙、夏侯婴、靳疆、纪信等四人握剑持盾步行，从郦山下取道芷阳，抄行小路。
English: Pei Gong left the car and rode, one person rode away, and four people, including Zou, Xia Houying, Zou Jiang, and Jixin, walked holding swords and shields, taking the road from the foot of Shaoshan Mountain to Fenyang and following the footpaths.

古文：沛公谓张良曰： 从此道至吾军，不过二十里耳。
现代文：沛公对张良说： 从这条路到我们军营，不过二十里而已。
English: Pei Gong said to Zhang Liang: From this road to our military camp, it is only twenty miles.

古文：谨使臣良奉白璧一双，再拜献大王足下；玉斗一双，再拜奉大将军足下。 项王曰： 沛公安在？ 
现代文：估计我到了军中，你再进去。 沛公走后，张良估计沛公抄小路已经到达军中，就进去道谢说： 沛公经受不了杯盏，不能亲自来辞行。谨使张良奉上白壁一只，拜献大王；玉斗一只，拜送大将军。 项羽说： 沛公在哪里？ 
English: After Pei Gong left, Zhang Liang estimated that Pei Gong had already reached the army by following the path, so he went in to thank him and said: "Pei Gong can't stand the cup and the chalice, so he can't come to leave in person. I would like to ask Zhang Liang to present a white wall to pay homage to the great king, and a jade turtle to pay homage to the great general. Xiao Yu said: Where is Pei Gong?

古文：良曰： 闻大王有意督过之，脱身独去，已至军矣。 
现代文：张良说： 听说大王有意责备他，独自脱身而去，已经回到军中了。 
English: Zhang Liang said, "I heard that the great king deliberately rebuked him and left on his own. He has already returned to the army.

古文：项王则受璧，置之坐上。
现代文：项王接过王壁，放在坐席上。
English: He took over the throne and placed it on the throne.

古文：亚父受玉斗，置之地，拔剑撞而破之，曰： 唉！
现代文：亚父接过玉斗，放在地上，拔剑一击而碎，说： 唉！
English: My father took the ball and placed it on the ground, pulled out his sword and smashed it with one blow, saying: Alas!

古文：竖子不足与谋。
现代文：这小子不足以共谋大事。
English: This kid's not big enough to be a co-conspirator.

古文：夺项王天下者，必沛公也，吾属今为之虏矣。 
现代文：夺取项王天下的，一定是沛公，我们这些人就要被他俘虏了。 
English: Pei Gong will be the one to conquer the world of King Xiang, and we will be his prisoners.

古文：沛公至军，立诛杀曹无伤。
现代文：沛公回到军中，立刻杀了曹无伤。
English: Pei Gong returned to the army and immediately killed Cao Wuzhong.

古文：居数日，项羽引兵西屠咸阳，杀秦降王子婴，烧秦宫室，火三月不灭；收其货宝妇女而东。
现代文：过了几天，项羽带兵西进，屠毁咸阳，杀死了秦朝已经投降的国王子婴，焚烧秦朝宫室，大火三个月不灭；搜罗了秦朝的财宝和妇女，率军东去。
English: A few days later, Xiang Yu led his soldiers westward, slaughtered Xianyang, killed the king's son-in-law who had already surrendered to the Qin Dynasty, burned the Qin Dynasty palace room, and the fire did not go out for three months; collected the Qin Dynasty's treasure and women, and led the army eastward.

古文：人或说项王曰： 关中阻山河四塞，地肥饶，可都以霸。 
现代文：有人劝项王说： 关中阻山带河，四面关塞，土地肥饶，可在这里建都，以定霸业。 
English: Some people advised King Xiang that: Guanzhong is surrounded by mountains and rivers, the four sides of Guanzhong are blocked, the land is fertile, and the capital can be built here to dominate the industry.

古文：项王见秦宫皆以烧残破，又心怀思欲东归，曰： 富贵不归故乡，如衣绣夜行，谁知之者！ 
现代文：项王看见秦朝宫室都已烧毁，残破不堪，又怀念故乡，心欲东归，就说： 富贵了不回故乡，如同衣绣夜行，有谁能知道！ 
English: Seeing that the Qin Dynasty's palace chambers had all been burned and destroyed beyond repair, and feeling nostalgic for his hometown and longing to return to the East, he said: "If you are rich and do not return to your hometown, it is like traveling at night with embroidered clothes. Who can know?"

古文：说者曰： 人言楚人沐猴而冠耳，果然。 
现代文：劝项王的人说， 人们说楚国人是猕猴戴帽子装人，果然如此。 
English: The person who persuaded Xiang Wang said, People say that the people of Chu are macaques wearing hats and pretending to be people, and this is indeed the case.

古文：项王闻之，烹说者。
现代文：项王听到了这话，烹杀了劝说他的那个人。
English: When the king heard this, he killed the man who had persuaded him.

古文：项王使人致命怀王。
现代文：项王派人向楚怀王报告请示。
English: Qiao Wang sent someone to report to Chu Huai Wang for instructions.

古文：怀王曰： 如约。 
现代文：楚怀王说： 按照约定办。 
English: King Chu Huai said, "It will be done according to the agreement."

古文：乃尊怀王为义帝。
现代文：项羽就尊楚怀王为义帝。
English: Xiang Yu respected King Chu Huai as a righteous emperor.

古文：项王欲自王，先王诸将相。
现代文：项王想自己称王，就先封诸侯将相为王。
English: If a king wants to make himself king, he must first make a vassal of a vassal a king.

古文：谓曰： 天下初发难时，假立诸侯後以伐秦。
现代文：项王对他们说： 天下最初造反的时候，暂时拥立诸侯后裔为王，以便讨伐秦朝。
English: He said to them: When the world first revolted, the descendants of the princes were temporarily appointed as kings in order to fight against the Qin Dynasty.

古文：然身被坚执锐首事，暴露於野三年，灭秦定天下者，皆将相诸君与籍之力也。
现代文：然而亲自身穿铠甲，手执兵器，率先起义，三年来风餐露宿，消灭秦朝，平定天下的，都是各位将相和我项籍的力量。
English: However, personally wearing armor, holding weapons, taking the lead in the uprising, camping for three years, eliminating the Qin Dynasty, and pacifying the world are all the forces that you will be like me.

古文：义帝虽无功，故当分其地而王之。 
现代文：只有义帝没有功劳，应该瓜分土地，封大家为王。 将领们都说： 好。 
English: Only Emperor Righteousness has no merit, and should divide up the land and make everyone king. The generals all said, "Okay."

古文：诸将皆曰： 善。 乃分天下，立诸将为侯王。
现代文：项王就分割天下，封将领们为侯王。
English: The king divided the country and made the generals the princes.

古文：项王、范增疑沛公之有天下，业已讲解，又恶负约，恐诸侯叛之，乃阴谋曰： 巴、蜀道险，秦之迁人皆居蜀。 
现代文：项王、范增疑心沛公将来占有天下。但既已和解，又怕违背原约，诸侯反叛，他们就暗中商量说： 巴、蜀道路险恶，秦朝被迁徙的罪人都居住蜀地。 
English: Xiang Wang and Fan Zeng suspected that Pei Gong would occupy the world in the future. However, since they had already reconciled, they were afraid that they would violate the original treaty and the princes would rebel, so they secretly discussed: Ba and Shu roads are dangerous, and the sinners who were displaced during the Qin Dynasty live in Shu.

古文：乃曰： 巴、蜀亦关中地也。 
现代文：于是就说： 巴、蜀也是关中地区。 
English: So he said: Ba and Shu are also Guanzhong areas.

古文：故立沛公为汉王，王巴、蜀、汉中，都南郑。
现代文：所以封沛公为汉王，称王于巴、蜀、汉中，建都南郑。
English: Therefore, Feng Pei Gong was the king of Han, called the king of Ba, Shu and Hanzhong, and built the capital of Nan Zheng.

古文：而三分关中，王秦降将以距塞汉王。项王乃立章邯为雍王，王咸阳以西，都废丘。
现代文：而把关中分为三部分，封给秦朝降将为王，阻挡汉王，项王封章邯为雍王，称王于咸阳以西，建都废丘。
English: However, the gate is divided into three parts: the one assigned to the Qin Dynasty will be the king; the one assigned to the Han Dynasty will be the king; the one assigned to the Xiang Dynasty will be the king; the one assigned to the Zhang Dynasty will be the king of the Yong Dynasty; and the one assigned to the Xiang Dynasty will be the king in the west of Xianyang.

古文：长史欣者，故为栎阳狱掾，尝有德於项梁；都尉董翳者，本劝章邯降楚。故立司马欣为塞王，王咸阳以东至河，都栎阳；立董翳为翟王，王上郡，都高奴。
现代文：长史司马欣，从前做栎阳狱掾，曾对项梁有过恩德；都尉董翳，最初劝说章邯降楚，所以封司马欣为塞王，称王于咸阳以东到黄河一带，建都栎阳；封董翳为翟王，称王于上郡，建都高奴。
English: Chief historian Sima Xin, formerly the warden of Fenyang Prison, had been kind to Xiang Liang; Lieutenant Dong Yao, initially persuaded Zhang Yao to surrender to Chu, so he named Sima Xin as the king of Siyang, and built the capital of Fenyang in the area east of Xianyang to the Yellow River; he named Dong Yao as the king of Fenyang, and named the king of Shang County, and built the capital of Gaon.

古文：徙魏王豹为西魏王，王河东，都平阳。
现代文：徙封魏王豹为西魏王，称王于河东，建都平阳。
English: The exiled Wei king, the Leopard, was the king of the Western Wei Dynasty. He claimed to be the king in Hedong and built the capital in Pingyang.

古文：瑕丘申阳者，张耳嬖臣也，先下河南，迎楚河上，故立申阳为河南王，都雒阳。
现代文：瑕丘申阳是张耳的宠臣，先攻下河南，在黄河岸边迎接楚军，所以立申阳为河南王，建都雒阳。
English: Shenyang was Zhang Er's favorite subject. He first conquered Henan and met the Chu army on the banks of the Yellow River. Therefore, Shenyang was established as the king of Henan and the capital was built in Shenyang.

古文：韩王成因故都，都阳翟。
现代文：韩王成仍以旧都城为都，建都阳翟。
English: Han Wangcheng still regards the old capital city as the capital, and the construction of the capital city is not successful.

古文：赵将司马卬定河内，数有功，故立卬为殷王，王河内，都朝歌。
现代文：赵将司马印平定河内，屡立战功，所以封司马印为殷王，称王于河内，建都朝歌。
English: Zhao subdued Sima Ying in Hanoi and repeatedly made war exploits, so he sealed Sima Ying as the king of Yin, called the king in Hanoi, and built the capital of morning song.

古文：徙赵王歇为代王。
现代文：徒封赵王歇为代王。
English: Zhao Wangxie was appointed as the acting king.

古文：赵相张耳素贤，又从入关，故立耳为常山王，王赵地，都襄国。
现代文：赵相张耳一向贤能，又随从项王入关，所以封张耳为常山王，称王于赵地，建都襄国。
English: Zhao Xiang Zhang Er had always been virtuous, and he followed Xiang Wang into the customs. Therefore, Zhang Er was sealed as the king of Changshan, called the king in Zhao, and built the capital of Xiang.

古文：当阳君黥布为楚将，常冠军，故立布为九江王，都六。
现代文：当阳君黥布为楚军将领，常常勇冠全军，所以封黥布为九江王，建都于六。
English: When Yangjun Zengbu was the general of the Chu army, he often won the whole army. Therefore, Zengbu was named the king of the Jiujiang River, and the capital was built in six.

古文：鄱君吴芮率百越佐诸侯，又从入关，故立芮为衡山王，都邾。
现代文：鄱君吴芮率领百越兵协助诸侯军，又随从入关，所以封吴芮为衡山王，建都于邾。
English: Emperor Gao's son, Wu Gan, led more than a hundred soldiers to assist the vassal armies and accompanied them into the pass. Therefore, Wu Gan was crowned King of Hengshan and the capital was built in Gao.

古文：义帝柱国共敖将兵击南郡，功多，因立敖为临江王，都江陵。
现代文：义帝的柱国共敖率兵攻打南郡，功劳很多，于是封共敖为临江王，建都江陵。
English: The pillar country of Emperor Righteousness, Confucianism, led the troops to attack Nan County, and made a lot of achievements. Therefore, Confucianism was crowned as the king of Linjiang and the capital was built in Jiangling.

古文：徙燕王韩广为辽东王。
现代文：徙封燕王韩广为辽东王。
English: Han Guang, the migratory king of Yan, became the king of Liaodong.

古文：燕将臧荼从楚救赵，因从入关，故立荼为燕王，都蓟。
现代文：燕将臧茶曾随楚军救赵，遂又跟从入关，所以封臧荼为燕王，建都于蓟。
English: Yan, the tea brewer, once followed the Chu army to save Zhao, and then followed the customs. Therefore, Yan was crowned the king of the tea brewers, and the capital was built in Yan.

古文：徙齐王田市为胶东王。
现代文：徒封齐王田市为胶东王。
English: Qiwangtian City is crowned as the King of Jiaodong.

古文：齐将田都从共救赵，因从入关，故立都为齐王，都临菑。
现代文：齐将田都曾随从项王共同救赵，遂又跟着入关，所以立田都为齐王，建都临淄。
English: Qi general Tiandu once followed Xiang Wang to jointly save Zhao, and then followed him into the pass, so he set up Tiandu as Qi king and built Linyi as the capital.

古文：故秦所灭齐王建孙田安，项羽方渡河救赵，田安下济北数城，引其兵降项羽，故立安为济北王，都博阳。
现代文：原来被秦朝灭亡的齐王建的孙子田安，正在项羽渡河救赵时，攻下济水北边几座城邑，率领他的军队投降了项羽，所以封田安为济北王，建都博阳。
English: Originally, Tian An, the grandson of Qi Wang Jian, who was killed by the Qin Dynasty, was crossing the Xiang Yu River to save Zhao when he captured several towns in the north of Jishui. He led his army to surrender to Xiang Yu. Therefore, Feng Tian An was the king of Jishui and built the capital of Boyang.

古文：田荣者，数负项梁，又不肯将兵从楚击秦，以故不封。
现代文：田荣多次有负项梁，又不愿率军随楚击秦，因此没有封王。
English: Tian Rong had many negative factors, and he did not want to lead the army to follow Chu to attack Qin, so he did not seal the king.

古文：成安君陈馀弃将印去，不从入关，然素闻其贤，有功於赵，闻其在南皮，故因环封三县。
现代文：成安君陈余丢弃将印离去，没有随从入关，然而一向听说他贤能，有功于赵，知道他在南皮，所以把环绕南皮的三个县封给他。
English: Cheng Anjun Chen Yu discarded the seal and left, without any attendants entering the pass. However, he had always heard that he was a wise man and owed a lot to Zhao. Knowing that he was in Nanpi, he gave him the three counties surrounding Nanpi.

古文：番君将梅鋗功多，故封十万户侯。
现代文：番君的将领梅捐战功很多，所以封为十万户侯。
English: The general of the guard, Mei, contributed a lot to the war, so he was given the title of 100,000 households.

古文：项王自立为西楚霸王，王九郡，都彭城。
现代文：项王自立为西楚霸王，封有九郡，建都彭城。
English: He became the self-proclaimed King of West Chu, with nine counties and the capital of Pengcheng.

古文：汉之元年四月，诸侯罢戏下，各就国。
现代文：汉元年四月，在项王硅麾之下诸侯罢兵散归，各自回到封国。
English: In April of the 1st year of the Han Dynasty, under the reign of Xiang Wang Si, the princes dispersed and returned to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：项王出之国，使人徙义帝，曰： 古之帝者地方千里，必居上游。 
现代文：项王也出关回到封国，派人迁徙义帝，说： 古代做帝王的拥有千里见方的土地，必须住在上游。 
English: Xiang Wang also went out of the customs to return to the fief, and sent people to migrate to Yidi, saying: The ancient emperors had thousands of miles of land and had to live in the upper reaches.

古文：乃使使徙义帝长沙郴县。
现代文：于是就派遣使者把义帝迁往长沙郴县。
English: Therefore, an envoy was sent to relocate Emperor Righteousness to Tsuruga County, Changsha.

古文：趣义帝行，其群臣稍稍背叛之，乃阴令衡山、临江王击杀之江中。
现代文：项王催促义帝快些动身，义帝群臣渐渐背叛了他，项王就暗中命令衡山王、临江王把义帝击杀在江中。
English: King Xiang urged Emperor Righteousness to leave quickly. Emperor Righteousness's ministers gradually betrayed him. King Xiang secretly ordered King Hengshan and King Linjiang to kill Emperor Righteousness in the middle of the river.

古文：韩王成无军功，项王不使之国，与俱至彭城，废以为侯，已又杀之。
现代文：韩王成没有军功，项王不让他回到自己的封地，一起到了彭城，废去王号，改封为侯，不久又杀死了他。
English: Han Wangcheng had no military merit, Xiang Wang did not allow him to return to his fief, and together they went to Pengcheng, abolished the king's title, changed the title to marquis, and soon killed him.

古文：臧荼之国，因逐韩广之辽东，广弗听，荼击杀广无终，并王其地。
现代文：臧荼到了封国，就驱逐韩广去辽东，韩广不服从，臧茶在无终击杀了韩广，占有了他的封地。
English: When he got the fiefdom, he expelled Han Guang to Liaodong, Han Guang disobeyed, and Yao Cha finally killed Han Guang and occupied his fief.

古文：田荣闻项羽徙齐王市胶东，而立齐将田都为齐王，乃大怒，不肯遣齐王之胶东，因以齐反，迎击田都。
现代文：田荣听说项羽把齐王市徒封胶东，而立齐将田都为齐王，十分气愤，不愿让齐王去胶东，就据齐反叛，迎击田都。
English: Tian Rong heard that Xiang Yu had captured Jiaodong from Qi Wang, and that Qi had set up Tiandu as Qi Wang. He was very angry and did not want Qi Wang to go to Jiaodong, so he rebelled against Qi and attacked Tiandu.

古文：田都走楚。
现代文：田都逃往楚国。
English: Tian Du fled to Chu.

古文：齐王市畏项王，乃亡之胶东就国。
现代文：齐工市害怕项王，就潜往胶东就国。
English: Qi Gong was afraid of Xiang Wang, so he sneaked into Jiaodong Province.

古文：田荣怒，追击杀之即墨。
现代文：田荣大为生气，派兵追击，在即墨杀死了他。
English: Tian Rong was very angry and sent soldiers to chase him, killing him in the blink of an eye.

古文：荣因自立为齐王，而西杀击济北王田安，并王三齐。
现代文：田荣便自立为齐王，向西进兵，击杀了济北王田安，兼并了三齐。
English: Tian Rong then established himself as the king of Qi, marched westward, killed the king of Jibei, Tian An, and annexed Sanqi.

古文：荣与彭越将军印，令反梁地。
现代文：田荣把将军印授予彭越，让他在梁地反楚。
English: Tian Rong awarded the general seal to Peng Yue, and let him lead the battle in Liangdi.

古文：陈馀阴使张同、夏说说齐王田荣曰： 项羽为天下宰，不平。
现代文：陈余秘密派遣张同、夏说劝告齐王田荣说： 项羽为天下的主宰，不公平。
English: Chen Yu secretly dispatched Zhang Tong and Xia Xian to advise Qi Wang Tian Rong, saying: Xiang Yu is the ruler of the world, which is unfair.

古文：今尽王故王於丑地，而王其群臣诸将善地，逐其故主赵王，乃北居代，馀以为不可。
现代文：如今把原来的诸侯王都封在坏地方称王，而他的群臣诸将都封在好地方称王。赶走原来的诸侯王，赵王就到北方居住代地，我以为这样是不能答应的。
English: Nowadays, the former princes are all enthroned in bad places to become kings, while his ministers are all enthroned in good places to become kings. After driving out the former princes, King Zhao went to the north to live in a place of his own. I thought this was unacceptable.

古文：闻大王起兵，且不听不义，原大王资馀兵，请以击常山，以复赵王，请以国为扞蔽。 
现代文：听说大王已经起兵，而且不接受不道义的命令，希望大王援助我一些兵马，允许我用以攻打常山，恢复赵王的地位，愿把赵国作为齐国的屏障。 
English: Hearing that the Great King has raised an army and does not accept immoral orders, I hope that the Great King will help me with some soldiers and horses and allow me to use them to attack Changshan and restore the status of King Zhao. I am willing to use Zhao as a barrier to Qi.

古文：齐王许之，因遣兵之赵。
现代文：齐王答应了，就遣兵赴赵。
English: King Qi agreed and sent troops to Zhao.

古文：陈馀悉发三县兵，与齐并力击常山，大破之。
现代文：陈余调动了三县的全部士卒，与齐军并力攻打常山，打垮了常山的军队。
English: Chen Yu mobilized all the soldiers from the three counties to fight against Changshan together with the Qi army and defeated the Changshan army.

古文：张耳走归汉。
现代文：张耳逃走归服了汉王。
English: Zhang Er fled and submitted to the Han king.

古文：陈馀迎故赵王歇於代，反之赵。
现代文：陈余去代地迎接原来的赵王歇返归赵地。
English: Chen Yu went to Zhao to welcome the original Zhao Wang Xie back to Zhao.

古文：赵王因立陈馀为代王。
现代文：赵王就立陈余为代王。
English: King Zhao appointed Chen Yu as acting king.

古文：是时，汉还定三秦。
现代文：这时，汉王回军平定了三秦。
English: At this time, Han Wang Hui's army conquered Sanqin.

古文：项羽闻汉王皆已并关中，且东，齐、赵叛之：大怒。
现代文：项羽听说汉王已经兼并了关中，将要东进，齐、赵又反叛了他，非常愤怒。
English: When Xiang Yu heard that Han Wang had annexed Guanzhong and was about to advance eastward, Qi and Zhao rebelled against him and were very angry.

古文：乃以故吴令郑昌为韩王，以距汉。
现代文：就以从前的吴令郑昌为韩王，来阻挡汉军。
English: He used the former Wu general Zheng Chang as the king of Korea to block the Han army.

古文：令萧公角等击彭越。
现代文：命令萧公角等人攻击彭越。
English: He ordered Xiao Gongkang and others to attack Peng Yue.

古文：彭越败萧公角等。
现代文：彭越打败了萧公角等人。
English: Peng Yue defeated Xiao Gongjiao and others.

古文：汉使张良徇韩，乃遗项王书曰： 汉王失职，欲得关中，如约即止，不敢东。 
现代文：汉王派张良巡行招抚韩地，张良就给项王写信说： 汉王没有得到他应有的封地职位，打算取得关中，实现了原来的约定就停止进军，不敢继续东进。 
English: The Han king sent Zhang Liang on a campaign to woo Korea, and Zhang Liang wrote a letter to Xiang Wang saying: The Han king did not get the fief position he deserved, he intended to take Guanzhong, and when he fulfilled the original agreement, he stopped marching and dared not continue eastward.

古文：又以齐、梁反书遗项王曰： 齐欲与赵并灭楚。 
现代文：张良又把齐、梁的反叛文告送给项王，说： 齐想和赵并力灭楚。 
English: Zhang Liang also sent Qi and Liang's message of rebellion to Xiang Wang, saying: Qi wants to join forces with Zhao to exterminate Chu.

古文：楚以此故无西意，而北击齐。
现代文：楚军因此无意西进，而向北攻打齐国。
English: As a result, the Chu army had no intention of advancing westward, but attacked Qi to the north.

古文：徵兵九江王布。
现代文：项王向九江王黥布征调兵力。
English: King Xiang called for and transferred troops to King Zibo of the Jiujiang River.

古文：布称疾不往，使将将数千人行。
现代文：黥布称病不去，派将领率兵几千人前去。
English: Zengbu said that he would not go because he was ill, and sent a general to lead several thousand soldiers.

古文：项王由此怨布也。
现代文：项王从此怨恨黥布。
English: From then on, King Xiang held a grudge against Xibu.

古文：汉之二年冬，项羽遂北至城阳，田荣亦将兵会战。
现代文：汉二年冬，项羽北上到达城阳，田荣也率军到此与项羽会战。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu went north and reached Chengyang. Tian Rong also led an army to fight against Xiang Yu.

古文：田荣不胜，走至平原，平原民杀之。
现代文：田荣兵败，逃到平原，平原百姓杀死了他。
English: Tian Rong was defeated and fled to the plains. The people of the plains killed him.

古文：遂北烧夷齐城郭室屋，皆阬田荣降卒，系虏其老弱妇女。
现代文：楚军北进，烧毁齐国房屋，夷平齐国城郭，坑杀田荣降卒，掳掠老弱妇女。
English: The Chu army marched north, burned the houses of Qi, razed the city walls of Qi, killed the soldiers of Tian Rongyuan, and abducted the old and weak women.

古文：徇齐至北海，多所残灭。
现代文：在齐攻城略地，直至北海，到处烧杀掠夺。
English: They burned, killed and plundered everywhere, from the city of Qi to the North Sea.

古文：齐人相聚而叛之。
现代文：齐国人联合起来反抗项羽。
English: The people of Qi united to resist Xiang Yu.

古文：於是田荣弟田横收齐亡卒得数万人，反城阳。
现代文：田荣的弟弟田横收集齐国逃散的士卒，得到几万人，反于城阳。
English: Tian Rong's younger brother, Tian Yang, collected the soldiers who had fled Qi Province and obtained tens of thousands of them, which was contrary to Chengyang.

古文：项王因留，连战未能下。
现代文：项王因此停留，连续攻打几次都没有攻下城阳。
English: As a result, Xiangwang stopped and did not attack Chengyang for several consecutive times.

古文：春，汉王部五诸侯兵，凡五十六万人，东伐楚。
现代文：春天，汉王统率五路诸侯的军队，共五十六万人，东进伐楚。
English: In the spring, Han Wangtong led an army of five princes, a total of five hundred and sixty thousand people, eastward.

古文：项王闻之，即令诸将击齐，而自以精兵三万人南从鲁出胡陵。
现代文：项王听到这个消息，即令诸将攻打齐国，而自己带领精兵三万人南下，由鲁越过胡陵。
English: Upon hearing this news, King Xiang ordered his generals to attack Qi, while he himself led 30,000 elite soldiers to the south, crossing the Huling Mountains from Lu.

古文：四月，汉皆已入彭城，收其货宝美人，日置酒高会。项王乃西从萧，晨击汉军而东，至彭城，日中，大破汉军。
现代文：四月，汉军都已进入彭城，搜掠财物珍宝和美女，天天设筵会饮，项王向西进发，到达萧县，早晨攻击汉军，向东进发，到达彭城，中午，把汉军打得大败。
English: In April, the Chinese army had entered Pengcheng, looted the treasures and beauties, and held a banquet every day. Xiang Wang marched westward to Xiao County, attacked the Chinese army in the morning, marched eastward to Pengcheng, and defeated the Chinese army at noon.

古文：汉军皆走，相随入穀、泗水，杀汉卒十馀万人。
现代文：汉军溃退，相继逃入谷水、泗水，楚军杀死了十多万汉军士卒。
English: The Han army broke and retreated, fleeing successively into the valleys and streams. The Chu army killed more than one hundred thousand Han soldiers.

古文：汉卒皆南走山，楚又追击至灵壁东睢水上。
现代文：汉军向南往山里逃跑，楚军又追击到灵壁东面的睢水上。
English: The Han army fled southward into the mountains, and the Chu army chased them to Surabaya, east of Lingbi.

古文：汉军卻，为楚所挤，多杀，汉卒十馀万人皆入睢水，睢水为之不流。
现代文：汉军退却，为楚军所逼，拥挤在一起，多被杀伤，汉军十多万人落入睢水，睢水为之不流。
English: The Han army retreated, forced by the Chu army, crowded together, and were mostly killed and injured. More than a hundred thousand Han troops fell into Surabaya, and Surabaya did not flow.

古文：围汉王三匝。
现代文：楚军把汉王包围了三层。
English: The Chu army surrounded the Han king on three levels.

古文：於是大风从西北而起，折木发屋，扬沙石，窈冥昼晦，逢迎楚军。
现代文：这时大风从西北刮起，吹断了树木，掀毁了房屋，飞沙走石，天色昏昏沉沉，向楚军迎面扑来。
English: At this time, a gale blew up from the northwest, blowing down trees, destroying houses, throwing sand and stones, and the sky was dark and gloomy, rushing head-on at the Chu army.

古文：楚军大乱，坏散，而汉王乃得与数十骑遁去，欲过沛，收家室而西；楚亦使人追之沛，取汉王家：家皆亡，不与汉王相见。
现代文：楚军大乱，阵形溃散，汉王才得以和几十个骑兵逃走。汉王打算经过沛县，接取家眷西行；楚军也派人追往沛县，掠取汉王家眷。家眷都已逃亡，没能和汉王相见。
English: The Chu army was in chaos, the formation broke up, and Han Wang was only able to escape with dozens of cavalrymen. Han Wang planned to pass through Peixian and pick up his family members to go west; the Chu army also sent people to chase after Peixian and plunder Han Wang's family members. The family members had fled and were unable to meet Han Wang.

古文：汉王道逢得孝惠、鲁元，乃载行。
现代文：汉王在路上遇到了孝惠、鲁元，就用车拉着一块儿走。
English: Han Wang met Xiao Hui and Lu Yuan on the road, and they drove together.

古文：楚骑追汉王，汉王急，推堕孝惠、鲁元车下，滕公常下收载之。
现代文：楚军骑兵追赶汉王，汉王着急了，把孝惠、鲁元推下车去，膝公便下车把他们抱上来，这样推下抱上了好几次。
English: The Chu cavalry chased Han Wang. Han Wang was in a hurry and pushed Xiao Hui and Lu Yuan out of the car. He got out of the car and held them up. He pushed them down and held them up several times.

古文：如是者三。曰： 虽急不可以驱，柰何弃之？ 
现代文：滕公说： 事虽危急，车也不能赶得更快了，但儿女忍心抛弃！ 
English: Tenggong said: Although the situation is critical, the car can't get there any faster, but I can't help abandoning my children!

古文：於是遂得脱。
现代文：后来汉王终于脱身而出。
English: Later, Han Wang finally broke free.

古文：求太公、吕后不相遇。
现代文：他寻找太公、吕后，没有找到。
English: He searched for the Grand Duke and Empress Lu, but did not find them.

古文：审食其从太公、吕后间行，求汉王，反遇楚军。
现代文：审食其跟随太公、吕后从小路潜行，寻找汉王，反而碰上了楚军。
English: After judging the food, he followed the Grand Duke and Lv Hou to sneak through the back roads, looking for the Han king, but instead ran into the Chu army.

古文：楚军遂与归，报项王，项王常置军中。
现代文：楚军就带他们回到军营，报告了项王，项王把他们拘留在军营里。
English: The Chu army took them back to the military camp and reported to Xiang Wang, who detained them in the military camp.

古文：是时吕后兄周吕侯为汉将兵居下邑，汉王间往从之，稍稍收其士卒。
现代文：这时吕后的哥哥周吕侯为汉率兵驻扎在下邑，汉王抄小路来到周吕侯那里，稍稍收集了一些逃散的士卒。
English: At this time, Lü Guo's brother, Zhou Lü Hou, was stationed in Shimo-eup for Han and his soldiers. Han Wang took a shortcut to Zhou Lü Hou's place and collected a few scattered soldiers.

古文：至荥阳，诸败军皆会，萧何亦发关中老弱未傅悉诣荥阳，复大振。
现代文：到了荥阳，各路败军都会合在一起，萧何也征发关中没有著籍的老弱全部来到荥阳，声势又振作起来。
English: When they arrived in Shenyang, the defeated armies from all directions would come together. All the old and weak people who did not have a record of registration in the Xiaohe County came to Shenyang, and the momentum picked up again.

古文：楚起於彭城，常乘胜逐北，与汉战荥阳南京、索间，汉败楚，楚以故不能过荥阳而西。
现代文：楚军从彭城出发，常常乘胜追击败兵，与汉军在荥阳南面的京、索之间交战，汉军打败了楚军，楚军因此不能越过荥阳西进。
English: The Chu army set out from Pengcheng, often taking advantage of the victory to chase and defeat the soldiers, and fought with the Chinese army in the south of Shenyang between Beijing and So. The Chinese army defeated the Chu army, so the Chu army could not cross Shenyang to the west.

古文：项王之救彭城，追汉王至荥阳，田横亦得收齐，立田荣子广为齐王。
现代文：项王解救彭城，追赶汉王到达荥阳，田横乘机收复了齐国，立田荣子田广为齐王。
English: Xiang Wang rescued Pengcheng, chased Han Wang to arrive in Fenyang, Tian Heng took the opportunity to recover Qi, and Lingtian Rongzi Tian Guang became the king of Qi.

古文：汉王之败彭城，诸侯皆复与楚而背汉。
现代文：汉王在彭城战败，诸侯又都向楚背汉。
English: The Han king was defeated in Pengcheng, and all the lords turned their backs on Chu.

古文：汉军荥阳，筑甬道属之河，以取敖仓粟。
现代文：汉军驻扎在荥阳，修筑了一条甬道，与黄河相连，以便运取敖仓的粮食。
English: The Chinese army was stationed in Fenyang and built a causeway to connect with the Yellow River in order to transport grain from Kamakura.

古文：汉之三年，项王数侵夺汉甬道，汉王食乏，恐，请和，割荥阳以西为汉。
现代文：汉三年，项王屡次侵夺汉军的甬道，汉王粮食缺乏，恐慌起来，请求讲和，划分荥阳以西归汉。
English: In the third year of the Han Dynasty, King Xiang repeatedly invaded and conquered the Han army's Shandong Province. The Han king was short of food, panicked, asked for peace, and returned to Han from west of Poyang.

古文：项王欲听之。
现代文：项王想要答应他。
English: The king wanted to agree with him.

古文：历阳侯范增曰： 汉易与耳，今释弗取，後必悔之。 
现代文：历阳侯范增说： 汉军容易对付，现在放掉他们，不予以消灭，以后一定要懊悔。 
English: Liyang marquis Fan Zeng said, "Chinese troops are easy to deal with. If we let them go now and do not annihilate them, we will surely regret it later."

古文：项王乃与范增急围荥阳。
现代文：项王就和范增加紧围攻荥阳。
English: Xiang Wang and Fan Zeng attacked and besieged Fenyang.

古文：汉王患之，乃用陈平计间项王。
现代文：汉王深为忧虑，就采用陈平的计策离间项王和范增。
English: Han Wang was deeply worried, so he used Chen Ping's strategy to separate Xiang Wang and Fan Zeng.

古文：项王使者来，为太牢具，举欲进之。
现代文：项王的使者来了，给他准备了牛、羊、了齐全的丰盛筵席，打算端上去。
English: The king's messengers came and prepared for him oxen and sheep, and a great banquet was prepared, and he was about to be served.

古文：见使者，详惊愕曰： 吾以为亚父使者，乃反项王使者。 
现代文：端饭菜的人一看使者，假装惊愕他说： 我以为是亚父的使者，没想到反而是项王的使者。 
English: When the person serving the meal saw the messenger, he pretended to be surprised and said, "I thought it was the messenger of Abba, but I didn't expect it to be the messenger of King Ahasuerus."

古文：更持去，以恶食食项王使者。
现代文：把饭菜又端了下去，拿粗菜恶饭给项王的使者吃。
English: The meal was served again, and the emissary of King Xiang was given coarse vegetables and bad rice to eat.

古文：使者归报项王，项王乃疑范增与汉有私，稍夺之权。
现代文：使者回来报告了项王，项王就怀疑范增私通汉军，渐渐剥夺他的权力。
English: The envoy returned and reported to King Xiang, who suspected Fan Zeng of conspiring with the Han army and gradually deprived him of his power.

古文：范增大怒，曰： 天下事大定矣，君王自为之。
现代文：范增大怒，说： 天下的形势，大局已定，君王好自为之。
English: Fan Zeng flew into a rage, saying: The situation of the world, the overall situation has been determined, the monarch is free to do as he pleases.

古文：原赐骸骨归卒伍。 
现代文：请赐我这把老骨头回家吧。 
English: Please give me this old bone and let me go home.

古文：项王许之。
现代文：项王答应了他。
English: The king consented.

古文：行未至彭城，疽发背而死。
现代文：范增走了，还没有到彭城，因背上长毒疮死去了。
English: Fan Zeng left, but before reaching Pengcheng, he died of a long poisonous sore on his back.

古文：汉将纪信说汉王曰： 事已急矣，请为王诳楚为王，王可以间出。 
现代文：汉军将领纪信劝汉王说： 形势已经很危急了，请让我假装成大王替你去蒙骗楚军，大王可以乘机逃出城去。 
English: The Han general Jixin advised the Han king: "The situation is already very critical. Please let me pretend to be the great king to deceive the Chu army for you. The great king can take the opportunity to escape from the city."

古文：於是汉王夜出女子荥阳东门被甲二千人，楚兵四面击之。
现代文：于是汉王夜间从荥阳东门放出两千名身穿铠甲的妇女，楚军四面围击。
English: As a result, the Han king sent out two thousand women in armor from the east gate of Shenyang at night, and the Chu army besieged them on all sides.

古文：纪信乘黄屋车，傅左纛，曰： 城中食尽，汉王降。 
现代文：纪信乘坐黄屋车，左边的车衡上竖立着大纛旗，说： 城中粮食吃光了，汉王投降。 
English: Jixin rode in a yellow carriage with a large banner on the left side of the carriage, saying: "The city has run out of grain, and the Han king has surrendered."

古文：楚军皆呼万岁。
现代文：楚军都高呼万岁。
English: The Chu troops all shouted, "Long live!"

古文：汉王亦与数十骑从城西门出，走成皋。
现代文：汉王和几十名骑兵从西门出城，奔向成皋。
English: Han Wang and dozens of cavalrymen left the city from the West Gate and rushed to Chengdu.

古文：项王见纪信，问： 汉王安在？ 
现代文：项王见到纪信，问他： 汉王在哪里？ 
English: When the king saw Ji Xin, he asked him, "Where is Han Wang?"

古文：曰： 汉王已出矣。 
现代文：纪信说： 汉王已经出城了。 
English: Kishin said: Han Wang has left the city.

古文：项王烧杀纪信。
现代文：项王烧死了纪信。
English: Xiang Wang burned Ji Xin.

古文：汉王使御史大夫周苛、枞公、魏豹守荥阳。
现代文：汉王派御史大夫周苛、枞公、魏豹守卫荥阳。
English: The Han Emperor sent the Imperial Historian Zhou Cao, the Duke of Wei, and the Wei Leopard to guard Fenyang.

古文：周苛、枞公谋曰： 反国之王，难与守城。 
现代文：周苛、枞公商量说： 魏豹这个叛国之王，很难和他共守城池。 
English: Zhou Cao and Zou Gong discussed and said: Wei Pan, the king of treason, is difficult to defend the castle with him.

古文：乃共杀魏豹。
现代文：就一起杀死了魏豹。
English: They killed the leopard together.

古文：楚下荥阳城，生得周苛。
现代文：楚军攻下荥阳城，活捉了周苛。
English: The Chu army captured Shenyang City and captured Zhou Cao alive.

古文：项王谓周苛曰： 为我将，我以公为上将军，封三万户。 
现代文：项王对周苛说： 做我的将领，我以你为上将军，封三万户。 
English: Xiang Wang said to Zhou Cao: "Be my general, and I will make you the supreme general, with a fief of thirty thousand households.

古文：周苛骂曰： 若不趣降汉，汉今虏若，若非汉敌也。 
现代文：周苛骂着说： 你不赶快投降汉军，汉军就要俘虏你，你不是汉军的对手。 
English: Zhou scolded and said: If you don't surrender to the Chinese army soon, the Chinese army will capture you. You are not a rival of the Chinese army.

古文：项王怒，烹周苛，井杀枞公。
现代文：项王大怒，烹死了周苛，并杀了枞公。
English: The king was enraged, killed Zhou Cao, and killed Xing Gong.

古文：汉王之出荥阳，南走宛、叶，得九江王布，行收兵，复入保成皋。
现代文：汉王逃出荥阳，南走宛、叶，收服了九江王黥布，一边走一边收集士卒，又进入成皋固守。
English: Han Wang escaped from Fenyang, went south to Wan, Ye, conquered Jiujiang Wang Zibo, collected soldiers while walking, and entered Chenglu to hold fast.

古文：汉之四年，项王进兵围成皋。
现代文：汉四年，项王围攻成皋。
English: In the fourth year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Wang was besieged and defeated.

古文：汉王逃，独与滕公出成皋北门，渡河走脩武，从张耳、韩信军。
现代文：汉王逃走了，单身一人与滕公出了成皋北门，渡河奔向修武，到了张耳、韩信军营。
English: Han Wang ran away, a single person and Teng Gong went out of Chenglu North Gate, crossed the river to practice martial arts, and went to Zhang Er and Han Xin military camps.

古文：诸将稍稍得出成皋，从汉王。
现代文：诸将陆续逃出成皋，追随汉王。
English: The generals escaped one after another and followed Han Wang.

古文：楚遂拔成皋，欲西。
现代文：楚军攻下成皋，想要向西进军。
English: The Chu army captured Chengye and wanted to march west.

古文：汉使兵距之巩，令其不得西。
现代文：汉王派兵在巩县阻击，使楚军不能西进。
English: Han Wang sent troops to block the Chu army in Gong County, so that the Chu army could not advance westward.

古文：是时，彭越渡河击楚东阿，杀楚将军薛公。
现代文：这时，彭越渡河在东阿攻击楚军，杀死了楚将军薛公。
English: At this time, Peng Yue Duhe attacked the Chu army in Donga and killed the Chu general Xue Gong.

古文：项王乃自东击彭越。
现代文：项王就亲自东去攻打彭越。
English: King Xiang personally went east to attack Peng Yue.

古文：汉王得淮阴侯兵，欲渡河南。郑忠说汉王，乃止壁河内。
现代文：汉王得到淮阻侯的军队，打算渡河南下，郑忠劝阻汉王，汉王就停留在河内筑起营垒。
English: When Han Wang received Huai's army and planned to cross the river to the south, Zheng Zhong dissuaded Han Wang, and Han Wang stayed in Hanoi to build a camp.

古文：使刘贾将兵佐彭越，烧楚积聚。
现代文：派刘贾领兵协同彭越，烧掉楚军的粮食。
English: Liu Jia was sent to lead the troops in cooperation with Peng Yue to burn the grain of the Chu army.

古文：项王东击破之，走彭越。
现代文：项王东进打败了刘贾和彭越，彭越逃走了。
English: Xiang Wang Dongjin defeated Liu Jia and Peng Yue, and Peng Yue fled.

古文：汉王则引兵渡河，复取成皋，军广武，就敖仓食。
现代文：汉王率军渡河，又夺取了成皋，驻扎在广武，取食敖仓。
English: Han Wang led the army across the river, and captured Chengdu, stationed in Guangwu, and took food from Hanzang.

古文：项王已定东海来，西，与汉俱临广武而军，相守数月。
现代文：项王已经平定了东海，率军回来，向西进发，与汉军都在广武驻扎，相持了好几个月。
English: Xiang Wang had already pacified the East China Sea, led his army back, and headed west. Both he and the Chinese army were stationed in Guangwu, and they were at loggerheads for several months.

古文：当此时，彭越数反梁地，绝楚粮食，项王患之。
现代文：当时，彭越在梁地多次反击楚军，断绝楚军的粮食，项王很忧虑。
English: At that time, Peng Yue repeatedly counterattacked the Chu army in Liangdi and cut off the Chu army's grain. Xiang Wang was very worried.

古文：为高俎，置太公其上，告汉王曰： 今不急下，吾烹太公。 
现代文：他设置了一个高大的砧板，把太公放在上面，告诉汉王说： 现在不快快投降，我就烹杀太公。 
English: He set up a tall see-saw, placed the Grand Duke on it, and told King Han, "If you don't surrender now, I'll cook and kill the Grand Duke."

古文：汉王曰： 吾与项羽俱北面受命怀王，曰 约为兄弟 ，吾翁即若翁，必欲烹而翁，则幸分我一桮羹。 
现代文：汉王说： 我和你项羽都是北面称臣，受命于怀王，说是 结为兄弟 ，我的老子就是你的老子，一定要烹杀你的老子，那么希望你分给我一杯肉羹。 
English: The king of Han said: I and you, Xiang Yu, are both north-facing dignitaries, ordered by the king of Huai, saying that we are brothers, my old son is your old son, we must cook and kill your old son, then I hope you will give me a cup of meat soup.

古文：项王怒，欲杀之。
现代文：项王十分气愤，打算杀死太公。
English: The king was so angry that he planned to kill the grand duke.

古文：项伯曰： 天下事未可知，且为天下者不顾家，虽杀之无益，祇益祸耳。 
现代文：项伯说： 天下大事还不能预料，而且打天下的人不顾念家眷，虽然杀了太公也没有好处，只能增加祸患。 
English: Xiang Bo said: The great events of the world cannot be predicted, and those who attack the world do not care about their families. Although it is not beneficial to kill the Grand Duke, it can only increase the disaster.

古文：项王从之。
现代文：项王听从了项伯的话。
English: Xiang Wang obeyed Xiang Bo's words.

古文：楚汉久相持未决，丁壮苦军旅，老弱罢转漕。
现代文：楚、汉长期相持，未决胜负，年青力壮的苦干行军作战，年老体弱的疲于水陆运输。
English: Chu and Han have long been at loggerheads, with the outcome still undecided. The young and strong are hard at work marching to battle, while the old and infirm are tired of land and water transportation.

古文：项王谓汉王曰： 天下匈匈数岁者，徒以吾两人耳，原与汉王挑战决雌雄，毋徒苦天下之民父子为也。 
现代文：项王对汉王说： 几年来天下扰攘不安。只是由于我们两个人的缘故，愿意与你挑战，一决雌雄，不要使天下百姓空受痛苦。 
English: The king said to the king of Han, "For several years, the world has been in turmoil. It is only because of the two of us that I am willing to challenge you to a duel. Don't make the people of the world suffer in vain."

古文：汉王笑谢曰： 吾宁斗智，不能斗力。 
现代文：汉王笑着拒绝说： 我宁愿斗智，不愿斗力。 
English: Han Wang refused with a smile, saying, "I would rather fight wisdom than fight strength."

古文：项王令壮士出挑战。
现代文：项王叫壮士出去挑战。
English: The king called on the braves to go out and challenge.

古文：汉有善骑射者楼烦，楚挑战三合，楼烦辄射杀之。
现代文：汉军有个善长骑马射箭的人叫楼烦，楚军派壮士挑战三次，楼烦都把壮士射死了。
English: The Han army had a good horseman and archery man called Lou Dui, the Chu army sent a strong man to challenge three times, and Lou Dui shot the strong man dead.

古文：项王大怒，乃自被甲持戟挑战。
现代文：项王大怒，就亲自披甲持戟出来挑战。
English: Qiao Wang flew into a rage, so he personally put on his armor and came out to challenge.

古文：楼烦欲射之，项王瞋目叱之，楼烦目不敢视，手不敢发，遂走还入壁，不敢复出。
现代文：楼烦想要射他，项王怒目呵叱，楼烦眼不敢正视，手不敢发箭，跑回营垒，不敢再出来。
English: The building boredom wanted to shoot him, Xiang Wang frowned and scolded, the building boredom eyes dared not face up, the hand dared not fire arrows, ran back to the camp, and dared not come out again.

古文：汉王使人间问之，乃项王也。
现代文：汉王派人暗中打听，才知道挑战的人原来是项王。
English: Han Wang sent someone to secretly inquire, only to find out that the challenger was actually Xiang Wang.

古文：汉王大惊。
现代文：汉王大为震惊。
English: Han Wang was shocked.

古文：於是项王乃即汉王相与临广武间而语。汉王数之，项王怒，欲一战。
现代文：于是项王靠近汉王军营，和他隔着广武涧对话，汉王历数项王的罪状，项王非常气愤，要求决战。
English: As a result, Xiang Wang approached Han Wang's military camp, and had a dialogue with Guangwu across from him. Han Wang recited several of Xiang Wang's offenses. Xiang Wang was very angry and demanded a decisive battle.

古文：汉王不听，项王伏弩射中汉王。汉王伤，走入成皋。
现代文：汉王没有答应，项王埋伏的弓弩射中了汉王，汉王受伤跑回成皋。
English: Han Wang did not agree, and Xiang Wang's ambushed bow and arrow hit Han Wang. Han Wang was injured and ran back to Chenglu.

古文：项王闻淮阴侯已举河北，破齐、赵，且欲击楚，乃使龙且往击之。
现代文：项王听说淮阴侯已经攻下河北，打垮了齐、赵军队，而且将要进攻楚军，就派龙且前往迎击。
English: Hearing that Huaiyin Hou had conquered Hebei and defeated the Qi and Zhao armies, and that he was going to attack the Chu army, Xiang Wang sent Long Yu to meet the attack.

古文：淮阴侯与战，骑将灌婴击之，大破楚军，杀龙且。
现代文：淮阴侯与龙且交战，骑兵将领灌婴也出击龙且，大破楚军，杀死了龙且。
English: Huaiyin Hou fought with Longquan, and cavalry general Guan Yu also attacked Longquan, defeated the Chu army, and killed Longquan.

古文：韩信因自立为齐王。
现代文：韩信就自立为齐王。
English: Han Xin became the king of Qi on his own.

古文：项王闻龙且军破，则恐，使盱台人武濊涉往说淮阴侯。
现代文：项王听说龙且的军队垮了，大为恐慌，派遣盱台人武涉去游说淮阴侯。
English: When the king heard that Long Jie's army had collapsed, he panicked and dispatched soldiers from Xingtai to persuade Huaiyin.

古文：淮阴侯弗听。
现代文：淮阴侯不肯听从。
English: Huaiyin Hou refused to listen.

古文：是时，彭越复反，下梁地，绝楚粮。
现代文：这时，彭越又起来反楚，攻下梁地，断绝楚军的粮道。
English: At this time, Peng Yue again rose up against Chu, captured Liang Di, and cut off the Chu army's food supply.

古文：项王乃谓海春侯大司马曹咎等曰： 谨守成皋，则汉欲挑战，慎勿与战，毋令得东而已。
现代文：项王就对海春侯大司马曹咎等人说： 小心守卫成皋，即使汉军挑战，千万不要和它交战，不要让它东进就行了。
English: He said to Ma Cao Yin, the grand steward of the Prince of Hai Chun, and others, "Be careful to guard Cheng Ho. Even if the Chinese army challenges, do not fight with it. Just do not let it advance eastward."

古文：我十五日必诛彭越，定梁地，复从将军。 
现代文：我十五天一定杀掉彭越，平定梁地，再与将军会合。 
English: In fifteen days, I will definitely kill Peng Yue, pacify Liang Di, and then meet with the general.

古文：乃东，行击陈留、外黄。
现代文：于是项王率军东去，进军过程中攻打陈留、外黄。
English: As a result, Xiang Wang led the army to the east, and in the process of marching attacked Chen Liu and Waigang.

古文：外黄不下。
现代文：外黄没有攻下。
English: Waigao has not been captured.

古文：数日，已降，项王怒，悉令男子年十五已上诣城东，欲阬之。外黄令舍人兒年十三，往说项王曰： 彭越彊劫外黄，外黄恐，故且降，待大王。
现代文：过了几天，外黄投降了，项王很生气，命令十五岁以上的男子全部到城东，准备坑杀他们，外黄令门客的儿子才十三岁，前去劝告项王说： 彭越用武力逼迫外黄百姓，外黄百姓很害怕，所以暂时投降，等待大王到来。
English: After a few days, Wai Huang surrendered. King Xiang was very angry and ordered all the men over the age of fifteen to go to the east of the city and prepare to kill them. The son of the gatekeeper, who was only thirteen years old, went to advise King Xiang and said: Peng Yue used force to persecute the Wai Huang people. The Wai Huang people were very afraid, so they temporarily surrendered and waited for the arrival of the great king.

古文：大王至，又皆阬之，百姓岂有归心？
现代文：大王到了，又都坑杀他们，难道百姓还有归顺之心吗？
English: The great king has arrived, and they have all been killed. Do the people still have the heart to submit?

古文：从此以东，梁地十馀城皆恐，莫肯下矣。 
现代文：从这儿往东，梁地十多个城邑都心怀恐惧，没有肯投降的了。 
English: From here to the east, more than a dozen cities and towns in Liangdi were afraid and did not want to surrender.

古文：项王然其言，乃赦外黄当阬者。
现代文：项王赞成他的话，就赦免了外黄应当坑杀的那些人。
English: The king agreed with his words and pardoned those people who should have been killed.

古文：东至睢阳，闻之皆争下项王。
现代文：从外黄往东直至睢阳，听到这个消息，都争先恐后地向项王投降。
English: Upon hearing this news, people from Waifang in the east to Fenyang all scrambled to surrender to King Xiang.

古文：汉果数挑楚军战，楚军不出。
现代文：汉军果然屡次向楚军挑战，楚军不出来应战。
English: The Han army did indeed repeatedly challenge the Chu army, but the Chu army did not come out to fight.

古文：使人辱之，五六日，大司马怒，渡兵汜水。士卒半渡，汉击之，大破楚军，尽得楚国货赂。
现代文：汉军派人在阵前辱骂楚军，骂了五六天，大司马十分气愤，让士卒渡过汜水，士卒刚渡过一半，汉军出击，大败楚军，缴获了楚国全部物资。
English: The Han army sent people to abuse the Chu army before the battle, and they abused them for five or six days. The big Sima was very angry and let the soldiers cross the Surabaya River. The soldiers had just crossed half of it. The Chinese army attacked, defeated the Chu army, and seized all the materials of Chu.

古文：大司马咎、长史翳、塞王欣皆自刭汜水上。
现代文：大司马曹咎、长史欣都自刎在汜水上。
English: The superintendent, Ma Cao Wei, and the mayor, Shixin, were both on the water.

古文：大司马咎者，故蕲狱掾，长史欣亦故栎阳狱吏，两人尝有德於项梁，是以项王信任之。
现代文：大司马曹咎原来是蕲县的狱掾，长史司马欣原来是栎阳的狱吏，两人曾对项梁有过恩德，因此项王信任他们。
English: Chief Magistrate Ma Cao Gui used to be the warden of Min County, and Chief Magistrate Ma Xin used to be the warden of Shenyang. Both of them had been kind to Xiang Liang, so Xiang Wang trusted them.

古文：当是时，项王在睢阳，闻海春侯军败，则引兵还。
现代文：当时，项王在睢阳，听说海春侯的军队失败了，就率军返回。
English: At that time, Xiang Wang was in Fenyang. When he heard that Hai Chun Hou's army had failed, he led his army back.

古文：汉军方围锺离眛於荥阳东，项王至，汉军畏楚，尽走险阻。
现代文：汉军正在荥阳东面围攻钟离眛，项王一到，汉军害怕楚军，全部撤走到险阻地带。
English: The Chinese army was besieging Zhongli in the east of Fenyang. As soon as Xiang Wang arrived, the Chinese army was afraid of the Chu army and all withdrew to the danger zone.

古文：是时，汉兵盛食多，项王兵罢食绝。
现代文：这时，汉军兵多粮足，项王兵疲粮绝。
English: At this time, the Han soldiers had plenty of food, while the Xiang Wang soldiers were exhausted.

古文：汉遣陆贾说项王，请太公，项王弗听。
现代文：汉王派遣陆贾劝说项王，请求释放太公，项王没有答应。
English: The king of Han dispatched Lu Jia to persuade Xiang Wang to request the release of the grand duke, but Xiang Wang did not agree.

古文：汉王复使侯公往说项王，项王乃与汉约，中分天下，割鸿沟以西者为汉，鸿沟而东者为楚。
现代文：汉王又派遣侯公前去劝说项王，项王就和汉约定，平分天下，划鸿沟以西归汉，鸿沟以东归楚。
English: The king of Han also sent Hou Gong forward to persuade the king of Xiang. The king of Xiang agreed with Han to divide the world equally, dividing the gap to the west to Han, and the gap to the east to Chu.

古文：项王许之，即归汉王父母妻子。
现代文：项王答应了侯公的要求，就把汉王的父母妻子送了回来。
English: Xiang Wang agreed to the demands of the lord of the manor and sent back the parents and wife of the Han King.

古文：军皆呼万岁。
现代文：汉军都高呼万岁。
English: The Chinese troops all shouted "long live."

古文：汉王乃封侯公为平国君。
现代文：汉王封侯公为平国君。
English: The Han King's vassal lord was the Taira no Kuni.

古文：匿弗肯复见。
现代文：侯公隐匿起来，不肯再见汉王。
English: The lord of the manor went into hiding and refused to see the king again.

古文：曰： 此天下辩士，所居倾国，故号为平国君。 
现代文：汉王说： 这个人是天下善辩之士，所到之处，可以使人国家覆灭，所以封号为平国君。 
English: King Han said, "This man is the best debater in the world. Wherever he goes, he can bring the country to ruin. That's why he's called the Prince of Peace."

古文：项王已约，乃引兵解而东归。
现代文：项王已经订立和约，就解除了军事对峙，率军东归。
English: Xiang Wang had already concluded a peace treaty, so he lifted the military confrontation and led the army back to the east.

古文：汉欲西归，张良、陈平说曰： 汉有天下太半，而诸侯皆附之。
现代文：汉王准备西归，张良、陈平劝汉王说： 汉占领了大半个天下，而诸侯都归服了我们。
English: The Han king was preparing to return to the West. Zhang Liang and Chen Ping went to persuade the Han king, saying, "Han has occupied most of the world, and all the princes have submitted to us.

古文：楚兵罢食尽，此天亡楚之时也，不如因其机而遂取之。
现代文：楚军兵疲粮尽，这是上天让楚灭亡的时候，不如乘这个机会消灭它。
English: The soldiers of the Chu army were exhausted. It was time for Heaven to let Chu perish. It would be better to take this opportunity to destroy it.

古文：今释弗击，此所谓 养虎自遗患 也。 
现代文：现在放走项王不去攻打他，这就是所谓 养虎自遗患 。 
English: To let Xiang Wang go and not attack him now is the so-called "raising a tiger from the ashes."

古文：汉王听之。
现代文：汉王同意了他们的建议。
English: Han Wang agreed to their suggestion.

古文：汉五年，汉王乃追项王至阳夏南，止军，与淮阴侯韩信、建成侯彭越期会而击楚军。
现代文：汉五年，汉王追击项王到了阳夏南面，军队驻扎下来，与淮阴侯韩信、建成侯彭越约期会合进攻楚军。
English: In the fifth year of the Han Dynasty, Han Wang chased Xiang Wang to the south of Yangxia, the army was stationed, and Huaiyin Hou Han Xin and Jiancheng Hou Peng Yue agreed to attack the Chu army.

古文：至固陵，而信、越之兵不会。
现代文：到达固陵，而韩信、彭越的军队不来会合。
English: When they arrived at Guling, the armies of Han Xin and Peng Yue did not come to meet.

古文：楚击汉军，大破之。
现代文：楚军攻击汉军，把汉军打得大败。
English: The Chu army attacked the Chinese army and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：汉王复入壁，深堑而自守。
现代文：汉王又进入营垒，挖深沟堑，自为固守。
English: Han Wang also entered the camp, dug a deep ravine, and defended himself.

古文：谓张子房曰： 诸侯不从约，为之柰何？ 
现代文：汉王对张子房说： 诸侯不遵守约定，怎么办呢？ 
English: Han Wang said to Zhang Zifang: What if the lords do not keep the agreement?

古文：对曰： 楚兵且破，信、越未有分地，其不至固宜。
现代文：张子房回答说： 楚军即将崩溃，韩信、彭越没有分到一块封地，他们不来会合是很自然的。
English: Zhang Zifang replied, "The Chu army is about to collapse. Han Xin and Peng Yue have not been allocated a fief. It is natural for them not to attend the meeting."

古文：君王能与共分天下，今可立致也。
现代文：君王能和他们共分天下，眼下可以使他们立刻前来。
English: The king can share the world with them, and now he can make them come immediately.

古文：即不能，事未可知也。
现代文：如果不能这样，局势的发展很难预料。
English: If this is not the case, it will be difficult to predict how the situation will develop.

古文：君王能自陈以东傅海，尽与韩信；睢阳以北至穀城，以与彭越：使各自为战，则楚易败也。 
现代文：君王能从陈县以东到海边的地区，全部划给韩信，睢阳以北到谷城，分给彭越，使他们各自为战，那么楚军是容易打败的。 
English: If the king can divide the area from east of Chen County to the coast to Han Xin, and from north of Fenyang to Gucheng to Peng Yue, so that they fight separately, then the Chu army is easy to defeat.

古文：汉王曰： 善。 
现代文：汉王说： 好。 
English: Han Wang said: Good.

古文：於是乃发使者告韩信、彭越曰： 并力击楚。
现代文：于是就派遣使者告诉韩信、彭越说： 合力攻打楚军。
English: So they sent an envoy to tell Han Xin and Peng Yue that they should work together to attack the Chu army.

古文：楚破，自陈以东傅海与齐王，睢阳以北至穀城与彭相国。 
现代文：楚军崩溃后，从陈县以东到海边给予齐王，睢阳以北到谷城给予彭相国。 
English: After the collapse of the Chu army, Qi Wang was given from the east of Chen County to the seashore, and Peng Sangu was given from the north of Fenyang to Gucheng.

古文：使者至，韩信、彭越皆报曰： 请今进兵。 
现代文：使者一到，韩信、彭越都回话说： 请让我们立刻进兵。 
English: As soon as the envoys arrived, Han Xin and Peng Yue both replied: "Please let us enter the army immediately."

古文：韩信乃从齐往，刘贾军从寿春并行，屠城父，至垓下。
现代文：韩信就从齐地出发，刘贾的军队从寿春出发并行，屠毁了城父，到达垓下。
English: Han Xin set out from Qi, Liu Jia's army set out from Shouchun in parallel, slaughtered the city fathers, and arrived at Quzhou.

古文：大司马周殷叛楚，以舒屠六，举九江兵，随刘贾、彭越皆会垓下，诣项王。
现代文：大司马周殷背叛了楚国，利用舒地的兵力屠毁了六县，调动全部九江士卒，随同刘贾、彭越都会集在垓下，来到项王阵前。
English: Grand Master Ma Zhouyin betrayed the State of Chu, used the troops of Shudi to massacre six counties, mobilized all Jiujiang soldiers, and together with Liu Jia and Peng Yue, gathered under the command and came to Xiang Wang's front.

古文：项王军壁垓下，兵少食尽，汉军及诸侯兵围之数重。
现代文：项王的军队筑垒垓下，兵少粮尽，汉军和各路诸侯军队把它重重包围起来。
English: Under the yoke of the king's army building fortifications, the soldiers were short of food and exhausted, and the Chinese army and the armies of various princes surrounded it.

古文：夜闻汉军四面皆楚歌，项王乃大惊曰： 汉皆已得楚乎？
现代文：夜晚听到四面的汉军都是唱的楚地歌曲，项王大为震惊他说： 汉军已经全部占领了楚国吗？
English: In the evening, he heard the Chinese troops from all sides singing Chu songs. He was shocked and said: Have the Chinese troops completely occupied Chu?

古文：是何楚人之多也！ 
现代文：为什么楚国人如此众多啊？ 
English: Why are there so many people from Chu?

古文：项王则夜起，饮帐中。
现代文：项王就夜间起来，在帐幕里饮酒。
English: And he rose up by night, and drank wine in his tent.

古文：有美人名虞，常幸从；骏马名骓，常骑之。
现代文：有一个名字叫虞的美人，得到项王的宠爱，常常带在身边。有一匹叫骓的骏马，项王经常骑着它。
English: There was a beautiful woman named Yu, who was favored by King Xiang, and he often carried her around with him. There was a horse called Gong, and King Xiang often rode it.

古文：於是项王乃悲歌慷慨，自为诗曰： 力拔山兮气盖世，时不利兮骓不逝。
现代文：于是项王慷慨悲歌，自己作诗唱道： 力拔山兮气盖世，时不利兮雅不逝。
English: As a result, Xiang Wang generously composed a tragic song and sang a poem himself: "Strive to lift the mountain and bring the spirit to the world, when it is unfavorable, the beauty will not die."

古文：骓不逝兮可柰何，虞兮虞兮奈若何！ 
现代文：骓不逝兮可奈何，虞兮虞兮奈若何！ 
English: If you don't die, what can you do? If you don't die, what's the point?

古文：歌数阕，美人和之。
现代文：唱了好几遍，美人跟着他一起唱。
English: He sang it several times, and the beautiful woman sang along with him.

古文：项王泣数行下，左右皆泣，莫能仰视。
现代文：项王悲泣，泪下数行，左右侍从也都俯首哭泣，不能抬头仰视。
English: The king wept bitterly and shed tears several times, and the attendants on both sides also bowed their heads and wept, unable to look up.

古文：於是项王乃上马骑，麾下壮士骑从者八百馀人，直夜溃围南出，驰走。
现代文：于是项王上马，部下壮士骑马随从的有八百多人，当夜冲破包围，向南飞驰而去。
English: As a result, Xiang Wang mounted his horse, accompanied by more than eight hundred of his subordinates on horseback, broke through the encirclement that night, and sped away to the south.

古文：平明，汉军乃觉之，令骑将灌婴以五千骑追之。
现代文：天亮，汉军才发觉，派骑兵将领灌婴率五千骑兵追赶项王。
English: It was only at dawn that the Chinese army discovered that they had sent a cavalry general with five thousand cavalrymen to chase Xiang Wang.

古文：项王渡淮，骑能属者百馀人耳。项王至阴陵，迷失道，问一田父，田父绐曰 左 。
现代文：项王渡过淮水，能够跟从的骑兵只有一百多人，项王到阴陵，迷失了道路，询问一个种田的人，种田的人欺骗他说 往左 。
English: Xiang Wang crossed Huai Shui, and there were only more than a hundred cavalrymen who could follow him. Xiang Wang went to Yinling, lost his way, and asked a farmer. The farmer deceived him and said, "To the left."

古文：左，乃陷大泽中。
现代文：项王往左去，结果陷入了一大片沼泽中。
English: He went to the left and ended up in a large swamp.

古文：以故汉追及之。
现代文：因此，汉军追上了项王。
English: Therefore, the Chinese army caught up with Xiang Wang.

古文：项王乃复引兵而东，至东城，乃有二十八骑。
现代文：项王就又带兵向东，到了东城，只有二十八个骑兵了。
English: So the king led his army east again, and when they reached the eastern city, there were only twenty-eight horsemen left.

古文：汉骑追者数千人。
现代文：追赶的汉军骑兵有几千人。
English: The pursuing Chinese cavalry numbered several thousand.

古文：项王自度不得脱。谓其骑曰： 吾起兵至今八岁矣，身七十馀战，所当者破，所击者服，未尝败北，遂霸有天下。
现代文：项王自己估计不能脱身了，对他的骑兵说： 我起兵到现在八年了，亲身打过七十多次仗，谁抵挡我，我就打垮谁，我攻击谁，谁就降服，未曾打过败仗，因而霸有天下。
English: The king thought that he would not be able to escape, and said to his cavalry: "I have been in the army for eight years now, and I have personally fought more than seventy battles. Whoever opposes me, I will defeat him. Whoever I attack, he will surrender. I have never been defeated in battle, so I dominate the world.

古文：然今卒困於此，此天之亡我，非战之罪也。
现代文：然而现在终于被围困在这里，这是上天要灭亡我，不是我作战的过失。
English: However, now that I am finally trapped here, it is God's will to destroy me, not my fault for fighting.

古文：今日固决死，原为诸君快战，必三胜之，为诸君溃围，斩将，刈旗，令诸君知天亡我，非战之罪也。 
现代文：今天固然要决心战死，愿意为各位痛痛快快地打一仗，一定要三次取胜，为各位突破重围，斩杀敌将，砍倒敌人军旗，让各位知道是上天灭亡我，不是我作战的过失。 
English: Today, of course, I must be determined to fight and die, I am willing to fight a battle for you, I must win three times, break through the encirclement for you, kill the enemy general, cut down the enemy's flag, and let you know that it is God who destroyed me, not my fault in the war.

古文：乃分其骑以为四队，四乡。
现代文：项王就把他的骑兵分为四队，面向四方。
English: So he divided his horsemen into four companies, and they set out in four directions.

古文：汉军围之数重。
现代文：汉军把项王包围了好几层。
English: The Chinese army surrounded Xiang Wang for several floors.

古文：项王谓其骑曰： 吾为公取彼一将。 
现代文：项王对他的骑兵说： 我为你们斩他一个将领。 
English: And the king said unto his horsemen, I will make him a captain over you.

古文：令四面骑驰下，期山东为三处。
现代文：项王命令骑兵四面疾驰而下，约定在山的东面会合为三处。
English: The king ordered the cavalry to gallop down on all sides, and agreed to meet at three places on the east side of the mountain.

古文：於是项王大呼驰下，汉军皆披靡，遂斩汉一将。
现代文：于是项王大声呼喊着，飞奔直下，汉军惊惶溃乱，项王就斩了一个汉军将领。
English: As a result, Xiang Wang shouted loudly and ran straight down, the Chinese army panicked and collapsed, and Xiang Wang beheaded a Chinese general.

古文：是时，赤泉侯为骑将，追项王，项王瞋目而叱之，赤泉侯人马俱惊，辟易数里与其骑会为三处。
现代文：当时，赤泉侯做骑兵将领，追赶项王，项王怒目大吼，赤泉侯人马俱惊，倒退了好几里。项王和他的骑兵会合为三处。
English: At that time, the lord of Akizumi, as a cavalry general, chased Xiang Wang. Xiang Wang was furious and roared. The lord of Akizumi was shocked and retreated several miles. Xiang Wang and his cavalry met at three places.

古文：汉军不知项王所在，乃分军为三，复围之。项王乃驰，复斩汉一都尉，杀数十百人，复聚其骑，亡其两骑耳。
现代文：汉军不知道项王在哪里，就把军队分为三部分，又把项王包围起来，项王骑马冲驰，又斩了汉军的一个都尉，杀死了百十来人，再把他的骑兵集合起来，只丧失了两个骑兵。
English: The Chinese army did not know where Xiang Wang was, so they divided the army into three parts, encircled Xiang Wang again, Xiang Wang galloped on horseback, beheaded a lieutenant of the Chinese army, killed a hundred and ten people, and then gathered his cavalry, losing only two cavalry.

古文：乃谓其骑曰： 何如？ 
现代文：项王就对他的骑兵说： 怎么样？ 
English: So the king said to his horsemen, "What do you think?

古文：骑皆伏曰： 如大王言。 
现代文：骑兵都佩服他说： 正像大王所说的那样。 
English: The horsemen all admired him and said, "It is just as the great king said."

古文：於是项王乃欲东渡乌江。
现代文：项王想要向东渡过乌江。
English: Xiao Wang wants to cross the Wujiang River to the east.

古文：乌江亭长舣檥船待，谓项王曰： 江东虽小，地方千里，众数十万人，亦足王也。
现代文：乌江亭长把船靠在岸边等待着项王。他对项王说： 江东虽小，地方也纵横上千里，民众数十万，也足以称王。
English: He said to King Xiang: Although the east of the Yangtze River is small, there are thousands of miles of land and hundreds of thousands of people, which is enough to praise the king.

古文：愿大王急渡。
现代文：希望大王赶快渡江。
English: I hope the great king will cross the river soon.

古文：今独臣有船，汉军至，无以渡。 
现代文：现在只有我有船只，汉军来到这，没有船只渡江。 
English: Now I'm the only one with boats. The Chinese army has come here, and there are no boats to cross the river.

古文：项王笑曰： 天之亡我，我何渡为！
现代文：项王笑着说： 上天要灭亡我，我渡江干什么呢！
English: Xiao Wang smiled and said, "Heaven wants to destroy me, so why should I cross the river?"

古文：且籍与江东子弟八千人渡江而西，今无一人还，纵江东父兄怜而王我，我何面目见之？
现代文：况且我和江东子弟八千人渡江西进，现在没有一个人回来，即使江东父兄怜悯我，让我称王，我有什么脸面去见他们？
English: What's more, I and eight thousand of Jiangdong's sons and brothers have crossed the Yangtze River into the West, and now not a single person has returned. Even if Jiangdong's father and brother had mercy on me and let me be crowned king, what face would I have to face them?

古文：纵彼不言，籍独不愧於心乎？ 
现代文：即使他们不说什么，我项籍难道不干心有愧吗？ 
English: Even if they don't say anything, don't I feel guilty?

古文：乃谓亭长曰： 吾知公长者。
现代文：项王对亭长说： 我知道你是个忠厚长者。
English: The king said to the chief steward, "I know that you are a loyal elder.

古文：吾骑此马五岁，所当无敌，尝一日行千里，不忍杀之，以赐公。 
现代文：我骑这匹马五年了，所向无敌，曾经一天奔驰一千里，不忍心杀了它，把它送给你吧。 
English: I've been riding this horse for five years, I'm invincible, I used to gallop a thousand miles a day, I can't bear to kill it, I'll give it to you.

古文：乃令骑皆下马步行，持短兵接战。
现代文：就叫骑兵都下马步行，甲短兵接战。
English: He ordered the cavalry to dismount and walk, and the cavalry joined the battle.

古文：独籍所杀汉军数百人。
现代文：单单项籍一人就杀死汉军几百人。
English: One person from a single nationality alone killed hundreds of Han soldiers.

古文：项王身亦被十馀创。
现代文：项王身上也受了十多处伤。
English: He also suffered more than ten wounds.

古文：顾见汉骑司马吕马童，曰： 若非吾故人乎？ 
现代文：他回头看见汉军的骑司马吕马童，说： 你不是我的老朋友吗？ 
English: He looked back and saw the horseman of the Chinese army, Ma Lüma Tong, and said: Aren't you my old friend?

古文：马童面之，指王翳曰： 此项王也。 
现代文：吕马童面对项王，指给王翳说： 这就是项王。 
English: Luma Tong faced Xiang Wang, pointed to Wang Yao and said, "This is Xiang Wang."

古文：项王乃曰： 吾闻汉购我头千金，邑万户，吾为若德。 
现代文：项王说： 我听说汉军用一千斤黄金、一万户封邑来悬赏我的头，我给你做件好事吧。 
English: He said, "I have heard that the Han army has offered a reward of one thousand kilos of gold and ten thousand fiefs for my head. Let me do something good for you."

古文：乃自刎而死。
现代文：就自刎而死。
English: He hanged himself and died.

古文：王翳取其头，馀骑相蹂践争项王，相杀者数十人。
现代文：王翳割了项王的头，其他骑兵自相蹂躏践踏，争夺项王的尸体，互相残杀了几十人。
English: The king castrated Xiang Wang's head, and other cavalrymen trampled on and fought over Xiang Wang's body, killing dozens of people.

古文：最其後，郎中骑杨喜，骑司马吕马童，郎中吕胜、杨武各得其一体。
现代文：最后，郎中骑杨喜，骑司马吕马童，郎中吕胜、杨武各自得到了项王的一段肢体。
English: In the end, Yang Xi, the second-in-command rider, Ma Lyu Madong, the third-in-command rider, Lv Sheng, and Yang Wu each got a piece of Xiang Wang's limb.

古文：五人共会其体，皆是。
现代文：五个人把肢体合拢起来，都确实是项王的。
English: Five people put the limbs together, and they are indeed the king's.

古文：故分其地为五：封吕马童为中水侯，封王翳为杜衍侯，封杨喜为赤泉侯，封杨武为吴防侯，封吕胜为涅阳侯。
现代文：所以把封赏的土地分为五部分：封吕马童为中水侯，封王翳为杜衍侯，封杨喜为赤泉侯，封杨武为吴防侯，封吕胜为涅阳侯。
English: Therefore, the land to be awarded was divided into five parts: the land to be awarded to Lyu Madong was Zhongshui County, the land to be awarded to Wang Xi was Duyan County, the land to be awarded to Yang Xi was Chisen County, the land to be awarded to Yang Wu was Wu Fang County, and the land to be awarded to Liusheng was Neyang County.

古文：项王已死，楚地皆降汉，独鲁不下。
现代文：项王死后，楚国各地都投降了汉军，只有鲁城不肯投降。
English: After the death of King He, all the regions of Chu surrendered to the Chinese army, except for Lucheng, which refused to surrender.

古文：汉乃引天下兵欲屠之，为其守礼义，为主死节，乃持项王头视鲁，鲁父兄乃降。
现代文：汉王就带领天下士卒打算屠毁鲁城，因为他们坚守礼义，为主人以死守节，汉王就拿项王的头给鲁城人看，鲁城父兄才投降了。
English: Han Wang then led the world's soldiers to plan the slaughter of Lucheng, because they adhered to propriety and kept the festival for their master with death. Han Wang then took the head of Xiang Wang to show to the people of Lucheng. Only then did Lucheng's father and brothers surrender.

古文：始，楚怀王初封项籍为鲁公，及其死，鲁最後下，故以鲁公礼葬项王穀城。
现代文：最初，楚怀王曾封项籍为鲁公，等到项籍死了，鲁城又最后投降，所以用鲁公的礼仪把项王理葬在谷城。
English: At first, King Chu Huai had made Xiang Zi the ruler of Lucheng. When Xiang Zi died, Lucheng finally surrendered, so he buried Xiang Wang Li in Gucheng with the etiquette of Lucheng.

古文：汉王为发哀，泣之而去。
现代文：汉王为项王举哀，哭了一场，然后离开了鲁城。
English: Han Wang mourned for Xiang Wang, cried for a while, and then left Lucheng.

古文：诸项氏枝属，汉王皆不诛。
现代文：各支项氏宗族，汉王都不诛杀。
English: The Han kings did not fight and kill each branch of the clan.

古文：乃封项伯为射阳侯。
现代文：封项伯为射阳侯。
English: Feng Xiangbo was the mayor of Xiangyang.

古文：桃侯、平皋侯、玄武侯皆项氏，赐姓刘。
现代文：桃侯、平景侯、玄武侯都是项氏宗族，赐姓刘。
English: Taohou, Pingjinghou, and Xuanwuhou were all from the Xiang clan and were given the surname Liu.

古文：太史公曰：吾闻之周生曰 舜目盖重瞳子 ，又闻项羽亦重瞳子。
现代文：太史公说：我听周生说 舜的眼睛大概是两个瞳孔 ，又听说项羽也是两个瞳孔。
English: Tai Shikong said: I heard Zhou Sheng say that the dragonfly's eyes are probably two pupils, and I also heard that the collar feathers are also two pupils.

古文：羽岂其苗裔邪？
现代文：项羽难道是舜的后裔吗？
English: Are they the descendants of dragonflies?

古文：何兴之暴也！
现代文：为什么兴起得这么迅速啊！
English: Why did it rise so quickly?

古文：夫秦失其政，陈胜首难，豪杰蜂起，相与并争，不可胜数。
现代文：秦朝政治腐败，陈涉首先发难，豪杰蜂起，相互争夺，不可胜数。
English: Political corruption in the Qin Dynasty, Chen Tang was the first to face difficulties, heroes and heroines rose up and fought against each other, and the list is endless.

古文：然羽非有尺寸，乘埶起陇亩之中，三年，遂将五诸侯灭秦，分裂天下，而封王侯，政由羽出，号为 霸王 ，位虽不终，近古以来未尝有也。
现代文：然而项羽毫无凭借，乘势起于民间，三年时间，就率领五路诸侯军消灭了秦朝，分割天下，封王建侯，政自己出，号为 霸王 ，虽然没有始终保持他的地位，但近古以来，还未曾有过这样的事情。
English: However, Xiang Yu had no support, he took advantage of the momentum from the people, and in three years, he led the five-way vassal army to destroy the Qin Dynasty, divide the world, establish a vassal state, establish a vassal state, and call himself the overlord, although he did not always maintain his status, but since ancient times, there has never been such a thing.

古文：及羽背关怀楚，放逐义帝而自立，怨王侯叛己，难矣。
现代文：等到项羽放弃关中，怀恋楚地，放逐义帝而自立为王，抱怨王侯背叛自己，这时已经难以控制局势了。
English: By the time Xiang Yu gave up Guanzhong, fell in love with Chudi, exiled Yidi and became king himself, and complained that the prince betrayed himself, it was already difficult to control the situation.

古文：自矜功伐，奋其私智而不师古，谓霸王之业，欲以力征经营天下，五年卒亡其国，身死东城，尚不觉寤而不自责，过矣。
现代文：他自我夸耀功勋，逞一己私智，不效法古人，以为创立霸王的事业，需要用武力来经营天下，仅五年时间就丢了他自己的国家，身死东城，还没有觉悟，不自我谴责，这就不对了。
English: He boasted of his own merits, boasted of his own wisdom, did not follow the example of the ancients, thought that the creation of the overlord's cause required the use of force to manage the world, lost his own country in only five years, died in the East, has not yet realized, does not self-condemn, this is not right.

古文：乃引 天亡我，非用兵之罪也 ，岂不谬哉！
现代文：竟然用 上天灭亡我，不是我用兵打仗的过错 为借口，难道不是太荒谬了吗！
English: Isn't it ridiculous to use the excuse that it was not my fault that I used soldiers to fight a war, but that it was the heavens that destroyed me!

