古文：吴王夫差既退于黄池，乃使王孙苟告劳于周，曰： 昔者楚人为不道，不承共王事，以远我一二兄弟之国。
现代文：吴王夫差从黄池盟会返回后，使派王孙苟向周天子报功，说： 过去楚国人不遵守礼仪，不共同承担天子的贡赋，疏远我们这些同姓诸侯国。
English: After Wu Wangfuchai returned from the Huangchi League, he sent Wang Songuo to pay tribute to Zhou Tianzi, saying: In the past, the Chu people did not observe the etiquette, did not jointly bear the tribute of Tianzi, and alienated those of us with the same surname.

古文：吾先君阖庐不贳不忍，被甲带剑，挺铍搢铎，以与楚昭王毒逐于中原柏举。
现代文：我们先君阖闾不愿宽赦容忍这种行为，披甲佩剑，拿起武器，指挥军队，与楚昭王在中原柏举一带展开激战。
English: Unwilling to tolerate such behavior, our forefathers put on armor and swords, took up arms, commanded the army, and fought a fierce battle with King Chu Zhaowang in the central plains of Baizhong.

古文：天舍其衷，楚师败绩，王去其国，遂至于郢。
现代文：上天赐福给吴，楚军被打败，楚昭王逃离本国，吴军攻进楚国国都。
English: Heaven blessed Wu, the Chu army was defeated, King Chu Zhao fled the country, and the Wu army invaded the capital of Chu.

古文：王总其百执事，以奉其社稷之祭。
现代文：阖闾集合楚国百官，让他们恢复对社稷的祭祀。
English: Assemble the hundred officials of Chu, and let them restore the sacrificial rites to the community.

古文：其父子、昆弟不相能，夫概王作乱，是以复归于吴。
现代文：因为阖闾和弟弟夫概王关系不好，夫概王在国内作乱，所以才回到吴国。
English: Because of the bad relationship between Yan and his brother Fuqiu Wang, Fuqiu Wang caused turmoil in the country, so he returned to Wuxi.

古文：今齐侯壬不鉴于楚，又不承共王命，以远我一二兄弟之国。
现代文：现在齐侯壬不吸取楚国的教训，也不共同承担向天子纳贡的义务，疏远我们这些同性诸侯国。
English: Now Qihongren does not learn the lesson of Chu, nor does it jointly undertake the obligation to pay tribute to the heavenly son, alienating us from these same-sex vassal states.

古文：夫差不贳不忍，被甲带剑，挺铍搢铎，遵汶伐博。簦笠相望于艾陵。
现代文：我夫差不愿意宽赦容忍这种行为，披甲佩剑，拿起武器，指挥军队沿着汶水北上去攻打齐国的博邑，冒雨在艾陵与齐军交战。
English: My poor husband did not want to forgive and tolerate such behavior, put on armor and sword, picked up weapons, and commanded the army to go north along the Wenshui River to attack the boeup of Qi, and braved the rain to fight the Qi army in Ailing.

古文：天舍其衷，齐师还。
现代文：上天赐福给吴国，齐国军队被打败。
English: Heaven blessed the State of Wu, and the army of the State of Qi was defeated.

古文：夫差岂敢自多，文、武实舍其衷。
现代文：我夫差怎敢自夸，其实是周文王、周武王赐福给吴国啊。
English: How dare my poor husband boast. In fact, it was King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu who blessed the State of Wu.

古文：归不稔于岁，余沿江溯淮，阙沟深水，出于商、鲁之间，以彻于兄弟之国。
现代文：回国后不等庄稼成熟，我又沿江溯淮河而上，挖掘长沟，直抵宋国和鲁国，来沟通同姓诸侯国。
English: After returning to China, when the crops were not ripe, I followed the Huaihe River upstream and dug a long ditch to reach the Song and Lu dynasties to communicate with the dynasties of the same name.

古文：夫差克有成事，敢使苟告于下执事。 
现代文：我夫差终于能成就大事，冒昧地派王孙苟向您的手下官员报告。 
English: My mission has finally achieved a great success. I have the audacity to send Wang Sunqo to report to your subordinate officials.

古文：周王答曰： 苟，伯父令女来，明绍享余一人，若余嘉之。
现代文：周天子回答说： 王孙苟，吴伯父派你来，说明他要继承先君的传统拥戴我，我嘉勉他的做法。
English: Zhou Tianzi replied: "Wang Sun Gou, Uncle Wu sent you to explain that he wants to carry on the tradition of his forefathers and support me. I appreciate his actions.

古文：昔周室逢天之降祸，遭民之不祥，余心岂忘忧恤，不唯下土之不康靖。
现代文：过去周王室遭逢天降之祸，王子朝率民众作乱，我心里哪能忘记忧患，不仅是忧虑下面的诸侯不安宁哩。
English: In the past, the Zhou royal family was plagued by a calamity, and the prince led the people to cause turmoil. In my heart, I can't forget the sorrow, not only the anxiety of the princes.

古文：今伯父曰： 戮力同德。 
现代文：现在吴伯父说： 与我同心合力。 
English: Now Uncle Wu said, "Join forces with me."

古文：伯父若能然，余一人兼受而介福。
现代文：他如果真能这样做，那真是我的福气。
English: If he can do that, then I'm blessed.

古文：伯父多历年以设元身，伯父秉德已侈大哉！ 
现代文：希望他健康长寿，他的德行真是伟大啊！ 
English: I wish him a long and healthy life. His virtues are truly great!

