古文：穆皇帝讳聃，字彭子，康帝子也。
现代文：穆皇帝名司马聃，字彭子，是康帝的儿子。
English: Emperor Mu's name was Sima Zi, also known as Peng Zi, and he was the son of Emperor Kang.

古文：建元二年九月丙申，立为皇太子。
现代文：建元二年九月丙申，立为皇太子。
English: In September of the second year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：戊戌，康帝崩。
现代文：戊戌日，康帝去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Emperor Kangxi passed away.

古文：己亥，太子即皇帝位，时年二岁。
现代文：己亥日，太子即皇帝位，当时年仅两岁。
English: Ji Hai Ri, the crown prince or emperor, was only two years old at the time.

古文：大赦，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：大赦天下，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: There was a general amnesty throughout the country, and the empress was revered as empress dowager.

古文：壬寅，皇太后临朝摄政。
现代文：壬寅日，皇太后上朝摄政。
English: Minshinri, the Empress Dowager became regent.

古文：冬十月乙丑，葬康皇帝于崇平陵。
现代文：冬十月乙丑，把康皇帝安葬在崇平陵。
English: In winter and October, Emperor Kang was buried in Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：十一月庚辰，车骑将军庾冰卒。
现代文：十一月庚辰，车骑将军庾冰去世。
English: In November, Geng Chen, the cavalry general Zou Bing passed away.

古文：永和元年春正月甲戌朔，皇太后设白纱帷于太极殿，抱帝临轩。
现代文：永和元年春正月甲戌初一，皇太后在太极殿设置白纱帷幕，抱着穆帝坐到殿前。
English: On the first day of spring in the first month of the first year of Yonghe, the Empress Dowager set up a white gauze curtain in the Taiji Hall and sat in front of the hall with Mu Di in her arms.

古文：改元。
现代文：改年号。
English: Change the year.

古文：甲申，进镇军将军、武陵王晞为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司，以镇军将军顾众为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲申日，进升镇军将军、武陵王司马晞为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司，任命领军将军顾众为尚书右仆射。
English: On the day of Jiaxing, the general of the town army was promoted, Wuling Wang Simak was promoted to the general of the town army, Kaifu Yi was promoted to the third division, and the leading general Gu Zong was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：夏四月壬戌，诏会稽王昱录尚书六条事。
现代文：夏四月壬戌，诏令会稽王司马昱录尚书六条事。
English: In the summer of April, the Imperial Edict Commission examined six matters recorded in Wang Sima's book.

古文：五月戊寅，大雩。
现代文：五月戊寅，举行大雩之祭。
English: In May, the Great Dragonfly Festival is held.

古文：尚书令、金紫光禄大夫、建安伯诸葛恢卒。
现代文：尚书令、金紫光禄大夫、建安伯诸葛恢死。
English: Shang Shuling, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Jian Anbo Zhuge died.

古文：六月癸亥，地震。
现代文：六月癸亥，发生地震。
English: In June, there was an earthquake in Xinhai.

古文：秋七月庚午，持节、都尉江荆司梁雍益宁七州诸军事、江州刺史、征西将军、都亭侯庾翼卒。
现代文：秋七月庚午，持节、都尉江、荆、司、梁、雍、益、宁七州诸军事、江州刺史、征西将军、都亭侯庾翼死。
English: On the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Ji Jie, Duye Jiang, Jing, Si, Liang, Yong, Yi, Ning Qizhou Military, Jiangzhou Shishi, General of the Western Expedition, and Du Ting Hou Xuan died.

古文：翼部将于瓚、戴羲等杀冠军将军曹据，举兵反，安西司马硃焘讨平之。
现代文：庚翼的部将于瓒、戴羲等杀冠军将军曹据，举兵反叛，安西司马朱焘讨伐伐并平定了他们。
English: Geng Ying's troops raised an army and rebelled against the champion generals Cao Rong and Dai Rong, while Anxi Sima Zhu Rong led a crusade and pacified them.

古文：八月，豫州刺史路永叛奔于石季龙。
现代文：八月，豫州刺史路永反叛并投奔了石季龙。
English: In August, Yu Zhi Lu Yong rebelled and defected to Shijilong.

古文：庚辰，以辅国将军、徐州刺史桓温为安西将军、持节、都督荆司雍益梁宁六州诸军事，领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史。
现代文：庚辰日，任命辅国将军、徐州刺史桓温为安西将军、持节、都督荆、司、雍、益、梁、宁六州诸军事，兼领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, he appointed the general of Fu Guo Province, the general of Anxi Province, the general of Xuzhou Province, and the military commanders of the six provinces of Jing, Shih, Yong, Yi, Liang, and Ning, as well as the lieutenant of Nanban Province and the general of Jingzhou Province.

古文：石季龙将路永屯于寿春。
现代文：石季龙的将领路永屯于寿春。
English: Shi Jilong's generals are Yongtun and Shuchun.

古文：九月丙申，皇太后诏曰： 今百姓劳弊，其共思详所以振恤之宜。
现代文：九月丙申，皇太后诏曰： 如今百姓劳苦，请一起仔细考虑振济抚恤的事宜办法。
English: In September, the empress dowager issued an edict saying, "Nowadays, the people are working hard. Please carefully consider the matter of how to raise their pensions."

古文：及岁常调非军国要急者，并宜停之。 
现代文：至于赋税劳役凡不是军队国政所急需的，都应该停止。 
English: As for tax-paying labor, anything that is not urgently needed by the military and the government should be stopped.

古文：冬十二月，李势将爨頠来奔。
现代文：冬十二月，李势将爨頠来投奔。
English: In the winter of December, Li Xiang came to the capital.

古文：凉州牧张骏伐焉耆，降之。
现代文：凉州牧张骏攻打焉耆，降服了他们。
English: Liangzhou herdsman Zhang Xuan led the attack against Yan Xuan and defeated them.

古文：二年春正月丙寅，大赦。
现代文：二年春正月丙寅，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Cui Yin was granted amnesty.

古文：己卯，使持节、侍中、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史、骠骑将军、录尚书事、都乡侯何充卒。
现代文：己卯日，使持节、侍中、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史、骠骑将军、录尚书事、都乡侯何充死。
English: On the day of his death, the military commander of Yangzhou, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi, Yangzhou Shishi and Yangzhou Shishi died.

古文：二月癸丑，以左光禄大夫葵谟领司徒，录尚书六条事、抚军大将军、会稽王昱及谟并辅政。
现代文：二月癸丑，任命左光禄大夫葵兼领司徒，录尚书六条事、抚军大将军、会稽王昱和蔡谟一起辅佐国政。
English: At the end of February, he appointed Zuo Guanglu as the doctor of Kwai and the leader of the magistrates, recorded six matters, the general of the army, the auditor Wang Yao, and Zhaimu to assist the national politics.

古文：三月丙子，以前司徒左长史殷浩为建武将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：三月丙子，任命前司徒左长史殷浩为建武将军、扬州刺史。
English: In March, Cixi appointed Yin Hao, the former chief of the Left Division of the Sidu, as the general of Jianwu and the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：夏四月己酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月己酉初一，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of summer in April.

古文：五月丙戌，凉州牧张骏卒，子重华嗣。
现代文：五月丙戌，凉州牧张骏死，他的儿子张重华继承职位。
English: In May, Liangzhou herdsman Zhang Xuan died, and his son Zhang Chonghua succeeded to the post.

古文：六月。
现代文：六月。
English: In June.

古文：石季龙将王擢袭武街，执张重华护军胡宣。
现代文：石季龙将的将领王擢袭击武街，俘获张重华的护军胡宣。
English: Shi Jilong's general Wang Gang attacked Wu Street and captured Zhang Chonghua's escort Hu Xuan.

古文：又使麻秋、孙伏都伐金城，太守张冲降之。
现代文：石季龙又派麻秋、孙伏都攻打金城，太守张冲投降。
English: Shi Jilong also sent Ma Qiu and Sun Fudu to attack Jincheng, and the governor Zhang Chong surrendered.

古文：重华将谢艾击秋，败之。
现代文：张重华的将领谢艾攻打麻秋，打败了麻秋。
English: Zhang Chonghua's general Xie Ai attacked Ma Qiu and defeated him.

古文：秋七月，以兗州刺史褚裒为征北大将军，开府仪同三司。
现代文：秋七月，任命兖州刺史褚裒为征北大将军，开府仪同三司。
English: In autumn and July, he appointed Zhangzhou Zhi Shijian as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments were held.

古文：冬十月，地震。
现代文：冬十月，发生地震。
English: Winter, October, earthquake.

古文：十一月辛未，安西将军桓温帅征虏将军周抚，辅国将军、谯王无忌，建武将军袁乔伐蜀，拜表辄行。
现代文：十一月辛未，安西将军桓温率领征虏将军周抚，辅国将军、谯王司马无忌，建武将军袁乔攻打蜀国，上了奏章马上就出发。
English: In November of Xinwei, Anxi General Huan Wen led the conscript general Zhou Fu, the auxiliary general, Shao Wang Sima Wu Bo, and Jianwu General Yuan Qiao to attack Shu, and set out immediately after receiving the report.

古文：十二月，枉矢自东南流于西北，其长竟天。
现代文：十二月，枉矢星从东南流向西北，行径整个天空。
English: In December, the meteor stream flows from the southeast to the northwest, covering the entire sky.

古文：三年春正月乙卯，桓温攻成都，克之。
现代文：三年春正月乙卯，桓温攻打成都，克之。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Kanen attacked Chengdu and defeated it.

古文：丁亥，李势降，益州平。
现代文：丁亥日，李势投降，益州平定。
English: On Dinghai Day, Lisheng surrendered and Yizhou was pacified.

古文：林邑范文攻陷日南，害太守夏侯览，以尸祭天。
现代文：林邑范文攻陷日南，害太守夏侯览，用尸体祭天。
English: Lin-eup Fan-wen invaded Nichinan and killed the grand marshal Xia Houchan, and used the corpse to worship Heaven.

古文：夏四月，地震。
现代文：夏四月，地震。
English: In the summer of April, an earthquake.

古文：蜀人邓定、隗文举兵反，桓温又击破之，使益州刺史周抚镇彭模。
现代文：蜀人邓定、隗文率领军队反叛，桓温又击败他们，并派益州刺史周抚镇彭模。
English: Shu people Dangding and Jianwen led the army to rebel, and Kuanwen defeated them again, and sent troops to Pengmo, Zhoufu Town, Yizhou Province.

古文：丁巳，邓定、隗文复入据成都，征虏将军杨谦弃涪城，退保德阳。
现代文：丁巳，邓定、隗文两次入据成都，征虏将军杨谦放弃涪城，退保德阳。
English: Ding Si, Dang Ding, and Nie Wen entered Chengdu twice, and the conscript general Yang Qian abandoned Shicheng and withdrew to Deyang.

古文：五月戊申，进慕容皝为安北将军。
现代文：五月戊申，进升慕容皝为安北将军。
English: In May, he was promoted to General of Anbei.

古文：石季龙又使其将石宁、麻秋等伐凉州，次于曲柳。
现代文：石季龙又派他的将领石宁、麻秋等人攻打凉州，驻在曲柳。
English: Shi Jilong also sent his generals Shi Ning, Ma Qiu and others to attack Liangzhou, stationed in Quliu.

古文：张重华使将军牛旋御之，退守枹罕。
现代文：张重华派将军牛旋抵御他们，退守枹罕。
English: Zhang Chonghua sent his general Niu Xuan to defend against them and retreated to Shuhan.

古文：六月辛酉，大赦。
现代文：六月辛酉，大赦天下。
English: June is the month of forgiveness.

古文：秋七月，范文复陷日南，害督护刘雄。
现代文：秋七月，范文再次攻陷日南，杀害守将刘雄。
English: In autumn and July, Fan Wen invaded Nichinan again and killed Liu Xiong.

古文：隗文立范贲为帝。
现代文：隗文立范贲为皇帝。
English: Emperor Wen established Fan Rong as emperor.

古文：八月戊午，张重华将谢艾进击麻秋，大败之。
现代文：八月戊午，张重华的将领谢艾进击麻秋，大败他们。
English: In the afternoon of August, Zhang Chonghua's general Xie Ai marched into Maqiu and defeated them.

古文：九月，地震。
现代文：九月，地震。
English: In September, an earthquake.

古文：冬十月乙丑，假凉州刺史张重华大都督陇右关中诸军事、护羌校尉、大将军，武都氐王杨初为征南将军、雍州刺史、平羌校尉、仇池公，并假节。
现代文：冬十月乙丑，暂任凉州刺史张重华为大都督陇右关中诸军事、护羌校尉、大将军，武都氐王杨初为征南将军、雍州刺史、平羌校尉、仇池公，全都授假节。
English: In the second month of October in winter, Zhang Chonghua, the provisional governor of Liangzhou, granted leave to all military officers, guards, and generals in the middle of Yuyuguan, and Yangchu, the king of Wuyuguan, granted leave to the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of Yongzhou, the lieutenant of Pingyuguan, and the prince of Qiuqi.

古文：十二月，振威护军萧敬文害征虏将军杨谦，攻涪城，陷之。
现代文：十二月，振威护军萧敬文杀害征虏将军杨谦，攻打涪城，攻下。
English: In December, Xiao Jingwen, Zhenwei's bodyguard, killed Yang Qian, a conscript general, and attacked and captured Lucheng.

古文：遂取巴西，通于汉中。
现代文：随之夺取巴西，与汉中相通。
English: He then conquered Brazil and established communication with Han and China.

古文：四年夏四月，范文寇九德，多所杀害。
现代文：四年夏四月，范文侵犯九德，杀害了很多人。
English: In the summer and April of the fourth year, Fan Wen invaded Jiude again and killed many people.

古文：五月，大水。
现代文：五月，发大水。
English: In May, there was a big flood.

古文：秋八月，进安西将军桓温为征西大将军、开府仪同三司，封临贺郡公；西中郎将谢尚为安西将军。
现代文：秋八月，进安西将军桓温为征西大将军、开府仪同三司，封临贺郡公；西中郎将谢尚为安西将军。
English: In the autumn and August, Anxi General Kanwen was promoted to General of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji was promoted to Linhe County, and West Vice Admiral Xie Shang was promoted to General of the Western Expedition.

古文：九月丙申，慕容皝死，子隽嗣伪位。
现代文：九月丙申，慕容皝死，他的儿子幕容隽继承伪位。
English: In September, Murong Zhen died, and his son, Mak Rong Zhen, succeeded to the pseudo throne.

古文：冬十月己未，地震。
现代文：冬十月己未，地震。
English: Winter in October, earthquake in October.

古文：石季龙使其将苻健寇竟陵。
现代文：石季龙派他的将领苻健攻打竟陵。
English: Shi Jilong sent his general Zou Jian to attack the tomb.

古文：十二月，豫章人黄韬自号孝神皇帝，聚众数千，寇临川，太守庾条讨平之。
现代文：十二月，豫章人黄韬从称孝神皇帝，聚集了数千人，攻打临川，太守庾条征讨伐，并消灭了他们。
English: In December, Huang Qi, a man from Yuzhang, gathered thousands of people to attack Linchuan, calling himself the emperor of filial piety, and destroyed them.

古文：五年春正月辛巳朔，大赦。
现代文：五年春正月辛巳初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the first day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the

古文：庚寅，地震。
现代文：庚寅日，地震。
English: On the 27th, an earthquake.

古文：石季龙僭即皇帝位于鄴。
现代文：石季龙在邺城即皇帝位。
English: Shi Jilong ascended to the throne in Handan.

古文：二月，征北大将军褚裒使部将王龛北伐，获石季龙将支重。
现代文：二月，征北大将军褚裒让部将王龛北伐，俘获石季龙的将领导支重。
English: In February, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Zou Zengbu, and the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Wang Zengbu, went to the north, and the general who captured Shi Jilong was the leader of the supporting force.

古文：夏四月，益州刺史周抚、龙骧将军硃焘击范贲，获之，益州平。
现代文：夏四月，益州刺史周抚、龙骧将军朱焘攻打范贲，并把他抓了起来，益州平定。
English: In the summer of April, Zhu Xi, the general of Zhou Fu and Longyu in Yizhou, attacked Fan Yu, and arrested him, and Yizhou was pacified.

古文：封周抚为建城公。
现代文：封周抚为建城公。
English: Fong Zhou Fu was appointed as the city builder.

古文：假慕容隽大将军、幽平二州牧、大单于、燕王。
现代文：暂任慕容隽大将军、幽平二州牧、大单于、燕王。
English: General Murong Hao, Youping Erzhoumu, Datan Yu, and Yan Wang were temporarily appointed.

古文：征西大将军桓温遣督军滕畯讨范文，为文所败。
现代文：征西大将军桓温派督军滕畯讨伐划范文，被范文打败。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Kuan Wen, sent the commander-in-chief of the army, Teng Xi, to fight and defeat Fan Wen, but was defeated by Fan Wen.

古文：石季龙死，子世嗣伪位。
现代文：石季龙死，他的儿子继承伪位。
English: Shi Jilong died and his son succeeded to the pseudo-throne.

古文：五月，石遵废世而自立。
现代文：五月，石遵废了石世，从立为皇帝。
English: In May, Shi Zun abolished the Stone Age and became emperor.

古文：六月，桓温屯安陆，遣诸将讨河北。
现代文：六月，桓温屯安陆，派各将讨伐伐河北。
English: In June, Kuan Wen Tun An Lu sent his generals to attack Hebei.

古文：石遵扬州刺史王浃以寿阳来降。
现代文：石遵的扬州刺史王浃率领寿阳人马来投降。
English: Yangzhou Jishi Wang Qi of Shizun led the Shouyang people to surrender.

古文：秋七月，褚裒进次彭城，遣部将王龛、李迈及石遵将李农战于代陂，王师败绩，王龛为农所执，李迈死之。
现代文：秋七月，褚裒进驻彭城，派派部将王龛、李迈和石遵的将领李农交战，官军被打得大败，王龛被李农俘获，李迈战死。
English: In the autumn and July, he entered Pengcheng and sent commanders Wang Jun, Li Mai and Shizun's general Li Nong to fight. The government army was defeated, Wang Jun was captured by Li Nong, and Li Mai died in the battle.

古文：八月，褚裒退屯广陵，西中郎将陈逵焚寿春而遁。
现代文：八月，褚裒退驻广陵，西中郎将陈逵焚烧寿春城后逃跑。
English: In August, Gong retired to Guangling, and Xi Zhonglang burned Chen Yao's Shuchun Castle and then fled.

古文：梁州刺史司马勋功石遵长城戍，仇池公杨初袭西城，皆破之。
现代文：梁州刺史司马勋在长城戍攻打石遵，仇池公杨初袭出西城，都打败了敌人。
English: Liangzhou assassin Sima Xun attacked Shizhong at the foot of the Great Wall, and Qiuqi Gong Yangchu attacked out of the West City, both of which defeated the enemy.

古文：冬十月，石遵将石遇攻宛，陷之，执南阳太守郭启。
现代文：冬十月，石遵将石遇打攻宛，攻克，俘获了南阳太守郭启。
English: In the winter of October, Shi Zun attacked and defeated Shi Rong, and captured Guo Qi, the Nanyang governor.

古文：司马勋进次悬钩，石季龙故将麻秋距之，勋退还梁州。
现代文：司马勋进驻悬钩，石季龙故将麻秋抵抗他，司马勋退回梁州。
English: Sima Xun was stationed in Huanhu, Shi Qilong resisted him, and Sima Xun returned to Liangzhou.

古文：十一月丙辰，石鉴弑石遵而自立。
现代文：十一月丙辰，石鉴弑石遵，从立为帝。
English: In November of the same year, Shi Jian and Shi Zun were enthroned as emperor.

古文：十二月己酉，使持节、都督徐兗二州诸军事、徐州刺史、征北大将军、开府仪同三司、都乡侯褚裒卒。
现代文：十二月己酉，使持节、都督徐兖二州诸军事、徐州刺史、征北大将军、开府仪同三司、都乡侯褚裒去世。
English: In December of the same year, on the occasion of the National Day of the People's Republic of China, the military governor of Xuzhou, Xuzhou Zhishi, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, the three officials of Kaifu, and the mayor of the capital town of Xuzhou passed away.

古文：以建武将军、吴国内史荀羡为使持节、监徐兗二州诸军事、北中郎将、徐州刺史。
现代文：任命建武将军、吴国内史荀羡为使持节、监徐、兖二州诸军事、北中郎将、徐州刺史。
English: He appointed General Jianwu, Wu Jiaozhong Shi, Jian Xu, Jian Erzhou Military, North Zhonglang General, and Xuzhou Zhishi.

古文：六年春正月，帝临朝，以褚裒丧故，悬而不乐。
现代文：六年春正月，穆帝上朝，因为褚裒丧葬的缘故，乐器悬挂起来不秦乐。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, because of the funeral of Emperor Mu, the musical instruments were hung up to play Qin music.

古文：闰月，冉闵弑石鉴，僭称天王，国号魏。
现代文：闰月，冉闵杀石鉴，自称天王，国号为魏。
English: Leap month, Ran Xizhi Shi Jian, self-proclaimed heavenly king, the country's name is Wei.

古文：鉴弟祗僭帝号于襄国。
现代文：石鉴的弟弟石祗也在襄国称帝。
English: Shijian's younger brother Shijie also became emperor in Xiang.

古文：丁丑，彗星见于亢。
现代文：丁丑日，彗星出现在亢宿。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, a comet appeared in Xizhou.

古文：己丑，加中军将军殷浩督扬豫徐兗青五州诸军事、假节。
现代文：己丑日，加任中军将军殷浩督扬豫徐兖青五州诸军事、假节。
English: On the day of his disgrace, he was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, Yin Hao, Yang Yu, Xu Jiaqing, the five states of the military and the false festival.

古文：氐帅苻洪遣使来降，以为氐王，封广川郡公。
现代文：氐率领苻洪派使者来投降，任苻蔡共为氐王，封广川郡公。
English: Zhai led Zhai Hong to send an envoy to surrender, appointed Zhai Cai as the king of Zhai, and made him the governor of Guangchuan County.

古文：假洪子健节，监河北诸军事、右将军，封襄国县公。
现代文：暂援苻洪的儿子苻健苻节，监河北诸军事、右将军，封襄国县公。
English: He temporarily supported Yu Hong's son, Yu Jianlu Jie, supervised the military and right-wing generals in Hebei Province, and appointed him the governor of Xiangguo County.

古文：三月，石季龙故将麻秋鸩杀苻洪于枋头。夏五月，大水。
现代文：三月，石季龙的老将麻秋在枋头杀死苻洪。夏五月，发大水。
English: In March, Shi Jilong's veteran Ma Qiu killed Zhaohong in Shantou. In May, Xia sent a large amount of water.

古文：庐江太守袁真攻合肥，克之。
现代文：庐江太守袁真攻打合肥，克之。
English: Yuan Zhen, the governor of the Li River, attacked Hefei and defeated it.

古文：六月，石祗遣其弟琨攻冉闵将王泰于邯郸，琨师败绩。
现代文：六月，石祗派其弟石琨在邯郸攻打冉闵的将领王泰，石琨的军队被打得大败。
English: In June, Shi Jue sent his brother Shi Jue to attack Wang Tai, the general of Ran Jue, in Handan. Shi Jue's army was soundly defeated.

古文：秋八月，辅国将军、谯王无忌薨。
现代文：秋八月，辅国将军、谯王司马无忌去世。
English: In autumn and August, the general of the Auxiliary Province, King Sima, passed away.

古文：苻健帅众入关。
现代文：苻健率领军队入关。
English: Hao Jian led the troops into the pass.

古文：冬十一月，冉闵围襄国。
现代文：冬十一月，冉闵围攻襄国。
English: In the winter of November, Ran Yu besieged and attacked Xiangyang.

古文：十二月，免司徒蔡谟为庶人。
现代文：十二月，把司徒蔡谟贬为庶人。
English: In December, he relegated Szeto Cajmo to the status of a commoner.

古文：是岁，大疫。
现代文：这一年，有大瘟疫。
English: That year, there was a great plague.

古文：七年春正月丁酉，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年春正月丁酉初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring.

古文：辛丑，鲜卑段龛以青州来降。
现代文：辛丑日，鲜卑段龛献上青州来投降。
English: On the day of Xinqiu, Xingbei Duanzhang offered to surrender to Qingzhou.

古文：苻健僭称王，国号秦。
现代文：苻健僣称王，国号为秦。
English: Jian Jian was proclaimed king, and the country's name was changed to Qin.

古文：二月戊寅，以段龛为镇北将军，封齐公。
现代文：二月戊寅，任命段龛为镇北将军，封齐公。
English: In February, Wu Yin appointed Duan Yu as the general of Zhenbei and made him the lord of Qi.

古文：石祗大败冉闵于襄国。
现代文：石祗在襄国把败冉打得大败。
English: Shijiazhuang defeated the defeated in Xiangguo.

古文：夏四月，梁州刺史司马勋出步骑三万，自汉中入秦川，与苻健战于五丈原，王师败绩。
现代文：夏四月，梁州刺史司马勋出步骑三万，从汉中入秦川，在五丈原和符健交战，官军大败。
English: In the summer of April, Liangzhou cadet Sima Xun set out on foot and rode thirty thousand, entered the Qin River from Hanzhong, and fought with Fu Jian in Wuzhangyuan. The government army was defeated.

古文：加尚书令顾和开府仪同三司。
现代文：加任尚书令顾和为开府仪同三司。
English: Shang Shuling Gu He was appointed as the head of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：刘显杀石祗。
现代文：刘显杀石祗。
English: Liu Xian killed Shijiazhuang.

古文：五月，祗兗州刺史刘启自鄄城来奔。
现代文：五月，石祗的兖州刺史刘启从鄄城来投奔。
English: In May, Liu Qi, the governor of Zhangzhou of Shijiazhuang, came from Zhangcheng to run for office.

古文：秋七月，尚书令、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司顾和卒。
现代文：秋七月，尚书令、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司顾和去世。
English: In autumn and July, Shang Shuling, Dr. Sakoroku, Kaifu Yi, and the three officials Gu He passed away.

古文：甲辰，涛水入石头，溺死者数百人。
现代文：甲辰日，洪水冲入石头城，溺死数百人。
English: On the same day, floods swept into Stone Town, drowning hundreds of people.

古文：八月，冉闵豫州牧张遇以许昌来降，拜镇西将军。
现代文：八月，冉闵的豫州牧张遇率领许昌人马来投降，授张遇镇西将军。
English: In August, Zhang Rong's Yuzhou herdsman Zhang Rong led Xu Changren to surrender and awarded Zhang Rong the title of Zhenxi General.

古文：九月，峻阳、太阳二陵崩。
现代文：九月，峻阳、太阳两陵崩塌。
English: In September, the two mausoleums collapsed under the harsh sun.

古文：甲辰，帝素服临于太极殿三日，遣兼太常赵拔修复山陵。
现代文：甲辰日开始，皇帝穿着素服上太极殿三天，派兼太常赵拔修复山陵。
English: From the first day of the first hour, the emperor wore plain clothes on the Taiji Hall for three days and sent Zhao Badu to repair the mausoleum.

古文：冬十月，雷雨，震电。
现代文：冬十月，雷有雨，电闪雷鸣。
English: Winter in October, thunder and rain, lightning and thunder.

古文：十一月，石祗将姚弋仲、冉闵将魏脱各遣使来降，以弋仲为车骑将军、大单于，封高陵郡公；弋仲子襄为平北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史、平乡县公；脱为安北将军、监冀州诸军事、冀州刺史。
现代文：十一月，石祗的将领姚弋仲、冉闵的将领魏脱各派人来表示投降，任命弋仲为车骑将军、大单于，封高陵郡公；姚弋仲儿子姚襄为平北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史、平乡县公；魏脱为安北将军、监冀州诸军事、冀州刺史。
English: In November, the generals of Shijiazhuang, Yao Yuzhong, and Ran, Wei De sent people to express their surrender, and appointed Yuzhong as the cavalry general, Datan Yu as the governor of Fenggaoling County; Yao Yuzhong's son, Yao Xiang, as the general of Pingbei, the military governor of Fengtu, the military governor of Fengtu, the military governor of Fengtu and the governor of Pingxiang County; Wei De as the general of Anbei, the military governor of Jizhou, and the military governor of Jizhou.

古文：十二月辛未，征西大将军桓温帅众北伐，次于武昌而止。
现代文：十二月辛未日，征西大将军桓温率领军队北伐，到武昌后停下。
English: On the eve of December, the general of the Western Expedition, Huan Wen, led the army of the Northern Expedition, and stopped after reaching Wuchang.

古文：时石季龙故将周成屯廪丘，高昌屯野王，乐立屯许昌，李历屯卫国，皆相次来降。
现代文：当时石季龙老部下周成屯驻在廪丘，高昌屯驻在野王，乐立屯驻在许昌，李历屯驻在卫国，全都先后来投降。
English: At that time, Shi Jilong's old subordinates, Zhou Cheng Tun stationed in Mengqiu, Gaochang Tun stationed in Yanwang, Le Li Tun stationed in Xuchang, Li Litun stationed in Weiguo, all surrendered later.

古文：八年春正月辛卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年春正月辛卯，日食。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the year, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：刘显僭帝号于襄国，冉闵击破，杀之。
现代文：刘显在襄国僣帝号，冉闵打败刘显，杀了他。
English: Liu Xian was on the Emperor's Yacht in Xiangguo Province. Ran Yu defeated Liu Xian and killed him.

古文：苻健僭帝号于长安。
现代文：苻健在长安称帝号。
English: Gong Jian is known as the Emperor in Chang'an.

古文：二月，峻平、崇阳二陵崩。
现代文：二月，峻平、崇阳两陵崩。
English: In February, two mausoleums, one in Jianping and the other in Soyang, collapsed.

古文：戊辰，帝临三日，遣殿中都尉王惠如洛阳，以卫五陵。
现代文：戊辰日开始，穆帝上朝三天，派殿中都尉王惠到洛阳，任命卫五陵。
English: On the morning of the first day of the fifth lunar month, three days after the ascension of Mu Di, he sent the palace lieutenant Wang Hui to Luoyang to appoint Wei Wuling.

古文：镇西将军张遇反于许昌，使其党上官恩据洛阳。
现代文：镇西将军张遇在许昌反叛，派他的同党上官恩据守洛阳。
English: Zhenxi General Zhang encountered a rebellion in Xuchang and sent his party colleague, Shangguan En, to defend Luoyang.

古文：乐弘攻督护戴施于仓垣。
现代文：乐弘在仓垣攻打督护戴施。
English: Yoshihiro is in Kuragaki, supervising and protecting Daishi.

古文：三月，使北中郎荀羡镇淮阴。
现代文：三月，派北中郎将荀羡镇守淮阴。
English: In March, he sent Bei Zhongro to guard Huaiyin.

古文：苻健别帅侵顺阳，太守薛珍击破之。
现代文：苻健的别率领入侵顺阳，太守薛珍打败了他们。
English: He Jian's party led an invasion of Shunyang, and the governor Xue Zhen defeated them.

古文：夏四月，冉闵为慕容隽所灭。
现代文：夏四月，冉闵被慕容隽所灭。
English: In the summer of April, Ran Xuan was killed by Murong Xuan.

古文：隽僭帝号于中山，称燕。
现代文：幕容隽在中山僣称帝号，国号燕。
English: In Zhongshan, Maku Rong was called the Emperor and the country was called Yan.

古文：安西将军谢尚帅姚襄与张遇战于许昌之诫桥，王师败绩。
现代文：安西将军谢尚率领姚襄与张遇战于许昌的诫桥，官军大败。
English: Anxi General Xie Shang led by Yao Xiang and Zhang met in battle at Xu Chang's Bridge of Command, and the government army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：苻健使其弟雄袭遇，虏之。
现代文：苻健派他的弟弟苻雄花卉攻击张遇，俘虏了他。
English: Yan Jian sent his younger brother Yan Xiong Huahui to attack Zhang Rong and captured him.

古文：秋七月，大雩。
现代文：秋七月，祭天求雨。
English: In autumn and July, there is a festival to pray for rain.

古文：石季龙故将王擢遣使请降，拜征西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：石季龙的故将王擢派使者来请求投降，任王擢为征西将军、秦州刺史。
English: Shi Jilong's former general Wang Yuanzhong sent an envoy to request the surrender, and appointed Wang Yuanzhong as the general of the Western Expedition and the historian of Qinzhou.

古文：丁酉，以镇军大将军、武陵王晞为太宰，抚军大将军、会稽王昱为司徒，征西大将军桓温为太尉。
现代文：丁酉日，任命镇军大将军、武陵王司马晞为太宰，任命抚军大将军、会稽王司马昱为司徒，征西大将军桓温为太尉。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, he appointed the general of the town army, Wuling Wang Simak, as Dazai, the general of the army of Fuxi, the auditor Wang Simak, as Sittu, and the general of the Western Expedition, Kuan Wen, as Taijun.

古文：八月，平西将军周抚讨萧敬文于涪城，斩之。
现代文：八月，平西将军周抚讨伐萧敬文于涪城，杀了他。
English: In August, the Pingxi general Zhou Fu attacked Xiao Jingwen in Licheng and killed him.

古文：冉闵子智以鄴降，督护戴施获其传国玺，送之，文曰 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 ，百僚毕贺。
现代文：冉闵的儿子冉智率领邺城人马投降，督护戴施得到了他的传国玉玺，呈送皇上，玺文是 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 ，百官都来庆贺。
English: Ran Zhi, the son of Ran Zhi, led the people of Zhengcheng to surrender, and the overseer Daishi received his Jade Scepter, which was presented to the emperor. The scepter was ordered by heaven, and the emperor Shuchang and hundreds of officials came to celebrate.

古文：九月，冉智为其将马愿所执，降于慕容恪。
现代文：九月，冉智被的将领马愿逮捕，向慕容恪投降。
English: In September, Ran Zhi was arrested by the general Ma Xiang and surrendered to Murong Ke.

古文：中军将军殷浩帅众北伐，次泗口，遣河南太守戴施据石门，荥阳太守刘遂戍仓垣。
现代文：中军将军殷浩率领军队北伐，驻在泗口，派河南太守戴施占据石门，荥阳太守刘遂戍仓垣。
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao led the army of the Northern Expedition, stationed in Hekou, and sent the Henan governor Dai Shi to occupy Shimen, and the Poyang governor Liu Suiyang to occupy Cangagaki.

古文：冬十月，秦州刺史王擢为苻健所逼，奔于凉州。
现代文：冬十月，秦州刺史王擢为苻健所逼迫，逃到凉州。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Zhishi from Qinzhou was persecuted by Yan Jian and fled to Liangzhou.

古文：九年春正月乙卯朔，大赦。
现代文：九年春正月乙卯初一，大赦天下。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 9th year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：张重华使王擢与苻健将苻雄战，擢师败绩。
现代文：张重华派王擢与苻健将领苻雄交战，王擢的军队大败。
English: Zhang Chonghua sent Wang Yuanzhang to fight with the general Yu Jian and the leader Yu Xiong, and Wang Yuanzhang's army was soundly defeated.

古文：丙寅，皇太后与帝同拜建平陵。
现代文：丙寅日，皇太后与皇帝共同拜祭建平陵。
English: On the Ninth Day of the Ninth Month, the Empress Dowager and the Emperor jointly paid homage to the construction of Pingling Mausoleum.

古文：三月，旱。
现代文：三月，天旱。
English: In March, there was a drought.

古文：交州刺史阮敷讨林邑范佛于日南，破其五十余垒。
现代文：交州刺史阮敷讨伐林邑范佛于日南，攻破敌人五十多个营垒。
English: Jiaozhou's Zhang Shi Ruan Jiki fought against the logging of Fanfo in the south of Japan, and broke through more than fifty enemy camps.

古文：夏四月，以安西将军谢尚为尚书仆射。
现代文：夏四月，任命安西将军谢尚为尚书仆射。
English: In the summer of April, Anxi General Xie Shang was appointed as Shang Shu's subordinate.

古文：五月，大疫。
现代文：五月，瘟疫大流行。
English: In May, the plague broke out.

古文：张重华复使王擢袭秦州，取之。
现代文：张重华两次派王擢攻击秦州，攻克。
English: Zhang Chonghua twice sent Wang Gang to attack Qinzhou and defeated it.

古文：仇池公杨初为苻雄所败。
现代文：仇池公杨初被苻雄打败。
English: At first, the enemy pond master Yang was defeated by Shao Xiong.

古文：秋七月丁酉，地震，有声如雷。
现代文：秋七月丁酉，地震，发出雷鸣般的声音。
English: In the autumn and July, there is a thunderous sound caused by an earthquake.

古文：八月，遣兼太尉、河间王钦修复五陵。
现代文：八月，派兼太尉、河间王钦修复五陵。
English: In August, he sent Wang Qin, also a captain, to repair the five mausoleums.

古文：冬十月，中军将军殷浩进次山桑，使平北将军姚襄为前锋，襄叛，反击浩，浩弃辎重，退保谯城。
现代文：冬十月，中军将军殷浩进驻山桑，派平北将军姚襄为前锋，姚襄反叛，反过来攻打殷浩，殷浩丢弃辎重，退保谯城。
English: In the winter of October, the Chinese army general Yin Hao stationed in Shanshan, sent the Pingbei general Yao Xiang as the forward, Yao Xiang rebelled, in turn attacked Yin Hao, Yin Hao abandoned the heavy burden, and withdrew to Baocheng.

古文：丁未，凉州牧张重华卒，子耀灵嗣。
现代文：丁未日，凉州牧张重华去世，他的儿子张耀灵继任。
English: On the day before yesterday, Zhang Chonghua, the pastor of Liangzhou, passed away, and his son Zhang Yaoling succeeded him.

古文：是月，张祚弑耀灵而自称凉州牧。
现代文：当月，张祚弑耀灵自称凉州牧。
English: That month, Zhang Rongyaoling claimed to be the pastor of Liangzhou.

古文：十一月，殷浩使部将刘启、王彬之讨姚襄，复为襄所败，襄遂进据芍陂。
现代文：十一月，殷浩使部将刘启、王彬之讨伐姚襄，又被姚襄打败，姚襄进据芍陂。
English: In November, Yin Hao sent Liu Qi and Wang Bin to fight against Yao Xiang. They were defeated by Yao Xiang, and Yao Xiang was taken prisoner.

古文：十二月，加尚书仆射谢尚为都督豫、扬、江西诸军事，领豫州刺史，镇历阳。
现代文：十二月，加援尚书仆射谢尚为都督豫、扬、江西诸军事，兼领豫州刺史，镇守历阳。
English: In December, Shang Shuxu assisted Shang Shixie to become the military governor of Yu, Yang and Jiangxi Provinces, as well as the governor of Yuzhou and the town guard of Liyang.

古文：十年春正月己酉朔，帝临朝，以五陵未复，悬而不乐。
现代文：十年春正月己酉初一，皇帝上朝，由于五陵未修复，乐器悬而不奏。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring Festival, when the emperor ascended to the throne, the five mausoleums were not restored, so the musical instruments were suspended and not played.

古文：凉州牧张祚僭帝位。
现代文：凉州牧张祚僣帝位。
English: Emperor Zhang Jian of Liangzhou was enthroned.

古文：冉闵降将周成举兵反，自宛陵袭洛阳。
现代文：冉闵降将周成举兵反，从宛陵袭洛阳。
English: Zhou Cheng rebelled and attacked Luoyang from Wanling.

古文：辛酉，河南太守戴施奔鲔渚。
现代文：辛酉日，河南太守戴施奔鲔渚。
English: On the day of Xin Rong, the governor of Henan Province, Dai Shibeng, arrived.

古文：丁卯，地震，有声如雷。
现代文：丁卯日，地震，有声如雷。
English: Dingwu day, earthquake, loud as thunder.

古文：二月己丑，太尉、征西将军桓温帅师伐关中。
现代文：二月己丑，太尉、征西将军桓温率领师伐关中。
English: In February, he was so ugly that the lieutenant and general of the Western Expedition, Kuan Wen, led his division to the middle of the pass.

古文：废扬州刺史殷浩为庶人，以前会稽内史王述为扬州刺史。
现代文：废扬州刺史殷浩为庶人，任命前会稽内史王述为扬州刺史。
English: The former Yangzhou chief historian Yin Hao was a commoner, and the pre-appointment internal auditor Wang Shu was a Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：夏四月己亥，温及苻健子苌战于蓝田，大败之。
现代文：夏四月己亥，温及苻健子苌战于蓝田，大败之。
English: In the summer and April of the same year, Wen Ji and Zou Jianzi fought in Lantian, and were soundly defeated.

古文：五月，江西乞活郭敞等执陈留内史刘仕而叛，京师震骇，以吏部尚书周闵为中军将军，屯于中堂，豫州刺史谢尚自历阳还卫京师。
现代文：五月，江西乞活郭敞等执陈留内史刘仕而叛，京师震骇，任命吏部尚书周闵为中军将军，屯于中堂，豫州刺史谢尚从历阳还卫京师。
English: In May, Guo Zhang, the governor of Jiangxi Province, and others rebelled against Liu Shih, the leader of the Chen Lingshi, and the Beijing division was shocked. Shang Shuzhong, the commander of the Guo Zhangshi, was appointed as the general of the Chinese army and was stationed in Zhongtang. Shizhi Xie Shang, the governor of Henan Province, was transferred from Liyang to guard the Beijing division.

古文：六月，苻健将苻雄悉众及桓温战于白鹿原，王师败绩。
现代文：六月，苻健将苻雄悉众及桓温战于白鹿原，官军大败。
English: In June, Zou Jian defeated Zou Xiong and Kanwen in the Battle of White Deer Plain, resulting in a crushing defeat for the imperial army.

古文：秋九月辛酉，桓温粮尽，引还。
现代文：秋九月辛酉，桓温粮尽，引还。
English: In autumn and September, the harvest was very poor, the grain was exhausted, and it was brought back.

古文：十一年春正月甲辰，侍中、汝南王统薨。
现代文：十一年春正月甲辰，侍中、汝南王司马统去世。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, in the month of Jia Chen, Junnan King Sima Tong, a courtier, passed away.

古文：平羌校尉、仇池公杨初为其部将梁式所害，初子国嗣位，因拜镇北将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：平羌校尉、仇池公杨初为其部将梁式杀害，杨初的儿子杨国继承爵位，于是扬国为镇北将军、秦州刺史。
English: Yang Guo, the son of Yang Guo, the son of Yang Guo, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：齐公段龛袭慕容隽将荣国于郎山，败之。
现代文：齐公段龛在郎山袭击慕容隽的将领荣国，打败了荣国。
English: Qigong Duanjun attacked Murongjun's general Rongguo in Langshan and defeated Rongguo.

古文：夏四月壬申，陨霜。
现代文：夏四月壬申，降霜。
English: Summer, April, Jinshin, frost.

古文：乙酉，地震。
现代文：乙酉，地震。
English: Acetylene, earthquakes.

古文：姚襄帅众寇外黄，冠军将军高季大破之。
现代文：姚襄率领军队侵犯外黄，冠军将军高季大败他们。
English: Yao Xiang led the army to invade the Outer Yellow, and the champion general Gao Ji defeated them.

古文：五月丁未，地又震。
现代文：五月丁未日，又地震。
English: On the eve of May Day, there was another earthquake.

古文：六月，苻健死，其子生嗣伪位。
现代文：六月，苻健死，他的儿子苻生继伪位。
English: In June, Zou Jian died, and his son Zou Sheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：秋七月，宋混、张瓘弑张祚，而立耀灵弟玄靓为大将军、凉州牧，遣使来降。
现代文：秋七月，宋混、张瓘杀张祚，而立张耀灵的弟张玄靓为大将军、凉州牧，派使来投降。
English: In the autumn and July, Song Jian and Zhang Ye killed Zhang Ye, and Zhang Yaoling's brother Zhang Xuan Ye became the general, Liangzhou Maki, and sent an envoy to surrender.

古文：以吏部尚书周闵为尚书左仆射，领军将军王彪之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命吏部尚书周闵为尚书左仆射，领军将军王彪之为尚书右仆射。
English: Appointed the official Shangshu Zhou Qi as Shangshu's left-hand man, and the leading general Wang Biao as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：冬十月，进豫州刺史谢尚督并冀幽三州诸军事、镇西将军，镇马头。
现代文：冬十月，进升豫州刺史谢尚督并冀幽三州诸军事、镇西将军，镇守马头。
English: In the winter of October, the military of the three prefectures, the general of Zhenxi, and the head of the horse guard of Zhenzhou marched into Yuzhou to assassinate Xie Shangdu.

古文：十二月，慕容恪帅众寇广固。
现代文：十二月，慕容恪率领军队入侵广固。
English: In December, Murong Ke led an army to invade Guanggu.

古文：壬戌，上党人冯鸯自称太守，背苻生遣使来降。
现代文：壬戌日，上党人冯鸯自称太守，背叛苻生派人来投降。
English: On the following day, the Shang party member Feng Xuan claimed to be the emperor and betrayed Xinsheng by sending someone to surrender.

古文：十二年春正月丁卯，帝临朝，以皇太后母丧，悬而不乐。
现代文：十二年春正月丁卯，皇帝上朝，因为皇太后母死，悬挂乐器而不奏乐。
English: In the first month of spring in the 12th year of Dingwu, when the emperor ascended to the throne, because the empress dowager's mother died, he suspended the musical instruments and did not play music.

古文：镇北将军段龛及慕容恪战于广固，大败之，恪退据安平。
现代文：镇北将军段龛在广固和慕容恪交战，大败幕容恪，幕容恪退守安平。
English: The Zhenbei general Duan Yu fought against Murong Ke in Guanggu, and was soundly defeated. Murong Ke retreated to Anping.

古文：二月辛丑，帝讲《孝经》。
现代文：二月辛丑日，皇帝讲《孝经》。
English: On the fateful day in February, the emperor gave a lecture on the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：三月，姚襄入于许昌，以太尉桓温为征讨大都督以讨之。
现代文：三月，姚襄进入许昌，朝廷任命太尉桓温为征讨大都督讨伐姚襄。
English: In March, Yao Xiang entered Xuchang, and the imperial court appointed Lieutenant Guan Wen as the grand governor to fight Yao Xiang.

古文：秋八月己亥，桓温及姚襄战于伊水，大败之，襄走平阳，徙其余众三千余家于江汉之间，执周成而归。
现代文：秋八月己亥，桓温在伊水和姚襄交战，大败姚襄，姚襄逃到平阳，把残余的三千多家眷徙到江汉之间，抓获周成而回。
English: In the autumn and August of Ji Hai, Huan Wen fought with Yao Xiang in Yishui, defeated Yao Xiang, and Yao Xiang fled to Pingyang, migrated the remaining more than three thousand people to the Han River, captured Zhou Cheng and returned.

古文：使扬武将军毛穆之，督护陈午，辅国将军、河南太守戴施镇洛阳。
现代文：派扬武将军毛穆之，督护陈午，辅国将军、河南太守戴施镇守洛阳。
English: He sent Yangwu General Mao Muzhi, Supervisor and Protector Chen Wu, General of the Auxiliary Provinces, and the Governor of Henan Province Dai Shizhen to defend Luoyang.

古文：冬十月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月癸巳初一，日食。
English: First day of winter, first day of October, solar eclipse.

古文：慕容恪攻段龛于广固，使北中郎将荀羡帅师次于琅邪以救之。
现代文：慕容恪攻打段龛于广固，朝廷派北中郎将荀羡率领军队驻在琅邪救援段龛。
English: Murong was stationed in Guanggu during the attack phase, and the imperial court sent Kitanakuro to lead the army stationed in the evil rescue phase.

古文：十一月，遣兼司空、散骑常侍车灌，龙骧将军袁真等持节如洛阳，修五陵。
现代文：十一月，派兼司空、散骑常侍车灌，龙骧将军袁真等人持节到洛阳，修复五陵。
English: In November, General Yuan Zhen, who was also the commander of the Air Force and a horseback rider, and the general of the Long March, were sent to Luoyang to hold a festival and restore the five mausoleums.

古文：十二月庚戌，以有事于五陵，告于太庙，帝及群臣皆服缌，于太极殿临三日。
现代文：十二月庚戌，因为要修五陵，到太庙祭告祖先，皇帝和大臣们都穿丝麻丧服，于太极殿临朝三日。
English: In December, Emperor Gaozong, because he wanted to repair the five mausoleums, went to the Imperial Temple to pay homage to his ancestors. The emperor and his ministers all wore silk mourning clothes and arrived at the Imperial Palace on the third day.

古文：是岁，仇池公杨国为其从父俊所杀，俊自立。
现代文：这一年，仇池公杨国被他的叔父杨俊杀死，杨俊自立为仇沲公。
English: In this year, his uncle Yang Jun killed his uncle Yang Guo, and Yang Jun became his uncle.

古文：升平元年春正月壬戌朔，帝加元服，告天太庙，始亲万机。
现代文：升平元年春正月壬戌初一，皇帝加元服，在太庙祭告祖先，开始亲自处理国家大事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：大赦，改元，增文武位一等。
现代文：大赦，改年号，文武官员爵位都晋升一等。
English: The amnesty, the change of year, and the promotion of civil and military officials to the first grade.

古文：皇太后居崇德宫。
现代文：皇太后居住在崇德宫。
English: The empress dowager lives in the Chongde Palace.

古文：丁丑，陨石于槐里一。
现代文：丁丑日，有一块陨石落在槐里。
English: On the day of Dingushi, a meteorite fell in the Yangtze River.

古文：是月，镇北将军、齐公段龛为慕容恪所陷，遇害。
现代文：当月，镇北将军、齐公段龛被慕容恪攻陷，遇害。
English: That month, General Zhenbei and Qi Gongdan were captured and killed by Murong Ke.

古文：扶南竺旃檀献驯象，诏曰： 昔先帝以殊方异兽或为人患，禁之。
现代文：扶南竺旃檀进献驯象，皇帝下诏说： 从前先帝因为异国的怪兽有的成为人患，禁止过。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "In the past, the previous emperor had banned exotic beasts because some of them were harmful to humans.

古文：今及其未至，可令还本土。 三月，帝讲《孝经》。
现代文：现在趁着还没有来到，可以让它们回到原来的地方去。 三月，皇帝讲《孝经》。
English: Now, taking advantage of the fact that they haven't arrived yet, they can go back to their original places.In March, the emperor gave a lecture on "The Book of Filial Piety."

古文：壬申，亲释奠于中堂。
现代文：壬申日，亲自在中堂祭奠孔子。
English: On Jinshin Day, he personally paid tribute to Confucius in the central hall.

古文：夏五月庚午，镇西将军谢尚卒。
现代文：夏五月庚午，镇西将军谢尚去世。
English: On the afternoon of the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, Zhenxi General Xie Shang passed away.

古文：苻生将苻眉、苻坚击姚襄，战于三原，斩之。
现代文：苻生的将领苻眉、苻坚打姚襄，在三原交战，杀了姚襄。
English: The twin generals, Gao Mei and Gao Jian, fought against Yao Xiang, clashed in Sanyuan, and killed Yao Xiang.

古文：六月，苻坚杀苻生而自立。
现代文：六月，苻坚杀苻生自立为王。
English: In June, Zou Jianzhong became king.

古文：以军司谢奕为使持节、都督、安西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命军司谢奕为使持节、都督、安西将军、豫州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed the military secretary Xie Yi as the envoy of the festival, the governor, the general of Anxi, and the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：秋七月，苻坚将张平以并州降，遂以为并州刺史。
现代文：秋七月，苻坚军援将领张平率领并州人马投降，便任命张平为并州刺史。
English: In the autumn of July, Zhang Ping, commander of the Xujian Military Aid, led the surrender of the people and horses of the unified state, and then appointed Zhang Ping as the leader of the unified state.

古文：八月丁未，立皇后何氏，大赦，赐孝悌鳏寡米，人五斛，逋租宿债皆勿收，大酺三日。
现代文：八月丁未日，立皇后何氏，大赦，赐赏孝悌鳏寡的人大米，每人五斛，欠租和欠债的都免除，大宴三日。
English: On the third day of August, the Queen Ho was established, amnesty was granted, rice was given to filial children and widows, five baht was given to each person, rent arrears and debts were forgiven, and a grand banquet was held on the third day.

古文：冬十月，皇后见于太庙。
现代文：冬十月，皇后进于太庙。
English: In the winter of October, the empress entered the Great Temple.

古文：十一月，雷。
现代文：十一月，有雷。
English: In November, there was thunder.

古文：十二月，以太常王彪之为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十二月，任命太常王彪之为尚书左仆射。
English: In December, Wang Biao Zong was appointed as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：二年春正月，司徒、会稽王昱稽首归政，帝不许。
现代文：二年春正月，司徒、会稽王司马昱稽赔罪还政，皇帝不允许。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Emperor did not allow Sito and the Auditor-General, Sima Yi, to return to power.

古文：三月，慕容隽陷冀州诸郡，诏安西将军谢奕、北中郎将荀羡北伐。
现代文：三月，慕容隽攻陷冀州各郡，皇帝诏令安西将军谢奕、北中郎将荀羡北伐。
English: In March, Murongjun invaded the counties of Jizhou, and the emperor ordered Anxi General Xie Yi and Beizhong Lang to take part in the Northern Expedition.

古文：三月，佽飞督王饶献鸩鸟，帝怒，鞭之二百，使殿中御史焚其鸟于四达之衢。
现代文：三月，佽飞督王饶进献鸩鸟，皇帝很生气，罚打二百鞭，派殿中御史在八通八达的路口焚烧鸩鸟。
English: In March, Gu Feidong Wang Rao Jin offered ostriches. The emperor was very angry and punished him with 200 lashes. He sent the palace official to burn the ostriches at the junction of eight roads.

古文：夏五月，大水。
现代文：夏五月，发大水。
English: In the summer and in May, there was a big flood.

古文：有星孛于天船。
现代文：有慧星进入天船星区。
English: A comet entered the region of the stars.

古文：六月，并州刺史张平为苻坚所逼，帅众三千奔于平阳，坚追败之。
现代文：六月，并州刺史张平被苻坚所逼，率领三千人马逃往于平阳，苻坚追上并打败了他。
English: In June, Zhang Ping, the governor of Anhui Province, was forced by Yu Jian to lead three thousand horses to flee to Yu Pingyang. Yu Jian caught up with and defeated him.

古文：慕容恪进据上党，冠军将军冯鸯以众叛归慕容隽，隽尽陷河北之地。
现代文：慕容恪进据上党，冠军将军冯鸯率领军事反叛，归附了慕容隽，慕容隽全部攻占了河北的地方。
English: Murong Ke advanced to the top of the party, and the champion general Feng Qi led the military rebellion and attached Murong Ke, and Murong Ke occupied all the places in Hebei.

古文：秋八月，安西将军谢奕卒。
现代文：秋八月，安西将军谢奕去世。
English: In autumn and August, Anxi General Xie Yi passed away.

古文：壬申，以吴兴太守谢万为西中郎将、持节、监司豫冀并四州诸军事、豫州刺史。
现代文：壬申日，任命吴兴太守谢万为西中郎将、持节、监司豫冀并四州诸军事、豫州刺史。
English: On the day of Jinshin, Wu Xingta Guo Xie Wan was appointed as the West Vice Admiral, Jishie, the Supervisor of Yuji, and the Military Commander of Shishu and the Historian of Yuzhou.

古文：以散骑常侍郗昙为北中郎将、持节、都督徐兗青冀幽五州诸军事、徐兗二州刺史，镇下邳。
现代文：任命散骑常侍郗昙为北中郎将、持节、都督徐兖青冀幽五州诸军事、徐兖二州刺史，镇守下邳。
English: He appointed Zangjie Zangjie to be the general of the Northern Middle Kingdom, the military governor of the Five Provinces of the Qing Dynasty, the governor of the Five Provinces of the Qing Dynasty, and the town guard of the Lower Han Dynasty.

古文：冬十月乙丑，陈留王曹劢薨。
现代文：冬十月乙丑日，陈留王曹劢去世。
English: In the winter of October, on the second day of the Ugly, Chen Liu Wang Cao Xi passed away.

古文：十一月庚子，雷。
现代文：十一月庚子，打雷。
English: November Geng Zi, thunder.

古文：辛酉，地震。
现代文：辛酉日，地震。
English: On a hot summer day, an earthquake.

古文：十二月，北中郎将荀羡及慕容隽战于山荏，王师败绩。
现代文：十二月，北中郎将荀羡和慕容隽在山荏交战，荀羡大败。
English: In December, Beizhong Lang fought Zhen and Murong Zhen in the mountains, and Zhen suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：三年春三月甲辰，诏以比年出军，粮运不继，王公已下十三户借一人一年助运。
现代文：三年春三月甲辰，下诏书，因为连年打仗，粮草运输跟不上，自王公以下每十三户借调一个人帮助运输一年。
English: In the spring of the third year, in the third month of the month of March, the imperial decree was issued. Because of the continuous war, the transportation of grain and grass could not keep up, and one person from every thirteen households below the prince was seconded to help transport for one year.

古文：秋七月，平北将军高昌为慕容隽所逼，自白马奔于荥阳。
现代文：秋七月，平北将军高昌被慕容隽攻逼，从白马逃往荥阳。
English: In autumn and July, the general Gaochang of North Pyongan Province was attacked by Murong Yao and fled from Baima to Shenyang.

古文：冬十月慕容隽寇东阿，遣西中郎将谢万次下蔡，北中郎将郗昙次高平以击之，王师败绩。
现代文：冬十月慕容隽侵犯东阿，朝廷派西中郎将谢万驻在下蔡，北中郎将郗昙驻在高平，攻打慕容隽，官军大败。
English: In the winter of October, Murong Qian invaded Dong'a. The imperial court sent West Middle Lord Xie Wan to reside in Lower Cai and North Middle Lord to reside in Gaoping to attack Murong Qian, and the government army suffered a great defeat.

古文：十一月戊子，进扬州刺史王述为卫将军。
现代文：十一月戊子日，进升杨州刺史王述为卫将军。
English: In November of the same year, Wang Shu, who was promoted to Yangzhou Jishi, became the general of Wei.

古文：十二月，又以中军将军、琅邪王丕为骠骑将军，东海王奕为车骑将军。
现代文：十二月，又任命中军将军、琅邪王丕为骠骑将军，东海王奕为车骑将军。
English: In December, he also appointed the general of the Chinese army and the general of the horse cavalry, the general of the horse cavalry and the general of the chariot cavalry.

古文：封武陵王晞子逢为梁王。
现代文：封武陵王晞子王逢为梁王。
English: Fongwuling Wang, Shanzi Wang and Liang Wang.

古文：交州刺史温放之帅兵讨林邑参黎、耽潦，并降之。
现代文：交州刺史温放之率领军队讨伐林邑参黎、耽潦，全都降服了他们。
English: Jiaozhou Jishi Wenfang led the army to fight against Lin'up, Sanli and Dangdang, and all of them were defeated.

古文：四年春正月，仇池公杨俊卒，子世嗣。
现代文：四年春正月，仇池公杨俊去世，儿子杨世继承爵位。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Prince Yang Jun of Qi died, and his son Yang Shihong succeeded to the title.

古文：丙戌，慕容隽死，子嗣伪位。
现代文：丙戌日，慕容隽死，儿子幕容暐继伪位。
English: On the same day, Murong Yao died, and his son, Mak Rong Yao, succeeded him.

古文：二月，凤皇将九雏见于丰城。
现代文：二月，凤皇带九个小凤凰出现在丰城。
English: In February, the Phoenix Emperor appeared in Fengcheng with nine little phoenixes.

古文：秋七月，以军役繁兴，省用撤膳。
现代文：秋七月，因为频繁打仗和徭役，省减宫廷膳食。
English: In autumn and July, because of frequent wars and military service, the palace diet was reduced.

古文：八月辛丑朔，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：八月辛丑初一，日食，是全食。
English: The first day of August, the solar eclipse, is a total eclipse.

古文：冬十月，天狗流于西南。
现代文：冬十月，天狗星落于西南。
English: In the winter of October, the Tengu star falls in the southwest.

古文：十一月，封太尉桓温为南郡公，温弟冲为丰城县公，子济为临贺郡公。
现代文：十一月，封太尉桓温为南郡公，弟弟桓冲为丰城县公，儿子桓济为临贺郡公。
English: In November, Captain Huan Wen became the governor of Nan County, his brother Huan Chong became the governor of Fengcheng County, and his son Huan Ji became the governor of Linhe County.

古文：凤皇复见丰城，众鸟随之。
现代文：凤凰又出现在丰城，有众多的鸟跟随。
English: The phoenix appeared again in Fengcheng, followed by many birds.

古文：五年春正月戊戌，大赦，赐鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人米五斛。
现代文：五年春正月戊戌，大赦，赏赐鳏寡孤独没有生活能力的人每人五斛米。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, there was a general amnesty, and widows and widowers who were alone and unable to make a living were each given five bushels of rice.

古文：北中郎将、都督徐兗青冀幽五州诸军事、徐兗二州刺史郗昙卒。
现代文：北中郎将、都督徐兖青冀幽五州诸军事、徐兖二州刺史郗昙去世。
English: The Northern Vice Admiral, the military governor of the five states of the Qing Dynasty and the military governor of the two states of the Song Dynasty passed away.

古文：二月，以镇军将军范汪为都督徐兗青冀幽五州诸军事、安北将军、徐兗二州刺史。
现代文：二月，任命镇军将军范汪为都督徐兖青冀幽五州诸军事、安北将军、徐兖二州刺史。
English: In February, Fan Wang, the general of the town army, was appointed the military governor of the five prefectures of Xuzhou, Qinghai and Hebei, the general of Anbei, and the chief historian of the two prefectures of Xuzhou.

古文：平南将军、广州刺史、阳夏侯滕含卒。
现代文：平南将军、广州刺史、阳夏侯滕含去世。
English: General Pingnan, Guangzhou Shishi and Yang Xia Hou Tenghan passed away.

古文：夏四月，大水。
现代文：夏四月，发大水。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a flood.

古文：太尉桓温镇宛，使其弟豁将兵取许昌。
现代文：太尉桓温镇守宛城，派他弟弟桓豁率领部队攻取许昌。
English: Captain Kuan Wen, who was in charge of Wancheng, sent his younger brother Kuan Hui to lead the troops to capture Xu Chang.

古文：凤皇见于沔北。
现代文：凤皇出现在沔北。
English: The phoenix emperor appears in the north of Shandong.

古文：五月丁巳，帝崩于显阳殿，时年十九。
现代文：五月丁巳，穆皇帝在显阳殿去世，当时十九岁。
English: In May, Emperor Mu passed away in Xianyang Palace at the age of nineteen.

古文：葬永平陵，庙号孝宗。
现代文：安葬在永平陵，庙号孝宗。
English: He was buried in Yongping Mausoleum, with the temple name of Xiaozong.

古文：哀皇帝讳丕，字千龄，成帝长子也。
现代文：哀皇帝名司马丕，字千龄，成帝长子也。
English: Emperor Ai's name was Sima Qian. He was a thousand years old. He was also the eldest son of Emperor Chengdu.

古文：咸康八年，封为琅邪王。
现代文：咸康八年封为琅邪王。
English: Xiankang was given the title of "King of Evil" for eight years.

古文：永和元年拜散骑常侍，十二年加中军将军，升平三年除骠骑将军。
现代文：永和元年援散骑常侍，十二年加授中军将军，升平三年除骠骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Yonghe era, he was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer of cavalry, in the twelfth year he was promoted to the rank of general of the Chinese army, and in the third year he was promoted to the rank of general of cavalry.

古文：五年五月丁巳，穆帝崩。
现代文：升平五年五月丁巳，穆帝去世。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Shohei era, Mudi passed away.

古文：皇太后令曰： 帝奄不救疾，胤嗣未建。琅邪王丕，中兴正统，明德懋亲。
现代文：皇太后下令说： 穆帝突然患病不能治，继承人没有立，琅邪王司马丕，是中兴王室的正统，德性完美的宗亲。
English: The empress dowager ordered: "Mudi's sudden illness cannot be cured, there is no heir, and the evil king Sima Yu is the legitimate and virtuous ancestor of the ZTE royal family.

古文：昔在咸康，属当储贰。
现代文：从前在咸康时应当作太子。
English: Once upon a time in Hamkang, he should have been crowned prince.

古文：以年在幼冲，未堪国难，故显宗高让。
现代文：因为年岁幼小，不足以承担国难，所以显宗成帝让位给康帝。
English: Because of his young age, he was not old enough to bear the national tragedy, so Emperor Xian Zongcheng gave way to Emperor Kang.

古文：今义望情地，莫与为比，其以王奉大统。 
现代文：现在亲情名望地位，没有能比得上他的，让琅邪王继承皇统。 
English: Now, there is no one who can match him in terms of kinship, fame and status, so let the evil king succeed to the throne.

古文：于是百官备法驾，迎于琅邪第。
现代文：于是百官准备好马车，到琅邪王的府第去迎接。
English: So the centurion prepared a carriage and went to the palace of the evil king to meet him.

古文：庚申，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：庚申日，琅邪王即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: On Goshun's Day, the evil king, that is, the emperor, will be pardoned by the world.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 朕获承明命，入纂大统。
现代文：壬戌日，下诏说： 朕得以承受圣明之命，入朝接受皇位。
English: On the Ninth Day of the Ninth Month, he issued the following edict: "I have been able to receive the order of the Sacred Light and enter the imperial court to accept the imperial throne.

古文：顾惟先王宗庙，蒸尝无主，太妃丧庭，廓然靡寄，悲痛感摧，五内抽割。
现代文：想到先王宗庙，祭祀没有主人，太妃哭丧的宫庭，空旷没有可以安身之处，心中十分悲痛，五脏就像抽割一样痛楚。
English: When I think of the ancestral temple of the previous king, the sacrificial rites without a master, the palace garden where the toffees wept and mourned, the emptiness without a place to rest, my heart is full of sorrow, and my internal organs are as sore as if they had been amputated.

古文：宗国之尊，情礼兼隆，胤嗣之重，义无与二。
现代文：宗国所尊崇的，情和礼受到同样重视，子孙继嗣的重要，情与义没有不同。
English: The feelings and etiquette revered by the motherland are equally valued, and the importance of children and grandchildren is no different from that of righteousness.

古文：东海王奕，戚属亲近，宜奉本统，其以奕为琅邪王。 
现代文：东海王司马奕，是亲近的戚属，应当敬承本族统绪，应以司马奕为琅邪王。 
English: Sima Yi, the king of the East Sea, is a close relative. He should respect the unification of his own people, and Sima Yi should be regarded as the king of evil.

古文：秋七月戊午，葬穆皇帝于永平陵。
现代文：秋七月戊午，把穆皇帝安葬在永平陵。
English: Emperor Mu was buried in Yongping Mausoleum on the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn.

古文：慕容恪攻陷野王，守将吕护退保荥阳。
现代文：慕容恪攻陷野王，守将吕护退保荥阳。
English: Murong Ke attacked and captured Wangye, and the guarding general, Lv Guo, retreated to Baoyang.

古文：八月己卯夜，天裂，广数丈，有声如雷。
现代文：八月己卯日晚上，天空有裂缝，宽数丈，有雷一般的声音。
English: In the evening of August 6th, there was a crack in the sky, several meters wide and tall, and a sound like thunder.

古文：九月戊申，立皇后王氏。
现代文：九月戊申，立皇后王氏。
English: In September, the Empress Wang clan was established.

古文：穆帝皇后何氏称永安宫。
现代文：穆帝皇后何氏称永安宫。
English: Mu Di's Empress He called it Yongan Palace.

古文：吕护叛奔于莫容。
现代文：吕护反叛，投奔了莫容暐。
English: Lvou rebelled and defected to Mo Ronglu.

古文：冬十月，安北将军范汪有罪废为庶人。
现代文：冬十月，安北将军范汪犯了罪，被废为庶人。
English: In the winter of October, Anbei General Fan Wang committed a crime and was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：十一月丙辰，诏曰： 显宗成皇帝顾命，以时事多艰，弘高世之风，树德博重，以隆社稷。
现代文：十一月丙辰，下诏说： 显宗成皇帝顾命临终时留下遗命，因为时事多难，弘扬高世的风教，树立德义博得威重，用以振兴社稷。
English: In November, the following edict was issued: On his deathbed, Emperor Xianzongcheng left behind his last will and testament, because the current situation is very difficult. He wished to carry forward the noble tradition, establish the dignity of virtue and valor, and use it to revitalize society.

古文：而国故不巳，康穆早世，胤祚不融。
现代文：但是国难不断，康帝穆帝过早地离开人世，继续的国运不盛。
English: However, the country continued to be plagued by difficulties. Kandy Mudi passed away prematurely, and the continued national movement was not successful.

古文：朕以寡德，复承先绪，感惟永慕，悲育兼摧。
现代文：朕以寡薄的德行，又继承先王的事业，心中有长久的思慕，悲痛摧折人心。
English: With my meager virtue, I also inherit the cause of the former king. I have a long-term yearning in my heart, and my heart is broken by grief.

古文：夫昭穆之义，固宜本之天属。
现代文：昭穆两个皇帝的大义，原本应遵从上天。
English: The great justice of the two emperors should have been obeyed by heaven.

古文：继体承基，古今常道。
现代文：继承国家大业，是古今的常道。
English: Inheriting the great cause of the country has been a common practice from ancient times to the present.

古文：宜上嗣显宗，以修本统。 
现代文：理应上继显宗，用以绵延本族统绪。 
English: It should be succeeded by the Hsien Sect, which should be used to extend the unity of the nation.

古文：十二月，加凉州刺史张玄靓为大都督陇右诸军事、护羌校尉、西平公。
现代文：十二月，加凉州刺史张玄靓为大都督陇右诸军事、护羌校尉、西平公。
English: In December, Zhang Xuanlian, the chief historian of Karangzhou, became the grand governor of the province, the right military, the guard lieutenant, and the West Pingguo.

古文：隆和元年春正月壬子，大赦，改元。
现代文：隆和元年春正月壬子，大赦，改年号。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Ryuhei, Renzi, amnesty, change the year.

古文：甲寅，减田税，亩收二升。
现代文：甲寅日，削减田税，每亩收税二升。
English: On July 1, the rice field tax was reduced, and the tax per mu was raised to two liters.

古文：是月，慕容将吕护、傅末波攻陷小垒，以逼洛阳。
现代文：当月，慕容暐的将领吕护、傅末波攻陷小垒，进逼洛阳。
English: In the same month, the generals Lv Gu and Fu Mubo of Murongwu attacked the small bastion and entered Luoyang.

古文：二月辛未，以辅国将军、吴国内史庾希为北中郎将、徐兗二州刺史，镇下邳；前锋监军、龙骧将军袁真为西中郎将、监护豫司并冀四州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇汝南，并假节。
现代文：二月辛未，任命辅国将军、吴国内史庾希为北中郎将、徐兖二州刺史，镇守下邳；任命前锋监军、龙骧将军袁真为西中郎将、监护豫司并冀四州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇汝南，都暂授苻节。
English: In February of Xinwei, the general of Fu Guo, the general of Shuxi in Wuzhong, was appointed as the general of the North, and Xu Xi, the general of the two prefectures, was appointed as the general of the West, and the general of Longyu, the general of Yuan Zhen, was appointed as the general of the West, and the military of the four prefectures of Hebei, the general of the two prefectures of Yuzhou, and the general of the town of Runan were appointed as the general of the West, and the military of the four prefectures of Hebei, the general of the two prefectures of Y

古文：丙子，尊所生周氏为皇太妃。
现代文：丙子日，推尊生母亲周氏为皇太妃。
English: On the day of the birth of the third child, Zhou's mother was promoted to crown princess.

古文：三月甲寅朔，日有蚀之。夏四月，旱。
现代文：三月甲寅初一，日食。夏四月，天旱。
English: March, the first day of spring, solar eclipse. Summer, April, drought.

古文：诏出轻系，振困乏。
现代文：诏令释放罪轻的囚犯，赈求困乏之人。
English: He ordered the release of prisoners with minor offenses and pardoned the destitute.

古文：丁丑，梁州地震，浩衅山崩。
现代文：丁丑日，梁州地震，浩衅有山崩塌。
English: Dingushi Day, earthquake in Liangzhou, mountain collapse.

古文：吕护复寇洛阳。
现代文：吕护又侵犯洛阳。
English: Lvgu invaded Luoyang again.

古文：乙酉，辅国将军、河南太守戴施奔于宛。
现代文：乙酉日，辅国将军、河南太守戴施逃到于宛。
English: On the day of Yixuan, the general of the auxiliary province and the governor of Henan Province, Dai Shi, fled to Yuwan.

古文：五月丁巳，遣北中郎将庾希、竟陵太守邓遐以舟师救洛阳。
现代文：五月丁巳日，派北中郎将庾希、竟陵太守邓遐率领水军救援洛阳。
English: On the third day of May, he sent Beibei Zhongro to rescue Luoyang, and Deng Yao, the governor of Jingling, led the naval force.

古文：秋七月，吕护等退守小平津。
现代文：秋七月，吕护等人退守小平津。
English: In the autumn and July, Lvong and others withdrew to defend Xiaoping.

古文：进琅邪王奕为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府。
现代文：进升琅邪王司马奕为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府。
English: The evil king Sima Yi was promoted to attendant, cavalry general, and the head of the government.

古文：邓遐进屯新城，庾希部将何谦及慕容将刘则战于檀丘，破之。
现代文：邓遐进驻新城，庾希部将何谦和慕容暐将刘则在檀丘交战，打败了刘则。
English: Deng Xuan was stationed in Xincheng. He Qian and Murong Xian fought Liu Ze in Dangqiu, and defeated Liu Ze.

古文：八月，西中郎将袁真进次汝南，运米五万斛以馈洛阳。
现代文：八月，西中郎将袁真进驻汝南，运送五万斛米以赠送给洛阳。
English: In August, Xi Zhonglang stationed Yuan Zhen in the south of the Ryukyus and sent fifty thousand mu of rice as a gift to Luoyang.

古文：冬十月，赐贫乏者米，人五斛。
现代文：冬十月，赏赐大米给贫穷的人，每人五斛。
English: In winter and October, rice is given to the poor, five baht per person.

古文：章武王珍薨。
现代文：章武王司马珍去世。
English: Zhangwu Wang Simazhen passed away.

古文：十二月戊午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月戊午初一，日食。
English: A solar eclipse will occur at noon on the first day of the month of December.

古文：诏曰： 戎旅路次，未得轻简赋役。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 军旗出征驻守，未能减轻赋税和徭役。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: The military banner was sent out for conscription and stationed, but it failed to reduce taxes and conscription.

古文：玄象失度，亢旱为患，岂政事未洽，将有板筑、渭滨之士邪！
现代文：天象失度，大旱成灾。难道是政事还不和洽，还是有如传说、以及像渭水之滨的隐士吗！
English: The heavens seem to have lost their balance, and the drought has become a disaster. Is it because the government is not yet in harmony, or is it like the legend, and like the hermit on the shore of Surabaya?

古文：其搜扬隐滞，蠲除苛碎，详议法令，咸从损耍。 
现代文：可访求推举隐士免除严峻繁琐的赋税，周祥地商议法令，全部遵循减损之要。 
English: It is possible to visit the hermit to ask for exemption from severe and cumbersome taxes, and to discuss laws and regulations in a cordial manner, all of which follow the principle of derogation.

古文：庾希自下邳退镇山阳，袁真自汝南退镇寿阳。
现代文：庾希从下邳退守山阳，袁真从汝南退守寿阳。
English: Rong Xi retreated from the Lower Yunnan to defend Sanyang, Yuan Zhen retreated from the Southern Yunnan to defend Shouyang.

古文：兴宁元年春二月己亥，大赦，改元。
现代文：兴宁元年春二月己亥日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Xingning in the spring and February of the first year of the year, the day of the boar, the general amnesty, and the change of the year.

古文：三月壬寅，皇太妃薨于琅邪第。
现代文：三月壬寅，皇太妃去世于琅邪府。
English: In March, the Empress Dowager passed away at Suyeafu.

古文：癸卯，帝奔丧，诏司徒、会稽王昱总内外众务。
现代文：癸卯日，皇帝奔丧，诏令司徒、会稽王昱总管内外众务。
English: On the day of the emperor's death, the emperor issued an edict to the magistrates and the auditor-general to take charge of internal and external affairs.

古文：夏四月，慕容寇荥阳，太守刘远奔鲁阳。
现代文：夏四月，慕容暐侵犯荥阳，太守刘远逃奔鲁阳。
English: In the summer of April, Murong Yao invaded Fenyang, and the governor Liu Yuan fled to Luyang.

古文：甲戌，扬州地震，湖渎溢。
现代文：甲戌日，扬州地震，湖水河水泛溢。
English: Jiaxuan day, Yangzhou earthquake, lake and river overflowed.

古文：五月，加征西大将军桓温侍中、大司马、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、假黄钺。
现代文：五月，加授征西大将军桓温侍中、大司马、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、假黄钺。
English: In May, he was additionally awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition, Kan-Wen (侍中), Daishima (大司馬), and the title of General of the Western Expedition (都督中外).

古文：复以西中郎将袁真都督司、冀、并三州诸军事，北中郎将瘦希都督青州诸军事。
现代文：又任命西中郎将袁真都督司、冀、并三州诸军事，北中郎将瘦希都督青州诸军事。
English: He also appointed the West Middle Man to be the military governor of Yuan Zhen, Hebei, and Sanzhou, and the North Middle Man to be the military governor of Qingzhou.

古文：癸卯，慕容陷密城，荥阳太守刘远奔于江陵。
现代文：癸卯，慕容暐攻陷密城，荥阳太守刘远逃往江陵。
English: At the same time, Murongqin captured Myeongseong, and Liu Yuan, the governor of Shenyang, fled to Gangneung.

古文：秋七月，张天锡弑凉州刺史、西平公张玄靓，自称大将军、护羌校尉、凉州牧、西平公。
现代文：秋七月，张天锡弑凉州刺史、西平公张玄靓，从称大将军、护羌校尉、凉州牧、西平公。
English: In autumn and July, Zhang Tianxi served as the governor of Liangzhou and Zhang Xuanqiu as the governor of Xiping, and was promoted to major general, lieutenant of the garrison, the governor of Liangzhou and the governor of Xiping.

古文：丁酉，葬章皇太妃。
现代文：丁酉日，葬章皇太妃。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, the funeral ceremony of the Empress Dowager took place.

古文：八月，有星孛于角亢，入天市。
现代文：八月，有彗星进入二宿星区，进入天市。
English: In August, a comet entered the Erzurum star region and entered the celestial city.

古文：九月壬戌，大司马桓温帅众北伐。
现代文：九月壬戌日，大司马桓温率领军队北伐。
English: In September of the same year, Grand Master Ma Huanwen led the Northern Expedition.

古文：癸亥，以皇子生，大赦。
现代文：癸亥日，因为皇子出生，大赦天下。
English: On the day of the boar, because the prince was born, there was a general amnesty.

古文：冬十月甲申，立陈留王世子恢为王。
现代文：冬十月甲申，立陈留王的世子曹恢为王。
English: In the winter of October in Jiaxing, Cao Huai, the son of Chen Liu Wang, was made king.

古文：十一月，姚襄故将张骏杀江州督护赵毗，焚武昌，略府藏以叛，江州刺史桓冲讨斩之。
现代文：十一月，姚襄原来的将领张骏杀死江州督护赵毗，焚烧武昌城，抢劫了官府官府的仓库反叛，江州刺史桓冲讨讨伐并杀了张骏。
English: In November, Zhang Xuan, the original general of Yao Xiang, killed Zhao Wei, the governor of Jiangzhou, burned Wuchang City, robbed the warehouse of the government, rebelled, and attacked and killed Zhang Xuan.

古文：是岁，慕容将慕容尘攻陈留太守袁披于长平。
现代文：这一年，慕容暐将领慕容尘在升平攻打陈留太守袁披。
English: In this year, Murong Yao led Murong Jian to attack Chen Ruzhu Yuan Pi in Shengping.

古文：汝南太守硃斌承虚袭许昌，克之。
现代文：汝南太守朱斌乘虚袭击许昌成功。
English: Zhu Bin, the eunuch governor of the south, successfully attacked Xu Chang with a fake attack.

古文：二年春二月庚寅，江陵地震。
现代文：二年春二月庚寅，江陵地震。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the Gangneung and Gangneung earthquakes occurred.

古文：慕容将慕容评袭许昌，颍川太守李福死之。
现代文：慕容暐的将领慕容评袭击许昌，颍川太守李福战死。
English: Murongqin's general, Murong Jian, attacked Xu Chang, and the governor of the Min River, Li Fu, was killed in the battle.

古文：评遂侵汝南，太守硃斌遁于寿阳。
现代文：幕容评入侵汝南，太守朱斌逃往寿阳。
English: Emperor Gaozong invaded the south of Ryukyu, and Emperor Zhu Bin fled to Shouyang.

古文：又进围陈郡，太守硃辅婴城固守。
现代文：幕容评又进兵围攻陈郡，太守朱辅环城固守。
English: At the end of the Edo period, troops entered and besieged Chen County again, and the daimyos (governors) of Zhuxuo and Huancheng held firm.

古文：桓温遣江夏相刘岵击退之。
现代文：桓温派江夏相刘岵击退幕容评。
English: Kan-Wen sent Jiangxia Minister Liu Wei to repel the attack.

古文：改左军将军为游击将军，罢右军、前军、后军将军五校三将官。
现代文：改左军将军为游击将军，罢除右军、前军、后军将军五校三将官。
English: The general of the left army was changed to a guerrilla general, and the generals of the right army, the front army and the rear army were removed from five schools and three generals.

古文：癸卯，帝亲耕藉田。
现代文：癸卯日，皇帝亲自下田劳动以发展农业。
English: On the same day, the emperor himself went to work in the fields to develop agriculture.

古文：三月庚戌朔，大阅户人，严法禁，称为庚戌制。
现代文：三月庚戌初一，大规模地核查户口人数，严历法令，称为庚戌制。
English: On the first day of Geng Zi in March, large-scale verification of the number of household accounts, strict laws and regulations, known as the Geng Zi system.

古文：辛未，帝不豫。
现代文：辛未日，皇帝病重。
English: Soon after, the emperor fell seriously ill.

古文：帝雅好黄老，断谷，饵长生药，服食过多，遂中毒，不识万机，崇德太后复临朝摄政。
现代文：皇帝平素喜欢长生不老之术，不吃五谷，专吃长生药，服食过多，于是中了毒，不能治理国政，崇德太后再次上朝摄政。
English: The emperor was always fond of the art of immortality. He didn't eat grains, he only ate macrobiotics and took too much food. As a result, he was poisoned and couldn't govern the country. Empress Dowager Zongde once again became regent.

古文：夏四月甲申，慕容遣其将李洪侵许昌，王师败绩于悬瓠，硃斌奔于淮南，硃辅退保彭城。
现代文：夏四月甲申，慕容暐派他的将领李洪入侵许昌，官军大败于悬瓠，朱斌逃往淮南，朱辅退保彭城。
English: In the summer of April in Jiaxing, Murong Jun sent his general Li Hong to invade Xuchang. The government army was defeated in the siege, Zhu Bin fled to Huainan, and Zhu Fu retreated to Pengcheng.

古文：桓温遣西中郎将袁真、江夏相刘岵等凿阳仪道以通运，温帅舟师次于合肥，慕容尘复屯许昌。
现代文：桓温派西中郎将袁真、江夏相刘岵等凿阳仪道用以运输，温率领水军驻在合肥，慕容尘再次驻许昌。
English: Kuan Wen sent Xi Zhong Lang to transport Yuan Zhen, Jiangxia Minister Liu Xuan and others along the Yangyi Road. Wen led the naval forces stationed in Hefei, and Murong Chen again stationed in Xuchang.

古文：五月，迁陈人于陆以避之。
现代文：五月，把陈郡人迁到陆以躲避幕容氏。
English: In May, the people of Chen County were moved to the mainland to avoid the Makuro clan.

古文：戊辰，以扬州刺史王述为尚书令、卫将军。
现代文：戊辰日，任命扬州刺史王述为尚书令、卫将军。
English: On the day of Pentecost, Yangzhou Sisi Wangsu was appointed as Shang Shuling and Wei general.

古文：以桓温为扬州牧、录尚书事。
现代文：任命桓温为扬州牧、录尚书事。
English: Appointed Kan-Wen as Yangzhou Patriarch, and recorded his records.

古文：壬申，遣使喻温入相，温不从。
现代文：壬申日，朝廷派人宣召桓温入朝当宰相，桓温不同意。
English: On Jinshin Day, the imperial court sent someone to invite Kan On to become prime minister, but Kan On did not agree.

古文：秋七月丁卯，复征温入朝。
现代文：秋七月丁卯，再次下圣旨招桓温入朝。
English: In the autumn and July, Emperor Go-Shirakawa once again issued an imperial edict inviting Kan'en to the imperial court.

古文：八月，温至赭圻，遂城而居之。
现代文：八月，桓温到了赭圻，就筑城居住在那里。
English: In August, when Kuan-Wen arrived in Handan, he went to live in Tsukushi.

古文：苻坚别帅侵河南，慕容寇洛阳。
现代文：苻坚部队入侵河南，慕容暐侵犯洛阳。
English: Shujian's troops invaded Henan, and Murong's troops invaded Luoyang.

古文：九月，冠军将军陈祐留长史沈劲守洛阳，帅众奔新城。
现代文：九月，冠军将军陈祐留下长史沈劲守卫洛阳，自已带部队逃往新城。
English: In September, the champion general Chen Yu left Luoyang, which he had guarded for a long time, and fled to Xincheng with his troops.

古文：三年春正月庚申，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：三年春正月庚申，皇后王氏去世。
English: In Goshun, the first month of the third year of Spring, Empress Wang died.

古文：二月乙未，以右将军桓豁监荆州扬州之义城雍州之京兆诸军事、领南蛮校尉、荆州刺史；桓冲监江州荆州之江夏随郡豫州之汝南西阳新蔡颍川六郡诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史，领南蛮校尉，并假节。
现代文：二月乙未，任命右将军桓豁监荆州扬州的义城和雍州的京兆诸军事、领南蛮校尉、荆州刺史；桓冲监江州荆州之江夏随郡豫州和汝南西阳新蔡颍川六郡诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史，领南蛮校尉，都授节。
English: In February of the same year, he appointed the right general Huan Huan to supervise the military in Yicheng of Jingzhou Yangzhou and Jingzhao of Yongzhou, and the lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians and the lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians of Jingzhou; and the right general Huan Huan to supervise the military in the six counties of Yuzhou of Jingzhou, Xiazu County of Xiyang of Yunnan, and the lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians of the Southern Barbarians of Xinyang of Jiangzhou, and the lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians of the Southern Barbarians of Xiyang, and the lieutenant of the Southern Barbarians of the Southern Barbarians of

古文：丙申，帝崩于西堂，时年二十五。
现代文：丙申日，皇帝在西堂去世，当时二十五岁。
English: On the day of Hsin, the emperor died in the West Hall at the age of twenty-five.

古文：葬安平陵。
现代文：葬在安平陵。
English: He was buried in Anping Mausoleum.

古文：废帝讳奕，字延龄，哀帝之母弟也。
现代文：废皇帝名司马奕，字延龄，是哀帝的同母兄弟。
English: The deposed emperor, whose name was Ma Yi, or Yanling, was the half-brother of Emperor Ai.

古文：咸康八年封为东海王。
现代文：咸康八年封为东海王。
English: Hamkang was crowned King of the East Sea eight years later.

古文：永和八年拜散骑常侍，寻加镇军将军；升平四年拜车骑将军。
现代文：永和八年授散骑常侍，不久加授镇军将军；升平四年授车骑将军。
English: In the eighth year of the Yonghe era, he was given the post of riding attendant, and soon he was given the post of general of the town army; he was promoted to general of the carriage and cavalry four years later.

古文：五年，改封琅邪王。
现代文：五年，改封琅邪王。
English: Five years later, he was given the title of "King of Evil."

古文：隆和初，转侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：隆和初年，转任侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Takakazu, he was transferred to the posts of Samurai Junior Officer, Grand General of Horse Cavalry, Keifu-gishi and Sanji.

古文：兴宁三年二月丙申，哀帝崩，无嗣。
现代文：兴宁三年二月丙申，哀帝去世，没有儿子。
English: In February of the third year of Xingning, Emperor Xian died without a son.

古文：丁酉，皇太后诏曰： 帝遂不救厥疾，艰祸仍臻，遗绪泯然，哀恸切心。
现代文：丁酉日，皇太后下诏说： 皇帝竟然患病不治，祸难频繁降临，哀家的心情很难受。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, the empress dowager issued an edict saying, "The emperor has died of an incurable disease, calamities have frequently befallen him, and the grief-stricken family is in a very difficult mood.

古文：琅邪王奕，明德茂亲，属当储嗣，宜奉祖宗，纂承大统。
现代文：琅邪王司马奕，德性完美，是德才兼备的亲属，应当继承皇位，宜敬奉祖宗，继承皇统。
English: The evil king Sima Yi, with perfect virtue, is a relative with both virtue and talent. He should inherit the imperial throne. It is appropriate to respect the ancestors and inherit the imperial lineage.

古文：便速正大礼，以宁人神。 
现代文：请迅速准备好即位，以让人神安宁。 
English: Please quickly prepare for the enthronement so that people can rest in peace.

古文：于是百官奉迎于琅邪第。
现代文：于是百官到琅邪府去迎奉琅邪王。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials went to Shanyi Prefecture to welcome Shanyi Wang.

古文：是日，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：当天即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: On the same day, he was enthroned as emperor and granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：三月壬申，葬哀皇帝于安平陵。
现代文：三月壬申，把哀皇帝安葬在安平陵。
English: In March of Jinshin, Emperor Ai was buried in the Anping Mausoleum.

古文：癸酉，散骑常侍、河间王钦薨。
现代文：癸酉日，散骑常侍、河间司马王钦去世。
English: On the same day, Sima Wangqin, a regular attendant of the cavalry, passed away.

古文：丙子，慕容将慕容恪陷洛阳，宁朔将军竺瑶奔于襄阳，冠军长史、扬武将军沈劲死之。
现代文：丙子日，慕容暐的将慕容恪攻陷洛阳，宁朔将军竺瑶逃往襄阳，冠军长史、扬武将军沈劲战死。
English: On the third day of the third month, Murong Ju's general, Murong Ke, invaded Luoyang, Ningshuo's general, Zou, fled to Xiangyang, and the champion, Changshi, and Yangwu's general, Shen Jin, died in battle.

古文：夏六月戊子，使持节、都督益宁二州诸军事、镇西将军、益州刺史、建城公周抚卒。
现代文：夏六月戊子，使持节、都督益宁二州诸军事、镇西将军、益州刺史、建城公周抚去世。
English: In the summer of June, the Empress Dowager Wu Zi, the Empress Dowager Jixi, the military leaders of the two prefectures of Yining, the general of Zhenxi, the governor of Yizhou, and the governor of Jiancheng passed away.

古文：秋七月，匈奴左贤王卫辰、右贤王曹谷帅众二万侵苻坚杏城。
现代文：秋七月，匈奴左贤王卫辰、右贤王曹谷率领军队二万入侵苻坚的杏城。
English: In autumn and July, the Xiongnu Zuoxian Wang Weichen and Zuoxian Wang Caotian led an army of twenty thousand to invade Jianjian's Ancheng.

古文：己酉，改封会稽王昱为琅邪王。
现代文：己酉日，改封会稽王司马昱为琅邪王。
English: On the day of his enthronement, King Sima Yi, who had been appointed as the King of the Reformed Church, became the King of Evil.

古文：壬子，立皇后庾氏。
现代文：壬子日，立皇后庾氏。
English: On Imago Day, the Empress Min clan was established.

古文：封琅邪王昱子昌明为会稽王。
现代文：封琅邪王司马昱的儿子司马昌明为会稽王。
English: Sima Changming, the son of the evil king Sima Yu, was appointed as the king of the association.

古文：冬十月，梁州刺史司马勋反，自称成都王。
现代文：冬十月，梁州刺史司马勋反叛，自称成都王。
English: In the winter of October, Sima Xun rebelled in Liangzhou, claiming to be the king of Chengdu.

古文：十一月，帅众人剑阁，攻涪，西夷校尉毌丘弃城而遁。
现代文：十一月，司马勋率领军队进入剑阁，攻打涪城，西夷校尉毌丘暐弃城逃跑。
English: In November, Sima Xun led the army into Jiange, attacked Shicheng, and Xiyi's lieutenant Shizhuqiu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：乙卯，围益州刺史周楚于成都，桓温遣江夏相硃序救之。
现代文：乙卯日，司马勋在成都围攻益州刺史周楚，桓温派江夏相朱序救援周楚。
English: On the second day of the second month, Sima Xun led the siege of Yizhou in Chengdu, and Huan Wen sent Jiang Xia Xiang Zhu Xue to rescue Zhou Chu.

古文：十二月戊戌，以会稽内史王彪之为尚书仆射。
现代文：十二月戊戌，任命会稽内史王彪之为尚书仆射。
English: At the end of December, Wang Biao was appointed as the auditor of the commission.

古文：太和元年春二月己丑，以凉州刺史张天锡为大将军、都督陇右关中诸军事、西平郡公。
现代文：太和元年春二月己丑，任命凉州刺史张天锡为大将军、都督陇右关中诸军事、西平郡公。
English: In the spring and February of the 1st year of the Taisho era, Zhang Tianxi, the chief historian of Liangzhou, was appointed as the general, the military governor of Yuekan, and the governor of Xiping County.

古文：丙申，以宣城内史桓秘为持节、监梁益二州征讨诸军事。
现代文：丙申日，任命宣城内史桓秘为持节、监梁益二州征讨伐诸军事。
English: On the day of Xuan Sheng's death, he appointed Xuancheng's internal history to be kept secret, and the inspector Liang Yi was drafted into the military for the conquest of the two states.

古文：三月辛亥，新蔡王邈薨。
现代文：三月辛亥，新蔡王司马邈去世。
English: In March of Xinhai, the new Cai Wang Simasong passed away.

古文：荆州刺史桓豁遣督护桓罴攻南郑，魏兴人毕钦举兵以应罴。
现代文：荆州刺史桓豁派督护桓罴攻南郑，魏兴人毕钦率领军队策应桓豁。
English: Jing Zhou sent Guo Huanzhang to attack Nan Zheng, and Wei Xing led the troops under the command of Bi Qin.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：夏四月，干旱。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：五月戊寅，皇后庾氏崩。
现代文：五月戊寅，皇后庾氏去世。
English: In May, Empress Dowager Wu passed away.

古文：硃序攻司马勋于成都，众溃，执勋，斩之。
现代文：朱序在成都攻打司马勋，司马勋的军队溃败，朱序俘获了司马勋并杀了他。
English: Zhu Xun attacked Sima Xun in Chengdu, Sima Xun's army was defeated, Zhu Xun captured Sima Xun and killed him.

古文：秋七月癸酉，葬孝皇后于敬平陵。
现代文：秋七月癸酉，把孝皇后安葬在敬平陵。
English: In the autumn and July, Empress Xiao was buried in the Jingping Mausoleum.

古文：九月甲午，曲赦梁、益二州。
现代文：九月甲午，特赦梁、益二州。
English: On the afternoon of September 1st, the amnesty for Liang and Yixing came into effect in two prefectures.

古文：冬十月辛丑，苻坚将王猛、杨安攻南乡，荆州刺史桓豁救之，师次新野而猛、安退。
现代文：冬十月辛丑，苻坚的将领王猛、杨安攻打南乡，荆州刺史桓豁救去救援，军队驻在新野，王猛、杨安退却。
English: The winter and October were harsh and ugly. Wang Meng and Yang An, the generals of Shijian, attacked Nanxiang, Jingzhou sent Shihuan to rescue, the army was stationed in Xinye, and Wang Meng and Yang An retreated.

古文：以会稽王昱为丞相。
现代文：任命会稽王司马昱为丞相。
English: Appointed the Auditor-General, Wang Simak, as chancellor.

古文：十二月，南阳人赵弘、赵忆等据宛城反，太守桓澹走保新野。
现代文：十二月，南阳人赵弘、赵忆等战据宛城谋反，太守桓澹逃到新野固守。
English: In December, Nanyang people Zhao Hong, Zhao Yi and others plotted a rebellion against the city, and the governor Huan Yao fled to Nianye.

古文：慕容将慕容厉陷鲁郡、高平。
现代文：慕容暐的将领慕容厉攻陷鲁郡、高平。
English: The general of the Murong army, Murong Li, invaded Lu County and Gaoping.

古文：二年春正月，北中郎将庾希有罪，走入于海。
现代文：二年春正月，北中郎将庾希犯了罪，逃到海上。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, Kitanakura committed the crime of abducting Yuki and fled to the sea.

古文：夏四月，慕容将慕容尘寇竟陵，太守罗崇击破之。
现代文：夏四月，慕容暐的将领慕容尘侵犯竟陵，太守罗崇打败了他们。
English: In the summer of April, the generals of the Murong Dynasty invaded the Mausoleum, and the governor Luo Chong defeated them.

古文：苻坚将王猛寇凉州，张天锡距之，猛师败绩。
现代文：苻坚的将领王猛侵犯寇凉州，张天锡打击他们，王猛的军队被打得大败。
English: Wang Meng, the general of Jianjian, invaded Qolangzhou, Zhang Tianxi attacked them, and Wang Meng's army was defeated.

古文：五月，右将军桓豁击赵忆，走之，进获慕容将赵槃，送于京师。
现代文：五月，右将军桓豁攻打赵忆，赵忆逃跑，恒豁进攻，俘获了慕容暐的将领赵槃，押送到京师。
English: In May, the right-wing general Huan Hui attacked Zhao Yi, Zhao Yi fled, Heng Hui attacked, captured the general Zhao Hui of Murong Hui, and sent him to the Beijing Division.

古文：秋九月，以会稽内史郗愔为都督徐兗青幽四州诸军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：秋九月，任命会稽内史郗愔为都督徐兖青幽四州诸军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
English: In autumn and September, he was appointed as the military governor of Xuzhou, the general of North Pyongan Province, and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：冬十月乙巳，彭城王玄薨。
现代文：冬十月乙巳，彭城王司马玄去世。
English: In the winter of October, Pengcheng Wang Sima Xuan passed away.

古文：三年春三月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。癸亥，大赦。
现代文：三年春三月丁巳初一，日食。癸亥日，大赦。
English: In March of the third year of spring, the first day of Ding Si, the solar eclipse. The day of the boar, the amnesty.

古文：夏四月癸巳，雨雹，大风折木。
现代文：夏四月癸巳，下冰雹，还有龙卷风。
English: In the summer of April, hail, hailstorms, and tornadoes.

古文：秋八月壬寅，尚书令、卫将军、蓝田侯王述卒。
现代文：秋八月壬寅，尚书令、卫将军、蓝田侯王述去世。
English: In the autumn and August of Renin, Shang Shuling, Wei Zheng, and Lantian Houwang passed away.

古文：四年夏四月庚戌，大司马桓温帅众伐慕容。
现代文：四年夏四月庚戌，大司马桓温率领军队攻打慕容暐。
English: In the summer and April of the fourth year of Geng Zi, Grand Master Ma Kanwen led an army to attack Murong Zi.

古文：秋七月辛卯，将慕容垂帅众距温，温击败之。
现代文：秋七月辛卯，幕容暐的将领慕容垂率领军队抵抗距温，桓温击败了他们。
English: In the autumn and July of Xinwu, Mu Rongtai, the general of the curtain, led the army to resist Dahuan, and Dahuan defeated them.

古文：九月戊寅，桓温裨将邓遐、硃序遇将傅末波于林渚，又大破之。
现代文：九月戊寅，桓温裨将邓遐、朱序在林渚遭遇慕容暐的将领傅末波，又大败他们。
English: In September, Wu Yin, Kuan Wen, Deng Yao and Zhu Xiu encountered Murong Yao's generals Fu Mianbo in Linzhu, and defeated them.

古文：戊子，温至枋头。
现代文：戊子日，桓温到达枋头。
English: On the day of Boshi, Kanen arrived in Shantou.

古文：丙申，以粮运不继，焚舟而归。
现代文：丙申日，因为粮草运输接不上，焚烧了舟船后返回。
English: On the same day, because the grain and grass transportation could not be connected, he burned the boat and returned.

古文：辛丑，慕容垂追败温后军于襄邑。
现代文：辛丑日，慕容垂在襄邑追上并击败了桓温的后军。
English: On the fateful day, Murong Du caught up with and defeated Kuan Wen's rearguard in Xiangyue.

古文：冬十月，大星西流，有声如雷。
现代文：冬十月，有彗星向西飞落，有雷鸣般的声音。
English: In the winter of October, a comet fell to the west, accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：己巳，温收散卒，屯于山阳。
现代文：己巳日，桓温招招集散兵，屯兵在山阳。
English: On the same day, Kuan-Wen called up the detached soldiers, and the garrison was in Sanyo.

古文：豫州刺史袁真以寿阳叛。
现代文：豫州刺史袁真率寿阳反叛。
English: Yuan Zhen, the governor of Yuzhou, led the Shouyang Rebellion.

古文：十一月辛丑，桓温自山阳及会稽王昱会于涂中，将谋后举。
现代文：十一月辛丑日，桓温从山阳到涂中和会稽王司马昱会晤，准备谋划日后的行动。
English: On the day of Xinwu in November, Kuan Wen went from Shanyang to Tu Zhong and met with the Comptroller Wang Sima, preparing to plan future actions.

古文：十二月，遂城广陵而居之。
现代文：十二月，在广陵建城居住。
English: In December, he settled in Jiancheng, Guangling.

古文：五年春正月己亥，袁真子双之、爱之害梁国内史硃宪、汝南内史硃斌。
现代文：五年春正月己亥，袁真的儿子袁双之、袁爱之害死梁国内史朱宪、汝南内史朱斌。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, Yuan Zhen's sons Yuan Shuangzhi and Yuan Ai killed Liang Guozhong Shi Zhu Xian and Ru Nan Nai Shi Zhu Bin.

古文：二月癸酉，袁真死，陈郡太守硃辅立真子瑾嗣事，求救于慕容。
现代文：二月癸酉，袁袁真死，陈郡太守朱辅立袁真的儿子袁瑾继嗣，向慕容暐求救。
English: At the end of February, Yuan Yuan Zhen died. Yuan Zhen's son, Yuan Zhen's son, Yuan Zhen's son, asked Murong Zhen for help.

古文：八月癸丑，桓温击袁瑾于寿阳，败之。
现代文：夏四月辛未，桓温部将竺瑶在武丘打败袁瑾。
English: In the late summer and early April, the Kanen club defeated Yuan Shao in Wuqiu.

古文：九月，苻坚将猛伐慕容，陷其上党。
现代文：秋七月癸酉初一，日食。八月癸丑，桓温在寿阳击败袁瑾。九月，苻坚的将领王猛攻打慕容暐，攻陷上党。
English: In autumn and July, on the first day of the first month, there was a solar eclipse. In August, it was ugly, and Kuan Wen defeated Yuan Shao in Shouyang. In September, the strong general Wang attacked Murong Shao and captured the upper party.

古文：广汉妖贼李弘与益州妖贼李金根聚众反，弘自称圣王，众万余人，梓潼太守周虓讨平之。
现代文：广汉妖贼李弘和益州妖贼李金根聚集人马造，李弘自称为圣王，有一万多人，梓潼太守周虓讨伐平定了他们。
English: Li Hong, the traitor of Guanghan, and Li Jingen, the traitor of Yizhou, gathered more than ten thousand people. Li Hong claimed to be a holy king, and Zizhou Zhou, the grand marshal of Zizhou, defeated them.

古文：冬十月，王猛大破慕容将慕容评于潞川。
现代文：冬十月，王猛大破在潞川大败慕容暐的将领慕容评于潞川。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Meng severely defeated the general Mu Rong Rong, who had defeated Mu Rong Rong, in the Beichuan River.

古文：十一月，猛克鄴，获慕容，尽有其地。
现代文：十一月，王猛攻克邺，俘获了慕容暐，全部占有了他的领地。
English: In November, Wang stormed Kecheng, captured Murong Yao, and occupied all of his territory.

古文：六年春正月，苻坚遣将王鉴来援袁瑾，将军桓伊逆击，大破之。
现代文：六年春正月，苻坚派将领王鉴救援袁瑾，将军桓伊迎击，大败王鉴。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Su Jian sent the general Wang Jian to rescue Yuan Shao, and the general Huan Yi counterattacked and defeated Wang Jian.

古文：丁亥，桓温克寿阳，斩袁瑾。
现代文：丁亥日，桓温攻克寿阳，斩袁瑾。
English: On the day of Dinghai, Huan Wen conquered Shouyang and killed Yuan Shao.

古文：三月壬辰，监益宁二州诸军事、冠军将军、益州刺史、建城公周楚卒。
现代文：三月壬辰，监益宁二州诸军事、冠军将军、益州刺史、建城公周楚去世。
English: In March, Imjin, the overseer of the military of the two states of Yining, the champion general, the history of Yizhou, and the founding father Zhou Chu passed away.

古文：夏四月戊午，大赦，赐穷独米，人五斛。
现代文：夏四月戊午，大赦，赐贫苦和老年无子的人粮食，每人五斛。
English: In the summer, at the end of April, there was a general amnesty, and the poor, the old and the childless were given food to the amount of five baht per person.

古文：苻坚将苻雅伐仇池，仇池公杨纂降之。
现代文：苻坚的将领苻雅攻打仇池，仇池公杨纂投降。
English: Xuanjian's general, Xinya, attacked Qiuqi, and Qiuqi's prince, Yang Kodo, surrendered.

古文：六月，京都及丹阳、晋陵、吴郡、吴兴、临海并大水。
现代文：六月，京都和丹阳、晋陵、吴郡、吴兴、临海都大水。
English: In June, Kyoto and Danyang, Jinling, Wugun, Wuxing and Linhai were all flooded.

古文：秋八月，以前宁州刺史周仕孙为假节、监益梁二州诸军事、益州刺史。
现代文：秋八月，任命前宁州刺史周仕孙为假节、监益梁二州诸军事、益州刺史。
English: In the autumn and August, Zhou Shisun, the former Ningzhou chief historian, was appointed as the false festival, supervising the military of the two states and the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：冬十月壬子，高密王俊薨。
现代文：冬十月壬子，高密王司马俊去世。
English: In the winter of October, Gaomi Wang Sima Jun passed away.

古文：十一月癸卯，桓温自广陵屯于白石。
现代文：十一月癸卯，桓温从广陵到白石屯驻。
English: At the end of November, Kuan Wen moved from Guangling to Shiroishi.

古文：丁未，诣阙，因图废立，诬帝在籓夙有痿疾，嬖人相龙、计好、硃灵宝等参侍内寝，而二美人田氏、孟氏生三男，长欲封树，时人惑之，温因讽太后以伊霍之举。
现代文：丁未日，谋划废黜当今皇帝，另立新皇帝，并放出传闻说皇帝在封国时早就有阳痿的疾病，他宠爱的人相龙、计好、朱灵宝等参于内室之事，使得他的两位美人田氏、孟氏生三病人个儿子，想受到分封立位，当时人们都很疑惑，桓温于是用伊尹、霍光的事迹委婉地劝说太后。
English: On the day of Ding Wei, he planned to depose the current emperor and set up a new emperor, and released a rumor that the emperor had an impotence disease as early as when he was enthroned. His favorite people, such as Saurong, Guo Hao and Zhu Lingbao, attended the inner room. This made his two beauties, Tian and Meng, who had three sick sons, want to be given separate fiefs. At that time, people were very suspicious, so Huan Wen used the deeds of Yi Yin and Huo Guang to gently persuade the empress dowager.

古文：己酉，集百官于朝堂，宣崇德太后令曰： 王室艰难，穆、哀短祚，国嗣不育储宫靡立。
现代文：己酉日，在朝堂里聚集百官，宣示崇德太后的令说： 王室艰难，穆帝、哀帝福运短暂，没来得及养育后代，无法立太子。
English: On the same day, hundreds of officials gathered in the imperial hall to proclaim the order of Empress Dowager Chongde, saying: The royal family is difficult, the good fortune of Mu Di and Lai Di is short-lived, it is too late to raise descendants, and it is impossible to establish a crown prince.

古文：琅邪王奕亲则母弟，故以入纂大位。
现代文：琅邪王司马奕按亲属来说是皇帝的同母弟弟，所以让他入继皇位。
English: According to his relatives, the evil king Sima Yi was the emperor's half-brother, so he was allowed to succeed to the throne.

古文：不图德之不建，乃至于斯。昏浊溃乱，动违礼度。
现代文：没有想到他不建立德行，竟然到了这种地步，昏昧悖乱，违犯礼法。
English: I didn't think that he wouldn't establish virtue, but it has come to this, confusion, disorder, and violation of etiquette.

古文：有此三孽，莫知谁子。
现代文：生了这三个孽障，不知道是谁的儿子。
English: Who begat these three evils, I know not whose son he is.

古文：人伦道丧，丑声遐布。
现代文：人伦之道丧失，丑恶的名声远扬。
English: Morals have been lost, and an ugly reputation has spread far and wide.

古文：既不可以奉守社稷，敬承宗庙，且昏孽并大，便欲建树储籓。
现代文：司马奕既不能谨守社稷，敬承祖宗，又极为昏乱悖孽，却想立太子封藩王。
English: Sima Yi was not able to keep the rules of the community, respect the ancestors, and was extremely confused and sinful, but he wanted to establish the prince as the king of the domain.

古文：诬罔祖宗，颂移皇基，是而可忍，孰不可怀！
现代文：欺骗祖宗，动摇皇室基业，是可忍，孰不可忍！
English: Deceiving the ancestors and shaking the foundation of the imperial family can be tolerated, but it must not be tolerated!

古文：今废奕为东海王，以王还第，供卫之仪，皆如汉朝昌邑故事。
现代文：现在废黜司马奕为东海王，以东海王的身份返回宅第，供奉守卫的标准，都和汉朝昌邑王一样。
English: Now, he is dethroned as the King of the East Sea, and returns to his mansion as the King of the East Sea. The standards for his guards are the same as those of the King of Changyi in the Han Dynasty.

古文：但未亡人不幸，罹此百忧，感念存没，心焉如割。
现代文：这是我的不幸，遭逢了这么多的忧患，想起生者和死者，心如刀割。
English: It is my misfortune to have met with so much sorrow, and to think of the living and the dead breaks my heart.

古文：社稷大计，义不获已。
现代文：社稷大计，大义没有得以伸张。
English: Social justice has not been achieved.

古文：临纸悲塞，如何可言。 
现代文：对着纸悲伤欲绝，怎么还能说话。 
English: How can you still talk when you're overwhelmed with grief over a piece of paper?

古文：于是百官入太极前殿，即日桓温使散骑侍郎刘享收帝玺绶。
现代文：于是百官进入太极前殿，即日桓温让散骑侍郎刘享收回皇帝的玺绶。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials entered the hall in front of the Taiji, and on that day, Kuan-Wen asked Liu Xiang, the horseman, to take back the emperor's scepter.

古文：帝著白帢单衣，步下西堂，乘犊车出神兽门。
现代文：皇帝穿着白帢帽和单衣，走下西堂，乘坐牛车驶出神兽门。
English: The emperor, wearing a white skullcap and a single garment, walked down the West Hall and rode out of the Gate of Divine Beasts in an ox cart.

古文：群臣拜辞，莫不觑欷。
现代文：群臣恭敬地告别，无不觑欷叹息。
English: The courtiers respectfully bid farewell, all of them sighing.

古文：侍御史、殿中监将兵百人卫送东海第。
现代文：侍御史、殿中监率领一百名士兵护送到东海府第。
English: A hundred soldiers, led by the chamberlain and palace superintendent, escorted them to Tokaifu.

古文：初，桓温有不臣之心，欲先立功河朔，以收时望。
现代文：当初，桓温有夺取帝位的野心，打算先在河朔立功，以得到世人的瞩目和声望。
English: At first, Kuan Wen had the ambition to seize the imperial throne, and planned to first make a contribution in Hechuo to gain the attention and reputation of the world.

古文：及枋头之败，威名顿挫，逐潜谋废立，以长威权。
现代文：到了枋头失败后，威名顿时受损，就秘密地策划废除皇帝立新帝，以此来增加威势权力。
English: After the defeat of Shantou, his reputation was immediately damaged, and he secretly planned to abolish the emperor and establish a new emperor in order to increase his power.

古文：然惮帝守道，恐招时议。
现代文：但是又害怕皇帝恪守正道，担心这么做会招来议论。
English: But they were also afraid of the emperor sticking to the right path, fearing that doing so would lead to controversy.

古文：以宫阐重闷，床笫易诬，乃言帝为阉，遂行废辱。
现代文：因为宫阐深闺之中的事情隐秘，床笫间的事情容易诬灭，就放出话说皇帝是没有性能力的人。于是进行了废黜。
English: Because the affairs of the palace are secret, and the affairs of the bedchamber are easily falsified, it was said that the emperor was a man without sexual ability. Therefore, the deposition was carried out.

古文：初，帝平生每以为虑，尝召术人扈谦筮之，卦成，答曰： 晋室有盘石之固，陛下有出宫之象。 
现代文：最初，皇帝也经常担心桓温，曾经召来术士扈谦下筮，卦象出来以后，扈谦说： 晋皇室像磐石一样稳固，陛下有离开宫廷的微象。 
English: At first, the emperor was also often worried about Huan Wen. He once summoned the sorcerer Zou Qian to subdue him. After the gossip came out, Zou Qian said: The Jin royal family is as solid as a rock, and His Majesty has a slight chance of leaving the court.

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：结果竟然和扈谦说的一样。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：咸安二年正月，降封帝为海西县公。
现代文：咸安二年正月，降封皇帝为海西县公。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xian'an, the emperor was demoted and became the governor of Haixi County.

古文：四月，徙居吴县，敕吴国内史刁彝防卫，又遣御史顾允监察之。
现代文：四月，徙居吴县，敕命吴国内史刁彝防卫，又派御史顾允监督。
English: In April, he moved to Wuxian County, where he devoted his life to the defense of Wu's domestic history, and also sent Gu Yun to supervise it.

古文：十一月，妖贼卢悚遣弟子殿中监许龙晨到其门，称太后密诏，奉迎兴复。
现代文：十一月，妖贼卢悚派弟子殿中监许龙大清早到海西县公大门前，称说有太后密诏，奉迎海西县公回去恢复皇位。
English: In November, a disciple of Lu Chulli, the demon thief, went to the front of the public gate of Haisi County in the early morning, saying that there was a secret edict from the empress dowager to return to restore the imperial throne.

古文：帝初欲从之，纳保母谏而止。
现代文：皇帝开始想听从许龙，听取了集中统一的规谏后作罢。
English: The emperor began to want to listen to Xu Long, and after listening to the centralized and unified rules and regulations, he gave up.

古文：龙曰： 大事将捷，焉用兒女子言乎？ 
现代文：许龙说曰： 大事就要成功了，怎么还听女人的话呢？ 
English: Xu Long said, "If something important is about to succeed, how can you still listen to a woman?

古文：帝曰： 我得罪于此，幸蒙宽宥，岂敢妄动哉！
现代文：皇帝说： 我犯了这样的罪，幸而承蒙宽宥，怎么敢轻举妄动呢！
English: The emperor said, "I have committed such a crime, fortunately I have been forgiven, how dare I act rashly!"

古文：且太后有诏，便应官属来，何独使汝也？
现代文：而且太后如果有诏令，就应该派自己的心腹来，为什么偏偏是你呢？
English: Moreover, if the empress dowager had a decree, she should have sent her own henchman. Why you in particular?

古文：汝必为乱。 
现代文：你一定是作乱。 
English: You must be causing a disturbance.

古文：因叱左右缚之，龙惧而走。
现代文：就呼喝侍从们绑了他，许龙惊慌逃走。
English: He shouted that the servants had tied him up, and Xu Long panicked and fled.

古文：帝知天命不可再，深虑横祸，乃杜塞聪明，无思无虑，终日酣暢，耽于内宠，有子不育，庶保天年。
现代文：皇帝知道皇位不能再得，很担心遭来横祸，就对世事不闻不门，无忧无虑，终日饮酒作乐，沉溺于内宠之中，不抚育自己的儿子，希望能保住自身。
English: The emperor knew that he could not regain the imperial throne, and was very worried about the misfortune that had befallen him, so he was oblivious to worldly affairs, carefree, drinking all day long, indulging in his inner pet, not raising his son, and hoping to save himself.

古文：时人怜之，为作歌焉。
现代文：当时的人们哀怜他，给他唱赞歌。
English: People at the time mourned him and sang his praises.

古文：朝廷以帝安于屈辱，不复为虞。
现代文：朝廷因为皇帝安于屈辱不再担忧他东山再起。
English: The imperial court was no longer worried about the emperor's comeback because he was content with his humiliation.

古文：太元十一年十月甲申，薨于吴，时年四十五。
现代文：太元十一年十月甲申，皇帝在吴国去世，当时四十五岁。
English: In October of the eleventh year of Taigen, Emperor Jiaxun died in the State of Wu at the age of forty-five.

古文：史臣曰：孝宗因繦抱之姿，用母氏之化，中外无事，十有余年。
现代文：史臣曰：孝宗年幼，由母亲摄政，中外无事，安定了十多年。
English: Shichen said: "Since he was young, Takamune was reigned by his mother. There was no trouble at home or abroad, and he remained stable for more than ten years.

古文：以武安之才，启之疆埸；以文王之风，被乎江汉，则孔子所谓吾无间然矣。
现代文：用武安君那样的雄才，在疆场开拓；用周文王那样的风化，施行到了江汉，那么这就是孔子所说的没有非议了。
English: With a great talent like Wu Anjun, he explored the frontier; with a demeanor like Zhou Wenwang, he implemented the Jianghan, then this is what Confucius said without reproach.

古文：哀皇宽惠，可以为君，而鸿祀禳天，用尘其德。
现代文：哀皇帝宽厚仁惠，可以做国君，但是祭祀祈福于上天，德行蒙受污损。
English: Emperor Ai is generous and benevolent, he can be the ruler of the country, but if he makes sacrifices and prays for blessings from heaven, his virtue will be tarnished.

古文：东海违许龙之驾，屈放命之臣，所谓柔弱胜刚强，得尽于天年者也。
现代文：海西公拒绝许龙让他恢复皇位，屈身于放逐之臣，正所谓是柔弱胜刚强，能够享尽天年的人。
English: Prince Haisei refused to allow Xu Long to restore him to the throne and bowed down to the exiled vassal. It is said that the weak are stronger than the strong, and those who can enjoy life to the full.

古文：赞曰：委裘称化，大孝为宗，遵彼圣善，成兹允恭。
现代文：赞曰：帝位虚设，母后当政，大孝为根本。遵循母亲教诲，成就诚信恭谦。
English: Zang said: The throne is not real, the mother is in power, and filial piety is fundamental. Follow your mother's teachings to achieve honesty and humility.

古文：西旌玉垒，北旆金墉。
现代文：可作西边玉垒的榜样，可作北边金墉的旗帜。
English: It can be used as a model for the Jade Fort on the west side and as a banner for the Golden Urn on the north side.

古文：迁殷旧僰，莫不来从。
现代文：迁徒的殷人追日的僰人，没有不来归顺的。
English: There is no one who does not come to submit to the yakitori of the migratory yakitori chasing the sun.

古文：哀后宽仁，惟灵既集。
现代文：哀后宽厚仁惠，神灵自来会集。
English: After the mourning, there will be benevolence and benevolence, and the gods will gather.

古文：海西多故，时灾见及。
现代文：海西公多难，灾祸降临头上。
English: There are many troubles in the West Sea, and calamities befall our heads.

古文：彼异阿衡，我非昌邑。
现代文：他不是辅臣，我也不是昌邑。
English: He's not a vassal, and I'm not a vassal.

