古文：晋文公既定襄王于郏，王劳之以地，辞，请隧焉。
现代文：晋文公帮助周襄王在郏地复位，襄王以土地作为酬劳，文公谢辞，要求死后用隧礼安葬。
English: Jin Wengong helped Zhou Xiang Wang to restore the throne in Shunde. Xiang Wang used the land as a reward. Wengong thanked him and asked to be buried with a tunnel after his death.

古文：王不许，曰： 昔我先王之有天下也，规方千里以为甸服，以供上帝山川百神之祀，以备百姓兆民之用，以待不庭不虞之患。
现代文：襄王不同意，说： 过去我们先王拥有天下，划出方圆千里的土地作为甸服，以便供给大帝山川百神的祭品，以备百姓万民的用度，以应付变乱和不能预料的灾患。
English: King Xiang disagreed, saying, "In the past, our forefather king owned the whole country and set aside thousands of square miles of land as a dianfu, in order to provide sacrifices to the great emperor, mountains, rivers and hundreds of gods, to prepare for the needs of the people, to cope with turmoil and unforeseen disasters.

古文：其余以均分公侯伯子男，使各有宁宇，以顺及天地，无逢其灾害，先王岂有赖焉。
现代文：其余的土地则按规定分配给公、侯、伯、子、男，使他们各有安居的处所，以顺从天地尊卑的等级，不至于遭到灾害，先王哪里有自己的私利呢？
English: The rest of the land was distributed according to regulations to princes, lords, nobles, sons, and men, so that they each had a safe place to live, in order to obey the hierarchy of heaven and earth, so as not to suffer disasters. Where did the former king have his own selfish interests?

古文：内官不过九御，外官不过九品，足以供给神祇而已，岂敢厌纵其耳目心腹以乱百度？
现代文：他宫中的官只有九御，朝廷上的官只有九卿，不过足以供奉神灵、主持祭祀罢了，哪里敢尽情满足自己的声色口腹之欲而败坏法规制度呢？
English: The officials in his palace were only nine emperors, and the officials in the imperial court were only nine nobles, but it was enough to offer sacrifices to the gods and preside over the rituals. Who would dare to corrupt the legal system in order to satisfy his lust for fame?

古文：亦唯是死生之服物采章，以临长百姓而轻重布之，王何异之有？
现代文：只是这生前死后服饰器物的色彩和纹饰，则根据地位的高低而有所区别，以表示尊卑贵贱的等级，此外天子与其他人还有什么不同的呢？
English: However, the color and decoration of the clothing and utensils before and after death are different according to the level of status, to indicate the rank of high and low, in addition, what is the difference between the heavenly son and others?

古文：今天降祸灾于周室，余一人仅亦守府，又不佞以勤叔父，而班先王之大物以赏私德，其叔父实应且憎，以非余一人，余一人岂敢有爱？先民有言曰： 改玉改行。 
现代文：现在上天将灾难降临在周王室，我也只能守护住王室的财产而已，又因为我的无能以致劳动了叔父，但是如果改变先王的制度来酬劳我个人所受的恩惠，那叔父将被人们憎恶，因为这不是我个人的财物，否则，我哪敢吝惜呢？前人有言道： 变换佩玉就要改变步伐。 
English: Now that heaven has brought disaster to the Zhou royal family, I can only guard the royal property, and because of my incompetence, I have worked for my uncle. But if I change the system of the former king to reward my personal favor, then my uncle will be hated by people, because it is not my personal property. Otherwise, how can I be stingy? The ancients said: Changing the jade means changing the pace.

古文：叔父若能光裕大德，更姓改物，以创制天下，自显庸也，而缩取备物以镇抚百姓，余一人其流辟旅于裔土，何辞之有与？
现代文：叔父如果能光扬美德，改姓易朝统治天下，创造新的制度来显示功业，从而采用天子的礼法来统抚百姓，我即使流放到边远荒地也没有话可说。
English: If my uncle was able to glorify virtue, change his surname to Yi to rule the world, create a new system to show his merits, and thus use the etiquette of the Son of Heaven to govern the people, I would have nothing to say even if I were exiled to a remote wasteland.

古文：若由是姬姓也，尚将列为公侯以复先王之职，大物其未可改也。
现代文：如果仍是姬氏掌有天下，叔父依然将作为诸侯，把恢复先王的规制作为自己的责职，那葬礼这样的体制不可更改。
English: If the world is still in the hands of the Hime clan, my uncle will still be a vassal, and he will take it as his duty to restore the former king's regulations, then the system of funerals cannot be changed.

古文：叔父其懋昭明德，物将自至，余何敢以私劳变前之大章，以忝天下，其若先王与百姓何？
现代文：叔父继续努力光扬美德，那样的礼仪自然会得到，我如何敢为了私情就改变先世的体制，以致于有愧于天下，那我把先王和百姓放到哪儿去了呢？
English: My uncle continued his efforts to glorify virtue, and such etiquette would naturally be obtained. How dare I change the system of the previous generation for the sake of my personal feelings, so that I am unworthy of the world. So where did I put the former king and the people?

古文：何政令之为也？
现代文：又怎么制定政令呢？
English: How can a decree be made?

古文：若不然，叔父有地而隧焉，余安能知之？ 
现代文：如若不然，叔父有土地而自行隧葬，我怎么能管得了呢？ 
English: If not, how can I handle it when my uncle has land and digs a tunnel to bury himself?

古文：文公遂不敢请，受地而还。
现代文：晋文公于是不敢请求隧葬，接受赐地而回国了。
English: Jinwen did not dare to ask for a tunnel burial, so he accepted the land grant and returned to China.

