古文：黄帝问曰：余闻古之治病，惟其移精变气，可祝由而已。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说古时治病，只要对病人移易精神和改变气的运行，用一种叫 祝由 的疗法，病就可以好了。
English: Huang Di asked, "I heard that in ancient times, when curing a disease, as long as the patient's spirit is moved and the operation of qi is changed, the disease can be cured with a kind of therapy called wishing.

古文：今世治病，毒药治其内，针石治其外，或愈或不愈，何也？
现代文：现在医病，要用药物治其内，针石治其外，疾病还是有好、有不好，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Nowadays, in the treatment of diseases, it is necessary to use drugs to cure the inside and needles to cure the outside. There are good and bad diseases. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯对曰：往古人居禽兽之间，动作以避寒，阴居以避暑，内无眷慕之累，外无伸宦之形，此恬惔之世，邪不能深入也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：远古时代的人们，生活简单，巢穴居处，在禽兽之间追逐生存；寒冷到了，利用活动以除寒冷；暑热来了，就到阴凉的地方避免暑气，在内没有眷恋羡慕的情志牵挂；在外没有奔走求官的劳累形役，他们处在一个安静淡薄、不谋势利、精神内守的环境中，邪气是不可能深入侵犯到身体里面的。
English: Qibo replied, "People in ancient times lived a simple life, living in nests and pursuing survival among animals. When the cold came, they used activities to remove the cold. When the heat came, they went to a shady place to avoid the heat. They did not have the attachment of envy inside; they did not have the exhausting role of running around looking for officials outside. They were in a quiet, light, unscrupulous, and spiritual environment. It was impossible for evil spirits to invade the body deeply.

古文：故毒药不能治其内，针石不能治其外，故可移精祝由而已。
现代文：所以既不须要药物治其内，也不须要针石治其外。即使有疾病的发生，只要对病人采用移易精神和改变气场的祝由法，病就可以好了。
English: Therefore, it is not necessary to use drugs to cure it internally, nor is it necessary to use acupuncture to cure it externally. Even if there is a disease, as long as the patient uses the method of transferring the spirit and changing the qi field, the disease can be cured.

古文：当今之世不然，忧患缘其内，苦形伤其外，又失四时之从，逆寒暑之宜，贼风数至，虚邪朝夕，内至五脏骨髓，外伤空窍肌肤，所以小病必甚，大病必死，故祝由不能已也。
现代文：现时，内则为忧患所牵累，外则为劳苦所形役，又不能顺从四时气候的变化，因此常常遭受到虚邪贼风的侵袭，正气衰弱在先，外邪乘虚而袭于后，内犯五脏骨髓，外伤孔窍肌肤，这样轻病必重，重病必死，所以用祝由法就不能医好疾病了。
English: At present, the internal organs are affected by sorrow, the external organs are shaped by toil, and cannot follow the changes in the four-hour climate. Therefore, they are often attacked by the evil wind. The virtuous spirit weakens first, and the external evil takes advantage of the weakness and attacks later. The five internal organs, the bone marrow, and the skin are affected by the external wound. Such a minor illness must be serious, and a serious illness must be fatal. Therefore, it is impossible to cure the disease with the method of wishing.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：很好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：余欲临病人，观死生，决嫌疑，欲知其要，如日月光，可得闻乎？
现代文：我想要临诊病人，能够察其死生，决断疑惑，掌握要领，如同日月之光一样的心中明了，这种诊法可以讲给我听吗？
English: I want to see a patient in the emergency room, I want to be able to check his life and death, resolve doubts, grasp the essentials, and know it in my heart like the light of the sun and the moon. Can this diagnosis be told to me?

古文：岐伯曰：色脉者，上帝之所贵也，先师之所传也。
现代文：岐伯曰：在诊法上，色和脉的诊察方法，是上古之帝所珍重，先师所传授的。
English: Qibo said: In terms of diagnosis, the method of diagnosing color and pulse is precious to the ancient emperors and was taught by the predecessors.

古文：上古使僦贷季，理色脉而通神明，合之金木水火土，四时八风六合，不离其常，变化相移，以观其妙，以知其要。
现代文：上古有位名医叫僦贷季，他研究色和脉的道理，通达神明，能够联系到金、木、水、火、土的五行，以及四时、八风、六合，从正常的规律和异常的变化，来综合分析，观察它的变化奥妙，从而知道其中的要领。
English: In ancient times, there was a famous doctor named Qian Lian Ji. He studied the principles of color and veins, and was able to connect with the gods. He was able to connect with the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, as well as the four seasons, the eight winds, and the six conjunctions. From the normal laws and abnormal changes, he comprehensively analyzed and observed the intricacies of its changes, and thus knew the essentials.

古文：欲知其要，则色脉是矣。
现代文：我们如果要能懂得这些要领，就只有研究色和脉。
English: If we want to understand these essentials, we can only study color and veins.

古文：色以应日，脉以应月，常求其要，则其要也。
现代文：面部的气色像太阳而有阴晴，手上的脉息像月亮而有盈亏，从色和脉中得其要领，正是诊病的重要关键。
English: The complexion of the face is like the sun, but cloudy, and the pulse on the hand is like the moon, but has gains and losses. The essentials are obtained from the color and pulse, which is the important key to diagnosing the disease.

古文：夫色之变化，以应四时之脉，此上帝之所贵，以合于神明也。
现代文：而面部的气色变化，与四时的脉象是相应的，这是上古帝王所十分珍重的，若能明白原理，心领神会，便可运用无穷。
English: And the change in facial appearance corresponds to the four o'clock pulse, which is very precious to the ancient emperors. If you can understand the principle and understand the mind, you can use it endlessly.

古文：所以远死而近生，生道以长，命曰圣王。
现代文：所以他能从这些观察中间，掌握情况，知道去回避死亡而达到生命的安全。要能够做到这样就可以长寿，而人们亦将称奉你为 圣王 了。
English: Therefore, from these observations, he can grasp the situation and know how to avoid death and achieve the safety of life. If you can do this, you can live a long life, and people will call you a saint.

古文：中古之治病，至而治之，汤液十日，以去八风五痹之病，十日不已，治以草苏草荄之枝，本末为助，标本已得，邪气乃服。
现代文：中古时代的医生治病，多在疾病一发生就能及时治疗，先用五谷熬制的汤液十天，以祛除 八风 、 五痹 的病邪。如果十天不愈，再用草药的叶、根、茎，根据病情选用药性正确的草药，这样标本明确的治疗，邪气就完全被征服。
English: Doctors in the Middle Ages treated diseases, and most of them could be treated in time as soon as the disease occurred. First, they used the decoction made from grain for ten days to eliminate the eight winds and five paralyses. If it did not heal after ten days, they used the leaves, roots and stems of herbs, and selected the herbs with the correct medicinal properties according to the condition of the disease. In this way, the specimen was treated clearly, and the evil spirit was completely conquered.

古文：暮世之治病也则不然，治不本四时，不知日月，不审逆从，病形已成，乃欲微针治其外，汤液治其内，粗工凶凶，以为可攻，故病未已，新病复起。
现代文：至于今世的医生治病，就不是这样了，治病不能根据四时的变化，不知道日月的阴阳，不辨别色与脉和病情的逆从关系，等到疾病已经形成了，才想用微针治其外，药物治其内，医术浅薄、治疗鲁莽的医生，还认为可以用攻法，不知病已形成，非攻可愈，以至原来的疾病没有痊愈，又因为治疗的错误，产生了新的疾病。
English: As far as the doctors of this world are concerned, this is not the case. They cannot treat diseases according to the four o'clock change, do not know the yin and yang of the sun and moon, and do not distinguish the inverse relationship between the color and the pulse and the condition. When the disease has already formed, they only want to use micro-needles to treat the outside, and drugs to treat the inside. The doctors with shallow medical skills and reckless treatment also think that they can use offensive methods. They do not know that the disease has already formed and can be cured without attacking, so that the original disease has not been cured, and because of the treatment error, a new disease has

古文：帝曰：愿闻要道。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得很好。
English: Huang Di said, "The speech was very good.

