古文：李汉超，云州云中人。始事邺帅范延光，不为所知。
现代文：李汉超，云州云中人，他起初跟随邺州帅守范延光，不为范所了解。
English: Li Hanchao, a native of Yunnan in Yunnan Province, initially followed Fan Yanguang, the governor of Zhangzhou, but he did not know Fan.

古文：又事郓帅高行周，亦不见亲信。
现代文：他又跟随郓州帅高行周，亦不被亲近信用。
English: He also followed Zhangzhou Shuai Gao Xing Zhou, and was not trusted.

古文：会周世宗镇澶渊，汉超遂委质焉。
现代文：恰逢周世宗镇守澶渊，李汉超于是归顺世宗。
English: It coincided with Zhou Shizong's garrisoning of Shuiyuan, and Li Hanchao then joined Shun Shizong.

古文：即位，补殿前指挥使，三迁殿前都虞候。
现代文：周世宗即皇帝位，补选李汉超为殿前指挥使，三次迁升为殿前都虞候。
English: Zhou Shizong became the emperor, Li Hanchao was elected as the commander of the front of the palace, and he was promoted to the front of the palace three times.

古文：宋初，改散指挥都指挥使，领绵州刺史，累迁控鹤左厢都校，领恩州团练使。
现代文：宋朝初年，李汉超改任散指挥都指挥使，掌领绵州刺史，累升至控鹤左厢都校，掌领恩州团练使。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Li Hanchao was promoted to the post of the commander of the capital city of Mianzhou, the commander of Mianzhou, the commander of Mianzhou, the commander of Mianzhou, the commander of Mianzhou and the commander of Mianzhou.

古文：从平李重进，寻迁齐州防御使兼关南兵马都监。
现代文：他随宋太祖平定李重进，不久升迁为齐州防御使兼关南兵马都监。
English: He followed Song Taizu in suppressing Li Chongjin, and was soon promoted to the post of the defense envoy of Qizhou as well as the inspector of the southern military region.

古文：汉超在关南，人有讼汉超强取其女为妾及贷而不偿者，太祖召而问之曰： 汝女可适何人？ 曰： 农家也。 又问： 汉超未至关南，契丹如何？ 曰： 岁苦侵暴。 曰： 今复尔耶？ 曰： 否。 太祖曰： 汉超，朕之贵臣也，为其妾不犹愈于农妇乎？
现代文：宋太祖说： 李汉超，是我的重要大臣，你女儿做他的妾不强于当农妇吗？
English: Song Taizu said: Li Hanchao is my important minister. Isn't it better for your daughter to be his concubine than to be a peasant woman?

古文：使汉超不守关南，尚能保汝家之所有乎？ 责而遣之。
现代文：若使汉超不守关南，还能担保是你家所有吗？ 太祖责备上告之人后让他走了。
English: If Han Chao does not keep Guannan, can he still guarantee that it is owned by your family? The great-grandfather scolded the appellant and let him go.

古文：密使谕汉超曰： 亟还其女并所贷，朕姑贳汝，勿复为也。
现代文：太祖又派密使告诉汉超说 ：立即归还民女和所借的钱，我暂且赦免你，不要再做这种事了。
English: The great-grandfather also sent an emissary to tell Han Chao, "Return the maiden and the borrowed money immediately. I'll pardon you for the time being, and don't do this kind of thing again."

古文：不足于用，何不以告朕耶？ 汉超感泣，誓以死报。
现代文：钱不够用，为何不把这情况告诉我呢？ 李汉超感动得流下了泪，发誓以死相报宋太祖。
English: I don't have enough money, why don't you tell me the situation? Li Hanchao was moved to tears and vowed to pay tribute to Song Taizu with his death.

古文：在郡十七年，政平讼理，吏民爱之，诣阙求立碑颂德。
现代文：他在郡十七年，政治稳定断案合理，官吏百姓都喜爱他，到朝廷请求为李汉超立碑颂德。
English: He was in his seventeenth year in the county, the political stability was reasonable, the officials and the people all loved him, and he went to the imperial court to request the erection of a monument to Li Hanchao.

古文：太祖诏率更令徐铉撰文赐之。
现代文：宋太祖召率更令徐铉撰写碑文赐之。
English: Song Taizong summoned Xu Xi to write the inscription.

古文：霸州监军马仁瑀尝兄事汉超，多自肆，擅发麾下卒入辽境，剽夺人口、羊马，由是二将交恶。
现代文：霸州监军马仁王禹曾像待兄长一样对待汉超，马仁王禹常任己放肆，擅自派部下士兵进入辽境，剽劫掠夺人口、羊马，由于这样李、马二将关系恶化。
English: The governor of Bozhou, Ma Ren Wang Yu, had treated Han Chao like an elder brother. Ma Ren Wang Yu was always reckless, sending his subordinate soldiers into Liao territory without authorization, plundering and looting the population and sheep and horses. As a result, Li and Ma's relationship deteriorated.

古文：太祖虑其生变，遣中使赐汉超、仁瑀金帛，令和解之。
现代文：宋太祖担心发生事变，派宦官赐给汉超、仁王禹金帛，令他们和解。
English: Song Taizu was worried about an incident, so he sent eunuchs to Han Chao and Yan Wang Yu Jinyuan to reconcile them.

古文：太平兴国初，迁应州观察使、判齐州，仍为关南巡检。
现代文：太平兴国初，李汉超升任应州观察使，判齐州，仍任关南巡检。
English: At the beginning of the Taiping Xingguo, Li Hanchao was promoted to the observation envoy of Yingzhou, sentenced to Qizhou, and still held the inspection of Guannan.

古文：二年八月，卒于屯所。
现代文：太平兴国二年八月，去世于屯所。
English: In August of the second year of the Taiping Xingguo, he died in the camp.

古文：太宗甚悼惜，赠太尉、忠武军节度，中使护葬。
现代文：宋太宗甚是悼念痛惜，赠他为太尉、忠武军节度，派宦官护葬。
English: Song Taizong was very sorry for the loss of memory, presented him with the title of lieutenant and loyal military, and sent eunuchs to escort the funeral.

古文：次子祐之、顺之、用之、润之、庆之、成之、藏之。
现代文：李汉超善抚士卒，与士卒同甘共苦，他死的那天，军中士卒都流泪。
English: Li Han was very good at taking care of his soldiers. He shared the same joys and sorrows with his soldiers. On the day of his death, his soldiers were in tears.

古文：郭进，深州博野人。
现代文：他的儿子李守恩。郭进，深州博野人。
English: His son, Li Shouen. Guo Jin, is from the wilds of Shenzhou.

古文：少贫贱，为钜鹿富家佣保。
现代文：少时贫贱，为钜鹿富豪家的雇工。
English: He was poor for a while and was an employee of a rich family in Elk.

古文：有膂力，倜傥任气，结豪侠，嗜酒蒲博。
现代文：他身强体壮，倜傥任气，结交豪杰侠士，嗜好酒和赌博游戏。
English: He was a strong and vigorous man, with high spirits, a friend of heroes and knights, and a fondness for alcohol and gambling.

古文：其家少年患之，欲图杀进，妇竺氏阴知其谋，以告进，遂走晋阳依汉祖。
现代文：他所在的富家少年认为他是祸患，想谋划杀他。妇女竺氏暗中知道了该谋，把这事告诉了郭进，郭进于是逃到晋阳投依后汉高祖刘知远。
English: The rich boy he was with thought he was a scourge and plotted to kill him. A woman from the Min clan secretly learned of the plot and told Guo Jin about it. Guo Jin then fled to Jinyang to seek refuge with Liu Zhiyuan, the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉祖壮其材，留帐下。
现代文：后汉高祖认为他身体强壮，把他留在身边。
English: Later, Han Gaozu thought he was physically strong and kept him around.

古文：晋开运末，契丹扰边。
现代文：后晋开运末年，契丹兵骚扰边境。
English: In the final years of the Later Jin Dynasty, Khitan soldiers harassed the border.

古文：汉祖建号太原。
现代文：后汉刘知远在太原建号称帝。
English: Liu Zhiyuan of the later Han Dynasty established himself as emperor in Taiyuan.

古文：契丹主道殂，汉祖将入汴，进请以奇兵间道先趋洺州，因定河北诸郡。
现代文：契丹主死在行军路上，刘知远将要进入汴京，郭进请用奇兵从小路首先趋向氵名州，因而平定了河北诸郡。
English: The Khitan lord died on the march, Liu Zhiyuan was about to enter Beijing, and Guo Jin asked for a miracle soldier to go from a small road to Shennan Prefecture first, thus leveling the counties of Hebei.

古文：累迁乾、坊二州刺史。
现代文：他累迁任乾、坊二州刺史。
English: He was successively transferred to Qianling and became the head of two provinces.

古文：少帝即位，改磁州。
现代文：后汉少帝刘承即位，郭进改任磁州刺史。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the young emperor Liu Cheng ascended to the throne, and Guo Jin was appointed as the magistrate of Zhengzhou.

古文：周广顺初，移淄州。
现代文：后周广顺初年，郭进移任淄州刺史。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, Guo Jin was transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：二年，吏民诣观察使举留。
现代文：广顺二年，淄州吏民到观察使处推举留任郭进。
English: In the second year of Guangshun, the officials and people of Ganzhou went to the observation mission to nominate Guo Jin to stay.

古文：是秋，迁登州刺史。
现代文：这年秋天，郭进升迁登州刺史。
English: In the autumn of that year, Guo Jin Sheng made history by moving to the state.

古文：会群盗攻劫居民，进率镇兵平之，部内清肃，民吏千余人诣阙请立《屏盗碑》，许之。
现代文：恰逢群盗进攻抢劫居民，郭进率领镇兵讨平之，郭进治军清明严肃，百姓官吏千余人到朝廷请求建立 屏盗碑 ，朝廷同意了。
English: It coincided with a group of thieves attacking and robbing residents. Guo Jin led the townspeople to settle the dispute. Guo Jin's army was clear and serious. More than a thousand people and officials went to the imperial court to request the establishment of a screen theft monument. The imperial court agreed.

古文：显德初，移卫州。卫、赵、邢、洺间多亡命者，以汲郡依山带河，易为出没，伺间椎剽，吏捕之辄遁去，故累岁不能绝其党类。
现代文：显德初年，郭进改任卫州刺史，卫、赵、邢、氵名诸州之间多亡命之人，凭借汲郡依山而被黄河围绕，容易在此出没，等候时机武力剽掠，官吏捕捉他就逃去，所以多年不能灭绝其同党。
English: In the first year of Xiande, Guo Jin was appointed as the vicar of Weizhou, and many of the exiles between Weizhou, Zhao, Handan and Handan were surrounded by the Yellow River due to the mountainous location of the county. It was easy for them to haunt here, waiting for the opportunity to plunder by force. When the officials caught them, they fled, so they could not exterminate their fellow party members for many years.

古文：进备知其情状，因设计发擿之，数月间剪灭无余，郡民又请立碑记其事。
现代文：郭进尽知其情况，于是设计派人挑动他们，几个月就把这批亡命者剪灭无余，该郡百姓又请求立碑记载他的事迹。
English: Guo Jin was fully aware of the situation, so he sent someone to instigate them, and in a few months, this group of exiles was completely wiped out. The people of the county also requested that a monument be erected to record his deeds.

古文：改洺州团练使，有善政，郡民复诣阙请立碑颂德，诏左拾遗郑起撰文赐之。
现代文：郭进改任氵名州团练使，有善政，其郡百姓又到朝廷请求为郭进立碑颂德，皇帝诏令左拾遗郑起撰碑文赐之。
English: Guo Jin was reappointed as the training envoy of the Renmin State Reunification Army, and his county people went to the imperial court to request the erection of a monument to Guo Jin, and the emperor ordered Zheng Qi to write a monument.

古文：进尝于城四面植柳，壕中种荷芰蒲薍，后益繁茂。
现代文：郭进曾经在州城四周种植柳树，濠中种上荷花蒲荻，后来越来越繁茂。
English: Guo Jin once planted willow trees around the state capital, and planted lotus flowers in the middle of the garden, which later became more and more prosperous.

古文：郡民见之有垂涕者，曰： 此郭公所种也。 
现代文：百姓见之，有的人流下了泪，说： 这是郭公所种的啊！ 
English: Seeing this, some people shed tears and said, "This was planted by Guo Gong!"

古文：建隆初，太祖亲征泽、潞，迁本州防御使，充西山巡检。
现代文：建隆初年，宋太祖亲征泽州、潞州，郭进升任氵名州防御使，充任西山巡检。
English: In the first year of Jianlong, Song Taizu personally led the expedition to Zezhou and Zhangzhou, and Guo Jin was promoted to the post of defense envoy of Zhangmeizhou, and served as the inspector of Xishan.

古文：尝与曹彬、王全斌入太原境，获数千人。
现代文：他曾与曹彬、王全斌入太原境内，俘获几千敌人。
English: He once entered Taiyuan territory with Cao Bin and Wang Quanbin and captured several thousand enemies.

古文：开宝二年，太祖亲征河东，以进为行营前军马军都指挥使。
现代文：开宝二年，宋太祖亲征河东，以郭进为行营前军马军都指挥使。
English: In the second year of Kaibao, Song Taizu personally led the expedition to the east of the river, with Guo Jin as the commander of the front army and Ma Jun as the envoy.

古文：九年，命将征河东，以进为河东道、忻、代等州行营马步军都监，招徕山后诸州民三万七千余口。
现代文：开宝九年，宋朝派将领征伐河东，任命郭进为河东道、忻代等州行营马步军都监，他招徕山后诸州百姓三万七千余人。
English: In the 9th year of Kibo, the Song Dynasty sent generals to conquer the eastern part of He, and appointed Guo Jin as the governor of He, and the governor of the horse-marching army of the state of Su, etc. He recruited more than 37,000 people from various states after Shaoshan.

古文：太平兴国初，领云州观察使、判邢州，仍兼西山巡检，赐京城道德坊第一区。
现代文：太平兴国初年，郭进任云州观察使，判邢州，仍旧兼任西山巡检，皇帝赐他京城道德坊第一区。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Xingguo, Guo Jin was appointed as the observation envoy of Yunnan Province, sentenced to Zhangzhou Province, and still concurrently served as the Xishan inspection, and the emperor gave him the first district of Beijing Daodefang.

古文：四年，车驾将征太原，先命进分兵控石岭关，为都部署，以防北边。
现代文：大平兴国四年，皇帝将亲征太原，先命郭进分兵控制石岭关，任都部署，以防备北边契丹。
English: In the fourth year of the Taiping Xingguo, the emperor will personally invade Taiyuan, first appoint Guo Jin to control Shilingguan, and deploy at any time to prevent the northern Qidan.

古文：契丹果犯关，进大破之，又攻破西龙门砦，俘馘来献，自是并人丧气。
现代文：契丹果然侵犯石岭关，郭进大破契丹兵，又攻破敌方西龙门砦，俘割敌人左耳来献功，从此并州一带敌人丧失了斗志。
English: The Khitan successfully invaded Shilingguan, Guo Jin defeated the Khitan soldiers, broke through the enemy's West Longmen Fort, and captured the enemy's left ear to make a contribution. From then on, the enemy in and around Ganzhou lost their fighting spirit.

古文：时田钦祚护石岭军，恣为奸利诸不法事，进虽力不能禁，亦屡形于言。
现代文：当时田钦祚监石岭军事，他肆意做以非法手段求得利益等违法的事，郭进虽然没有力量禁止他做违法的事情，但也屡次在言谈中显露。
English: At that time, Tian Qinqian was in charge of Shiling Military, and he wantonly did illegal things such as seeking profits by illegal means. Although Guo Jin did not have the power to prohibit him from doing illegal things, he repeatedly revealed it in his speeches.

古文：进武人，性刚烈，战功高，钦祚以他事侵之，心不能甘，自经死，年五十八，钦祚以暴卒闻。
现代文：郭进是武人，性情刚烈，战功很高，田钦祚以别的事侵犯他，他不甘心又无奈，自杀死，时年五十八岁，田钦祚以郭进暴死的名义向上报告。
English: Guo Jin was a warrior, with a strong character and great military achievements. Tian Qinlu violated him in other ways. He was both unwilling and helpless, and committed suicide. At the age of 58, Tian Qinlu reported Guo Jin's violent death to his superiors.

古文：太宗悼惜久之，赠安国军节度，中使护葬。
现代文：宋太宗悼惜郭进良久，赠其安国军节度使，派宦官护葬。
English: Song Taizong mourned Guo Jin Liangjiu, presented him with an envoy of the National Security Army, and sent eunuchs to escort the funeral.

古文：后颇闻其事。因罢钦祚内职，出为房州团练使。
现代文：后来宋太宗颇闻郭进死因，于是罢去田钦祚内职，出外任房州团练使。
English: Later, Song Taizong heard a lot about the cause of Guo Jin's death, so he dismissed Tian Qinqian's internal post and went abroad to serve as a Fangzhou group training envoy.

古文：进有材干，轻财好施，然性喜杀，士卒小违令，必寘于死，居家御婢仆亦然。
现代文：郭进有才干，轻视钱财而喜好布施，但其性喜欢杀人，士卒稍有违令，必定置之于死地，他在家管理婢仆也是这样。
English: Guo Jin is talented. He despises money and likes to give alms, but his nature likes to kill. If there is a slight violation of the order, he will surely put it to death. He manages the maidservants at home as well.

古文：进在西山，太祖遣戍卒，必谕之曰： 汝辈谨奉法。
现代文：他在西山，宋太祖派遣守卫的兵士，一定告谕士兵说 ：你们要谨慎奉守法令。
English: When he was in Xishan, Song Taizu sent soldiers to guard, and he must have told the soldiers: "You must be careful to abide by the law."

古文：我犹贷汝，郭进杀汝矣。 其御下严毅若此。
现代文：否则我尚能宽恕你们，郭进会杀你们。 郭进驾御部下严厉如此。
English: Otherwise, I can still forgive you, Guo Jin will kill you. Guo Jin drives your subordinates so severely.

古文：然能以权道任人，尝有军校自西山诣阙诬进者，太祖诘知其情状，谓左右曰： 彼有过畏罚，故诬进求免尔。 遣使送与进，令杀之。
现代文：然而，郭进能以权道用人，曾经有军校从西山到朝廷诬告郭进，宋太祖查知其情形，对身边的人说 ：这人有过失害怕处罚，故诬告郭进求免其处罚罢了。 太祖派使者把这人送给了郭进，令郭进杀之。
English: However, Guo Jin was able to employ people by virtue of his power. Once, a military school from Xishan went to the imperial court to falsely accuse Guo Jin. Song Taizu found out about the situation and said to the people around him, "This person is guilty of negligence and is afraid of punishment, so he only falsely accused Guo Jin and asked to be exempted from punishment. Taizu sent an envoy to Guo Jin and ordered Guo Jin to kill this person.

古文：会并人入寇，进谓诬者曰： 汝敢论我，信有胆气。
现代文：恰逢并州敌人入侵，郭进对诬告他的军校说： 你胆敢诬告我，确实有胆力气魄。
English: Coinciding with the invasion of the enemies of the state, Guo Jin said to the military school that falsely accused him: You dare to falsely accuse me, you really have guts and courage.

古文：今舍汝罪，能掩杀并寇，即荐汝于朝；如败，可自投河东。 其人踊跃听命，果致克捷。
现代文：今天免你的罪，你能出其不意杀死并州敌人，我就向朝廷推荐你；如果你战败了，可自己去投奔河东。 这人欢呼听命，果然导致克敌报捷。
English: Today I absolve you of your sin, if you can kill the enemy of the state unexpectedly, I will recommend you to the court; if you are defeated, you can go to Hedong by yourself.

古文：进即以闻，乞迁其职，太祖从之。
现代文：郭进立即把其事报告朝廷，请求升其官职，宋太祖听从了郭进的建议。
English: Guo Jin immediately reported the matter to the imperial court and asked to be promoted to his official position. Song Taizu listened to Guo Jin's suggestion.

古文：初，开宝中，太祖令有司造宅赐进，悉用筒瓦。
现代文：起初，开宝年间，宋太祖命令有关部门建造宅第赏赐郭进，全部采用筒瓦。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Kaibao, Emperor Taizu ordered the relevant departments to build a residence to reward Guojin, all of which were made of tubular tiles.

古文：素病佝偻，以是罕在要近，累典边任，多杀戮。
现代文：有关部门上言说，按旧制不是亲王公主的房屋不能用这种瓦。宋太祖发怒道： 郭进镇守西山十多年，使我无北顾之忧。
English: The relevant departments said that according to the old system, houses that are not princes and princesses cannot use such tiles. Song Taizu said angrily: Guo Jin has been guarding the West Mountain for more than ten years, so I have no worries.

古文：是秋，徙知永兴军，卒，年五十一。
现代文：我看待郭进岂能不如自己的儿女呢？赶快前往监督工役，不要再妄说。 太平兴国初年，又赏赐郭进住宅一区。
English: Do I think of Guo Jin as less than my own children? Hurry up and go to supervise the workmen, don't say anything more. In the first year of the Taiping Restoration, Guo Jin was awarded a residential area.

古文：姚内斌，平州卢龙人。
现代文：姚内斌，平州卢龙人。
English: Yao Neibin, from Lulong, Pingzhou.

古文：仕契丹为关西巡检、瓦桥关使。
现代文：初在契丹为官，任关西巡检、瓦桥关使。
English: He first worked as an official in Qidan, and served as a Kansai patrol inspector and tile bridge inspector.

古文：周显德六年，太祖从世宗北征，兵次瓦桥关，内斌率众五百人以城降。
现代文：后周显德六年，宋太祖跟从周世宗北征，军驻瓦桥关，姚内斌率五百人以城投降。
English: Six years after Zhou Xiande, Song Taizu followed Zhou Shizong's Northern Expedition, and the army was stationed in Wawuqiao Pass. Yao Neibin led 500 people to surrender in the city.

古文：世宗以为汝州刺史，吏民诣阙举留，恭帝诏褒之。
现代文：周世宗任他为汝州刺史，吏民到朝廷推举姚内斌留任，后周恭帝下诏表扬姚内斌。
English: Zhou Shizong appointed him to write the history of Ruzhou, the officials and people went to the imperial court to nominate Yao Neibin to remain in office, and later Emperor Zhou Hongzong issued an edict praising Yao Neibin.

古文：内斌本名犯宣祖讳下一字，遂改今名。
现代文：他本名触犯宣祖名讳下一字，遂改用现名。
English: He changed his name to his current one after he had hidden one letter of his real name, which was a violation of the name of Emperor Xuan Zi.

古文：从平李筠，改虢州刺史。
现代文：他跟从平定李筠，改任虢州刺史。
English: He followed the pacification of Li Zhen and was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：西夏数犯西鄙，以内斌为庆州刺史兼青、白两池榷盐制置使。
现代文：西夏数次侵犯西边疆域，朝廷以姚内斌任庆州刺史兼青、白两池榷盐制置使。
English: The Western Xia invaded the western border territory several times, and the imperial court appointed Yao Neibin as the envoy of Qingzhou Zhishi and Qing and Bai Liangchi salt production.

古文：在郡十数年，西夏畏伏，不敢犯塞，号内斌为 姚大虫 ，言其武猛也。
现代文：他在郡十多年，西夏畏伏，不敢侵犯边塞，称他为 姚大虫 ，是说他威武猛烈。
English: He has been in the county for more than ten years, Xi Xia is timid and does not dare to encroach on the border, calling him Yao Big Worm, saying that he is powerful and fierce.

古文：初，内斌降，其妻子皆在契丹。
现代文：起初，姚内斌投降，他的妻子儿女都在契丹。
English: At first, Yao Neibin surrendered, and his wife and children were in Khitan.

古文：乾德四年，子承赞密自幽州来归。
现代文：乾德四年，他的儿子姚承赞秘密从幽州来归附。
English: In Qiande's fourth year, his son Yao Chengzan secretly came from Yuzhou to join him.

古文：五年，幽州民田光嗣等又以内斌儿女六人间道来归，太祖并召见，赐以衣服、缗钱、鞍马，令中使护送还内斌。
现代文：乾德五年，幽州百姓田光嗣等人又带姚内斌儿女六人从小路来归附，宋太祖一同召见他们，赏赐衣服、缗钱、鞍马，命令宦官护送还姚内斌。
English: In Qiande's fifth year, Tian Guangzhi, a Yuzhou villager, and others brought six of Yao Neibin's sons and daughters to return from a side road. Song Taizu summoned them together, rewarded them with clothes, money, and a pommel horse, and ordered eunuchs to escort Yao Neibin back.

古文：开宝四年，召赴阙，上待之甚厚，遣归治所。
现代文：开宝四年，太祖召他赴朝廷，太祖皇帝待他很优厚，又派他归治所。
English: In the fourth year of Kaibao's reign, his great-grandfather summoned him to the imperial court. The great-grandfather emperor treated him very generously and sent him to a sanatorium.

古文：七年春，暴得疾卒，年六十四。
现代文：开宝七年春，姚内斌突然得病去世，终年六十四岁。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Kaibao, Yao Neibin suddenly fell ill and died at the age of 64.

古文：遣中使护丧，归葬洛阳，常赙外，赐其子田三十顷。
现代文：太祖遣宦官护丧，归葬洛阳，常规所送治丧财物以外，赐其子田地三十顷。
English: The great-grandfather sent eunuchs to escort the funeral and buried Luoyang. In addition to the usual funeral goods, he gave his son thirty hectares of land.

古文：承赞为供奉官、阁门祗候，死于阵；承鉴至殿中丞。
现代文：姚承赞任供奉官、门祗候，他死于战场；姚承鉴官至殿中丞。
English: Yao Chengzang served as a sacrificial officer and gatekeeper, and he died on the battlefield; Yao Chengzang was a court official and middle-ranking officer.

