古文：刘繇字正礼，东莱牟平人也。
现代文：刘繇，字正礼，是东莱郡牟平人。
English: Liu Yao, surnamed Zhengli, is from Muping, Donglai County.

古文：齐孝王少子封牟平侯，子孙家焉。
现代文：齐孝王的小儿子被封为牟平侯，后代子孙就在那里居住。
English: The youngest son of King Qi Xiaoguo was given the title of Muping Hou, and his descendants live there.

古文：繇伯父宠，为汉太尉。
现代文：刘繇的伯父刘宠，是汉朝的太尉。
English: Liu Zhe's uncle, Liu Zhe, was a captain in the Han Dynasty.

古文：繇兄岱，字公山，历位侍中，兖州刺史。
现代文：刘繇的哥哥刘岱，字公山，担任过侍中、兖州刺史。
English: Liu Yao's elder brother Liu Yao, surnamed Gongshan, served as a chamberlain and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：繇年十九，从父韪为贼所劫质，繇篡取以归，由是显名。
现代文：刘繇十九时，叔父刘韪被强盗劫掠作人质，刘繇将他抢夺回来，因此名声显达。
English: At the age of nineteen, Liu Yao's uncle Liu Yao was taken hostage by robbers. Liu Yao snatched him back and became famous.

古文：举孝廉，为郎中，除下邑长。
现代文：刘繇被举荐为孝廉，担任郎中，任下邑县县长。
English: Liu Wei was recommended as a filial son, served as a junior vassal, and was appointed as the county governor of the next county.

古文：时郡守以贵戚讬之，遂弃官去。
现代文：当时郡守把自己的亲戚托付给他，他就辞官离开。
English: At that time, the county governor entrusted his relative to him, and he resigned.

古文：州辟部济南，济南相中常侍子，贪秽不循，繇奏免之。
现代文：州府征召他为济南部丞，济南相是中常侍的儿子，贪污受贿不守法纪，刘繇上奏罢免他。
English: The prefectural government conscripted him as Ji Nanjo, the son of a vice-premier, who was corrupt, bribed and disobeyed the law, and Liu Ye was summoned to remove him.

古文：平原陶丘洪荐繇，欲令举茂才。
现代文：平原人陶丘洪举荐刘繇，想让州里举荐他为茂才。
English: The plainsman Tao Qiu Hong recommended Liu Ye, and wanted the state to recommend him to Maocai.

古文：刺史曰： 前年举公山，奈何复举正礼乎？ 
现代文：州刺史说： 前年才推举他哥哥公山，怎么又要推举正礼呢? 
English: The state historian said: His brother, Gongshan, was elected only last year, so why should Zhengli be elected again?

古文：洪曰： 若明使君用公山於前，擢正礼於后，所谓御二龙於长涂，骋骐骥於千里，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：陶丘洪说： 如果您之前推举刘公山，后又荐刘正礼，就像是驾御两匹如龙的骏马，在千里长途上驰骋，不也可以吗呢? 
English: Tao Qiu Hong said: If you previously recommended Liu Gongshan, and later recommended Liu Zhengli, it would be like driving two dragon-like horses, galloping on a long journey of thousands of miles, wouldn't it be OK?

古文：会辟司空掾，除侍御史，不就。
现代文：恰遇朝廷征召刘繇为司空掾，任命为侍御史，但他没有到任。
English: It just so happened that the imperial court summoned Liu Ye to serve as Sikyong and appointed him as an attendant to the emperor, but he did not take up the post.

古文：避乱淮浦，诏书以为扬州刺史。
现代文：他在淮浦躲避战乱，皇帝下诏书任命他为扬州刺史。
English: He was hiding from the war in Huai Pu, and the emperor issued an edict appointing him as Yangzhou's crown prince.

古文：时袁术在淮南，繇畏惮，不敢之州。
现代文：当时袁术在淮南，刘繇很忌惮他，不敢到扬州上任。
English: At that time, Yuan Shou was in Huainan, and Liu Bei was afraid of him and did not dare to take office in Yangzhou.

古文：欲南渡江，吴景、孙贲迎置曲阿。
现代文：他想要南渡长江，吴景、孙贲将他迎接到曲阿。
English: He wanted to cross the Yangtze River to the south, and Wu Jing and Sun Ye welcomed him to Qu'ao.

古文：术图为僣逆，攻没诸郡县。
现代文：袁术谋划篡位，攻克周围各郡县。
English: Yuan Zhi planned to usurp power and conquer the surrounding counties.

古文：繇遣樊能、张英屯江边以拒之。以景、贲术所授用，乃迫逐使去。
现代文：刘繇派遣樊能、张英驻军江边抗击袁术，想到到吴景、孙贲是袁术所任用的人，就逼迫他们离开。
English: Liu Bei dispatched Qian Neng and Zhang Ying to the riverside to oppose Yuan Shuxu. Thinking that Wu Jing and Sun Yat-sen were appointed by Yuan Shuxu, he forced them to leave.

古文：於是术乃自置扬州刺史，与景、贲并力攻英、能等，岁馀不下。
现代文：袁术就自己设置扬州刺史，和吴景、孙贲合力攻打张英、樊能等，一年多也未能攻克。
English: Yuan Shuxu himself set up the history of Yangzhou, and worked with Wu Jing and Sun Yat-sen to attack Zhang Ying and Qian Neng, but failed to conquer them for more than a year.

古文：汉命加繇为牧，振武将军，众数万人，孙策东渡，破英、能等。繇奔丹徒，遂溯江南保豫章，驻彭泽。
现代文：汉朝廷命令给刘繇加官为扬州牧、振武将军，有数万部队。孙策东渡长江，大败张英、樊能等，刘繇逃往丹徒，于是逆江上到江南地区守卫豫章，驻扎在彭泽。
English: The Han imperial court ordered Liu Bei to be promoted to Yangzhou Maki and Zhenwu generals, with tens of thousands of troops. Sun Ce traveled east to the Yangtze River, defeated Zhang Ying and Yaneng, and Liu Bei fled to Dantu. He then went upstream to the south of the Yangtze River to guard Yuzhang and was stationed in Pengze.

古文：笮融先至，杀太守朱皓，入居郡中。
现代文：笮融先到豫章，杀了豫章太守朱鰑，到豫章郡居住。
English: Yan Rong first went to Yuzhang, killed the governor of Yuzhang, Zhu Xi, and lived in Yuzhang County.

古文：繇进讨融，为融所破，更复招合属县，攻破融。
现代文：刘繇出兵征讨笮融，被笮融打败，他再次召集所属各县人马，攻破笮融。
English: Liu Bei sent out troops to recruit soldiers to fight against Xun Rong, and was defeated by Xun Rong. He once again called together people from all the counties he belonged to to defeat Xun Rong.

古文：融败走入山，为民所杀，繇寻病卒，时年四十二。
现代文：笮融败逃到山中，被当地百姓所杀。刘繇不久病死，年纪四十二岁。
English: Zou Rongfei fled to the mountains and was killed by local people. Liu Zou soon died of illness at the age of forty-two.

古文：笮融者，丹杨人，初聚众数百，往依徐州牧陶谦。
现代文：笮融，丹杨人，一开始聚集部队数百人，前往徐州投靠徐州牧陶谦。
English: Yan Rong, a Danyang people, initially gathered hundreds of troops and went to Xuzhou to support Xuzhou Mu Taoqian.

古文：谦使督广陵、彭城运漕，遂放纵擅杀，坐断三郡委输以自入。
现代文：陶谦让他督管广陵、彭城的漕运，他就恣意妄为，随意杀戮，将三郡的运输利益都截取来做为自己的收入。
English: Tao Qian asked him to supervise the paddle transport of Guangling and Pengcheng, and he acted arbitrarily, killed at will, and took the transportation profits of the three counties as his own income.

古文：乃大起浮图祠，以铜为人，黄金涂身，衣以锦采，垂铜槃九重，下为重楼阁道，可容三千馀人，悉课读佛经，令界内及旁郡人有好佛者听受道，复其他役以招致之，由此远近前后至者五千馀人户。
现代文：就大肆建造佛寺，用铜制作佛像，黄金涂抹像体，锦彩缝作像衣，悬挂九层铜盘，下建重楼阁道，可容纳三千多人，这些人都佛经，并使郡内有崇信佛教的百姓和旁边郡县的百姓都来听课受道。再用其他方式招纳人，因此前后远近有五千多人来到。
English: He built a Buddhist temple, made a bronze statue of Buddha, painted the statue with gold, sewed it with brocade to make a robe, hung a nine-tiered bronze dish, and built a large pavilion to accommodate more than three thousand people. These people were Buddhist scriptures, and made the people in the county who believed in Buddhism and the people in the neighboring counties come to listen to the teachings. He also recruited people in other ways, so more than five thousand people came from near and far.

古文：每浴佛，多设酒饭，布席於路，经数十里，民人来观及就食且万人，费以巨亿计。
现代文：每到浴佛节，就备办很多酒饭，在路上安置酒席，绵延几十里，来观看和食用的百姓有上万人，耗费亿万钱财。
English: Every time we come to the Bathing Buddha Festival, we prepare a lot of meals and drinks, and set up drinking tables on the road, stretching for dozens of miles. Tens of thousands of people come to watch and eat, spending hundreds of millions of money.

古文：曹公攻陶谦，徐土骚动，融将男女万口，马三千匹，走广陵，广陵太守赵昱待以宾礼。
现代文：曹操攻打陶谦，徐州地区骚乱，笮融带着男女万人、马匹三千，逃到广陵，广陵太守赵昱待以宾客之礼。
English: Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian, there were riots in Xuzhou, and Zhaoyun fled to Guangling with ten thousand men and women and three thousand horses. The governor of Guangling, Zhao Qian, received him as a guest.

古文：先是，彭城相薛礼为陶谦所偪，屯秣陵。
现代文：之前，彭城国相薛礼被陶谦逼迫，驻守秣陵。
English: Previously, Pengcheng's state councillor Xue Li was persecuted by Tao Qian and stationed in Fuling.

古文：融利广陵之众，因酒酣杀昱，放兵大略，因载而去。
现代文：笮融利用广陵的人马，乘醉酒时杀了赵昱，让士兵大肆抢掠，将物品载着离开。
English: Gong Rong took advantage of the people and horses in Guangling, killed Zhao Yao when he was drunk, and let the soldiers loot and carry the goods away.

古文：过杀礼，然后杀皓。
现代文：路过秣陵杀薛礼，又豫章杀了朱鰑。
English: Passing through Fuling, he killed Xue Li, and then Yu Zhang killed Zhu Xi.

古文：后策西伐江夏，还过豫章，收载繇丧，善遇其家。
现代文：后来孙策往西征讨江夏，回师路过豫章，收殓并车载刘繇尸骨，为他发丧，对他的家属非常厚待。
English: Later, Sun Ce went to the West to fight against Jiangxia, and when he returned, he passed by Yu Zhang, collected and transported Liu Ye's bones, mourned for him, and treated his family very well.

古文：王朗遗策书曰： 刘正礼昔初临州，未能自达，实赖尊门为之先后，用能济江成治，有所处定。
现代文：王朗给孙策写信说： 刘正礼过去刚到扬州时，不能自己安适，实在是依赖您们家的人为他四处奔走，才得以渡江到达任所，有了处身安定的地方。
English: Wang Lang wrote to Sun Ce: "When Liu Zhengli just arrived in Yangzhou, he could not feel at ease. He really relied on the people in your family to run around for him, so that he could cross the river to reach his post and have a stable place to live.

古文：践境之礼，感分结意，情在终始。
现代文：入境的礼待，感激之情、结交之心，这份情义一直都在。
English: The hospitality, the gratitude, the camaraderie that comes with immigration has always been there.

古文：后以袁氏之嫌，稍更乖剌。更以同盟，还为雠敌，原其本心，实非所乐。
现代文：后来因为袁术的嫌隙，关系逐渐背离，以至将盟友的关系变成仇敌的关系，探究本心，实在不是他愿意这样做。
English: Later, because of Yuan Shu's grudge, the relationship gradually deviated, so that the relationship of ally turned into the relationship of enemy, and it was not his will to do so.

古文：康宁之后，常愿渝平更成，复践宿好。
现代文：安定下来之后，他常常想改变这种既成的形势，重新修复与您过去的友好关系。
English: After settling down, he often wants to change this established situation and restore the friendly relations with you of the past.

古文：一尔分离，款意不昭，奄然殂陨，可为伤恨！
现代文：一旦分离，诚挚的心意不能彰显，而他突然崩逝，实在遗憾伤心!
English: Once separated, the sincerity of the heart can not be shown, and he suddenly passed away, really sorry and sad!

古文：知敦以厉薄，德以报怨，收骨育孤，哀亡愍存，捐既往之猜，保六尺之讬，诚深恩重分，美名厚实也。
现代文：得知您以忠厚来回报薄情，以仁德来回报怨恨，收殓尸骨抚养遗孤，哀悼逝者同情生者，抛弃过去的猜忌，保护托付的孩子，实在是情深义重、名声显著啊!
English: To learn that you repay ill-feelings with loyalty, resentment with benevolence, raise orphans, mourn the dead, sympathize with the living, discard past suspicions, and protect entrusted children, is really a profound and significant reputation!

古文：昔鲁人虽有齐怨，不废丧纪，春秋善之，谓之得礼，诚良史之所宜藉，乡校之所叹闻。
现代文：过去鲁国虽说与齐国有恩怨，但齐孝公去世，鲁人没有废弛丧礼而去吊唁，《春秋》中称赞这一行为，说实在很得礼，实在是良史所应该记载的，乡校所应该评议赞叹的。
English: In the past, although Lu Province had a grudge against Qi Province, Qi Xiaogong passed away, and Lu people did not waste the funeral ceremony and went to offer condolences. "Spring and Autumn" praised this act, saying that it was really very courteous, it was really something that should be recorded in good history, and the township school should review and praise.

古文：正礼元子，致有志操，想必有以殊异。
现代文：正礼的长子，很有志气节操，想必有不同寻常之处。
English: The eldest son of the formal, very ambitious and disciplined, must have something unusual.

古文：威盛刑行，施之以恩，不亦优哉！ 
现代文：您威势强盛执掌刑罚，如能对他施恩加惠，不是更有德行吗! 
English: You wield the power of punishment. Would it not be more virtuous if you could bestow favors on him?

古文：繇长子基，字敬舆，年十四，居繇丧尽礼，故吏馈饷，皆无所受。
现代文：刘繇长子刘基，字敬舆，十四岁时，为刘繇服丧，都符合礼节，刘繇生前属下官员所赠馈的礼物，他都没有接受。
English: At the age of fourteen, Liu Qi, the eldest son of Liu Hui, who is also known as Jingwu, attended the funeral of Liu Hui, which was all in line with etiquette. He did not accept the gifts given by the officials under Liu Hui.

古文：姿容美好，孙权爱敬之。
现代文：刘基姿态容貌都很好，孙权喜爱敬重他。
English: Liu Ji's posture and appearance are very good, and Sun Quan likes and respects him.

古文：权为骠骑将军，辟东曹掾，拜辅义校尉、建忠中郎将。
现代文：孙权为骠骑将军时，征召刘基为东曹掾，任命他为辅义校尉、建忠中郎将。
English: When Sun Quan was the general of the cavalry, he conscripted Liu Ji as the East Cao Pi and appointed him as the auxiliary lieutenant and Jian Zhong Zhong.

古文：权为吴王，迁基大农。
现代文：孙权为吴王，升任刘基为大农令。
English: Sun Quan was Wu Wang, and Liu Ji was promoted to Dairenling.

古文：权尝宴饮，骑都尉虞翻醉酒犯忤，权欲杀之，威怒甚盛，由基谏争，翻以得免。
现代文：孙权曾参加宴饮，骑都尉虞翻酒醉后忤逆犯上，孙权想要处死他，因在盛怒之下，由于刘基极力劝谏，虞翻才得以免死。
English: Sun Quan once went to a banquet and rode on the back of the captain, Gu Fu, who was drunk and had committed treason. Sun Quan wanted to execute him, but Liu Ji tried to dissuade him, so Gu Fu was spared from death.

古文：权大暑时，尝於船中宴饮，於船楼上值雷雨，权以盖自覆，又命覆基，馀人不得也。其见待如此。
现代文：有一次因天气酷热，孙权在船上举行酒宴，在船上碰到雷雨，孙权举伞遮护自己，又命令手下人遮护刘基，其他官员得不到如此优待。
English: On one occasion, due to the extremely hot weather, Sun Quan held a wine banquet on the boat. When the boat encountered a thunderstorm, Sun Quan raised an umbrella to protect himself and ordered his subordinates to protect Liu Ji. Other officials do not receive such preferential treatment.

古文：徙郎中令。
现代文：孙基被厚待到如此地步。刘基升任为郎中令。
English: Sun Ji was treated so well that Liu Ji was promoted to the position of second-in-command.

古文：权称尊号，改为光禄勋，分平尚书事。
现代文：孙权即位后，改任刘基为光禄勋，分管尚书事务。
English: After Sun Quan ascended to the throne, he was appointed as Liu Ji for Guanglu Xun, in charge of book-keeping affairs.

古文：年四十九卒。
现代文：刘基四十九岁时去世。
English: Liu Ji passed away at the age of 49.

古文：后权为子霸纳基女，赐第一区，四时宠赐，与全、张比。
现代文：后来孙权为儿子孙霸纳娶刘基的女儿，赐了一处宅邸，四时都有赏赐，与全家、张家等同。
English: Later, Sun Quan gave a mansion to his son Sun Ba Na for marrying Liu Ji's daughter, and he was rewarded at all four times, equal to the whole family and the Zhang family.

古文：基二弟，铄、尚，皆骑都尉。
现代文：刘基的两个弟弟，刘铄、刘尚，都是骑都尉。
English: Liu Qi's two younger brothers, Liu Wei and Liu Shang, were both cavalry captains.

古文：太史慈字子义，东莱黄人也。
现代文：太史慈，字子义，东莱郡黄县人。
English: Tai Shi Ci, also known as Zi Zi Yu, was from Huang County, Donglai County.

古文：少好学，仕郡奏曹史。
现代文：他年少好学，在郡里任奏曹史。
English: He was eager to learn at a young age, and was appointed to play the role of Cao Shi in the county.

古文：会郡与州有隙，曲直未分，以先闻者为善。
现代文：恰遇郡府和州府有嫌隙，是非曲直没有分明，就将先上报一方看做正确。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, there were frequent conflicts between counties and prefectures in the State of Wu, and it was difficult for the imperial court to distinguish who was right and who was wrong. They often relied on the official documents submitted first.

古文：时州章已去，郡守恐后之，求可使者。
现代文：这时州里的奏章已送走，郡太守担心自己落后，就寻找可以派出的人。
English: On one occasion, the county government was afraid of being left behind, so it asked for someone who could intercept the state envoy.

古文：慈年二十一，以选行，晨夜取道，到洛阳，诣公车门，见州吏始欲求通。慈问曰： 君欲通章邪？ 吏曰： 然。 
现代文：太史慈当时二十一岁，郡太守便挑选了他。他昼夜赶路，到了洛阳，到负责接纳上奏的公车门口，看到州里派来送奏章的小官正在请求通报，太史慈问他： 你想通报奏章吗? 那人答： 是的。 
English: At that time, Mr. Shi Ci was 21 years old, and the county governor selected him. He rushed to Luoyang day and night, and when he arrived at the entrance of the bus that was responsible for receiving the record, he saw that the minor official sent by the state to deliver the record was requesting notification. Mr. Shi Ci asked him: Do you want to notify the record? The man replied: Yes.

古文：问： 章安在？ 曰： 车上。 
现代文：太史慈说： 奏章在哪里? 那人答： 在车上。 
English: She said, "Where's the score?" The man replied, "In the car."

古文：慈曰： 章题署得无误邪？
现代文：太史慈说： 奏章的签署没有什么错误吧?
English: Taishi Ci said, "There is nothing wrong with signing the record, right?

古文：取来视之。 
现代文：拿来看看。 
English: Let's take a look.

古文：吏殊不知其东莱人也，因为取章。
现代文：吏役不知道他是东莱郡派来的人，就为他取来奏章。
English: The official did not know that he was a person sent by Donglai County, so he fetched the record for him.

古文：慈已先怀刀，便截败之。
现代文：太史慈已先在怀里藏好了刀，夺过奏章就把它砍坏了。
English: Taishi Ci had already hidden the knife in his arms, snatched the music chapter and cut it to pieces.

古文：吏踊跃大呼，言 人坏我章 ！
现代文：那吏役非常着急，大呼道： 有人弄坏了我的奏章! 
English: The official was very anxious and shouted loudly, "Someone has broken my score!"

古文：慈将至车间，与语曰： 向使君不以章相与，吾亦无因得败之，是为吉凶祸福等耳，吾不独受此罪。
现代文：太史慈把他带到两车中间，对他说： 如果你不把奏章给我，我也不能砍坏它，现在我们的吉凶祸福是相同的，我不会独自承担这一罪名。
English: Taishi took him to the middle of the two cars and said to him: "If you don't give me the score, I can't cut it, now our good fortune and misfortune are the same, I won't bear this crime alone."

古文：岂若默然俱出去，可以存易亡，无事俱就刑辟。 吏言： 君为郡败吾章，已得如意，欲复亡为？ 
现代文：不如我们悄悄一起逃走罢了，还可以活着且免于一死，不会一起承担死刑。 吏役说： 你为郡里弄坏我的奏章，已经如你所愿，为什么还要逃呢? 
English: It would have been better if we had quietly run away together, we would still be alive and would have been spared death, we would not have had to bear the death penalty together.The bailiff said, "You have already broken my record for the county, as you wished, why do you still want to run away?

古文：慈答曰： 初受郡遣，但来视章通与未耳。
现代文：太史慈回答说： 起初受郡里派遣，只是来看奏章是否已经呈报上去。
English: Taishi replied: At first, I was sent by the county just to see if the score had been submitted to the newspaper.

古文：吾用意太过，乃相败章。
现代文：我想得过分了，才把奏章弄坏。
English: I overdid it and ruined the score.

古文：今还，亦恐以此见谴怒，故俱欲去尔。 
现代文：现在回去，也担心因此被谴责迁怒，所以想和你一起逃走。 
English: If I go back now, I'm afraid I'll be condemned to anger, so I want to run away with you.

古文：吏然慈言，即日俱去。
现代文：吏役认为太史慈的话很对，当天就同他一起逃走了。
English: The bailiff thought his words were right and ran away with him the same day.

古文：慈既与出城，因遁还通郡章。
现代文：太史慈与吏役一起出城后，又借机返回呈上郡里的奏章。
English: After leaving the city together with the officials, Taishi Ci took the opportunity to return to present the music to the county.

古文：州家闻之，更遣吏通章，有司以格章之故不复见理，州受其短。
现代文：州里得知后，又换派一个小官去送奏章，上级官员因奏章内容有矛盾而未再受理，州里因理短而受害。
English: After the prefectural government learned of this, it sent another minor official to deliver the score. The higher-ranking officials did not accept it due to the contradictory content of the score, and the prefectural government suffered as a result.

古文：由是知名，而为州家所疾，恐受其祸，乃避之辽东。
现代文：太史慈因此出名，但被州中嫉恨。他担心遭受祸患，就跑到辽东躲避。
English: Taishi Ci became famous for this, but was envied by the state. Fearing disaster, he fled to Liaodong to escape.

古文：北海相孔融闻而奇之，数遣人讯问其母，并致饷遗。
现代文：北海相孔融听说这件事后认为太史慈很奇异，多次派人问候太史慈的母亲，并送去物品。
English: After hearing about the incident, the North Sea statesman Kong Rong thought that Taishi was very strange, and sent people to greet Taishi's mother several times, and sent items.

古文：时融以黄巾寇暴，出屯都昌，为贼管亥所围。
现代文：当时孔融因为黄巾军劫掠州郡，出兵驻守都昌，被贼军管亥包围。
English: At that time, Kong Rong sent troops to garrison Duchang because the Yellow Turban Army had looted Zhoushu County, and was encircled by the Kuomintang Army.

古文：慈从辽东还，母谓慈曰： 汝与孔北海未尝相见，至汝行后，赡恤殷勤，过於故旧，今为贼所围，汝宜赴之。 
现代文：太史慈从辽东返回，他母亲对他说： 你与孔北海未曾见面，从你离开之后，他对我殷勤赡养，比亲朋故旧还好，现在他被贼兵围困，你当赶去援助。 
English: When Taishi returned from Liaodong, his mother said to him, "You have never met Kong Beihai. Since you left, he has been more than a family friend to me. Now he is besieged by bandits. You should rush to help."

古文：慈留三日，单步径至都昌。
现代文：太史慈在家待了三天，就只身步行到都昌。
English: After staying at home for three days, he walked all the way to Duchang.

古文：时围尚未密，夜伺间隙，得入见融，因求兵出斫贼。
现代文：此时包围得还不十分严密，太史慈等到夜间，乘间隙进去见孔融，请求孔融派兵出城斩杀贼人。
English: At this time, the encirclement was not very tight, so Shi Ci waited until night, took the opportunity to see Kong Rong, and asked Kong Rong to send soldiers out of the city to kill the thieves.

古文：融不听，欲待外救。
现代文：孔融没有允许，想等待外部援救。
English: Kong Rong did not give permission and wanted to wait for outside help.

古文：未有至者，而围日偪。
现代文：但援军一直没到，而包围一天比一天紧逼。
English: But reinforcements have not arrived, and the siege is tightening by the day.

古文：融欲告急平原相刘备，城中人无由得出，慈自请求行。
现代文：孔融想向平原相刘备告急，但城里人无法出城，太史慈主动请求派他去。
English: Kong Rong wanted to go to Liu Bei in the plain to report the emergency, but the people in the city could not leave the city, so Taishi Ci took the initiative to ask him to go.

古文：融曰： 今贼围甚密，众人皆言不可，卿意虽壮，无乃实难乎？ 
现代文：孔融说： 如今贼兵包围得十分严密，大家都说不能出去，你的决心很大，不也很困难吗! 
English: Kong Rong said, "Nowadays, the bandits are surrounded very closely. Everyone says you can't go out. Your determination is great. Isn't it also very difficult?"

古文：慈对曰： 昔府君倾意於老母，老母感遇，遣慈赴府君之急，固以慈有可取，而来必有益也。
现代文：太史慈回答： 过去您全心奉养我的老母亲，她感激恩遇，让我来援助您的困境，她本来认为我有可取的地方，来了必定有益。
English: She replied: In the past, you took care of my old mother with all your heart. She was grateful for the opportunity to help you in your plight. She thought I had something to offer and that it would be good to come.

古文：今众人言不可，慈亦言不可，岂府君爱顾之义，老母遣慈之意邪？
现代文：现在大家都说不行，如果我也说行不通，这难道就是您爱护看顾的道义、老母让我前来的用意吗?
English: Now everyone says no, and if I also say it won't work, is this the moral of your loving care and your mother's intention for me to come?

古文：事已急矣，愿府君无疑。 
现代文：事情已经很紧迫，希望您不要再犹豫了! 
English: The matter is already very urgent, I hope you will not hesitate any longer!

古文：融乃然之。
现代文：孔融于是答应他的请求。
English: Kong Rong then agreed to his request.

古文：於是严行蓐食，须明，便带鞬摄弓上马，将两骑自随，各作一的持之，开门直出。
现代文：于是太史慈整顿行装，早早地吃了饭，等到天明，便带上箭囊提着弓弩上马，令两名骑兵跟着自己，各作一个箭靶子拿在手上，打开城门径直出去。
English: So Taishi Ci packed his things, ate his meal early, and when it was daylight, he mounted his horse with a quiver of arrows and a bow and arrow. He ordered two horsemen to follow him, each with an arrow target in his hand, and they opened the gate and went straight out.

古文：外围下左右人并惊骇，兵马互出。
现代文：外面包围的人都很惊骇，步兵、骑兵胡乱冲出。
English: The people around the bread were shocked, and the infantry and cavalry rushed out.

古文：慈引马至城下堑内，植所持的各一，出射之，射之毕，径入门。
现代文：太史慈骑马来到城下的壕沟内，插好随从所拿的两个靶子，然后跃出壕沟射靶，射完后，径直进入城门。
English: Taishi Ci rode to the trench under the city, inserted the two targets he took with him, and then jumped out of the trench to shoot the target. After shooting, he went straight into the city gate.

古文：明晨复如此，围下人或起或卧，慈复植的，射之毕，复入门。
现代文：第二天早晨又是城外包围的人有的站起来，有的趴卧着，太史慈再插好靶，射完后又进城去。
English: The next morning, the besieged people outside the city again, some standing up, some lying on their stomachs. Taishi Ci then set up a target, and after shooting, went back into the city.

古文：明晨复出如此，无复起者，於是下鞭马直突围中驰去。
现代文：第三天早晨还是这样，城外敌军没有再站起来的，太史慈就策马径直冲向包围圈。
English: On the morning of the third day, it was still the same. The enemy outside the city did not stand up again, so Taishi Ci took his horse and rushed straight to the encirclement.

古文：比贼觉知，慈行已过，又射杀数人，皆应弦而倒，故无敢追者。
现代文：等到敌军觉察，他已突围离开，且射死了好几个人，都是中箭倒地，所以没有赶追赶他的人。
English: By the time the enemy noticed, he had already broken out of the encirclement and shot several people, all of whom fell to the ground from the arrows, so there was no one to chase him.

古文：遂到平原，说备曰： 慈，东莱之鄙人也，与孔北海亲非骨肉，比非乡党，特以名志相好，有分灾共患之义。
现代文：太史慈就到了平原，对刘备说： 我孔慈，是东莱的见识浅薄的人，和孔北海并非骨肉至亲，也不是同乡旧友，只是因为名声志向相似而交好，有忧患与共的情义。
English: When Taishi Ci arrived at the plain, he said to Liu Bei, "I, Kong Ci, am a man with a shallow understanding of Donglai. I am not a close relative of Kong Beihai, nor am I an old friend from the same village, but we are friends because of our similar fame and ambition, and we share the same feelings of sorrow.

古文：今管亥暴乱，北海被围，孤穷无援，危在旦夕。
现代文：现在管亥作乱，孔融被围，走投无路，孤军无援，危在旦夕。
English: Now, Guan Hai is creating chaos, Kong Rong is besieged, cornered, alone and helpless, and in imminent danger.

古文：以君有仁义之名，能救人之急，故北海区区，延颈恃仰，使慈冒白刃，突重围，从万死之中自讬於君，惟君所以存之。 
现代文：因为您有仁义之名，能够救助人的急难，所以孔北海非常慕仰，翘首以盼，仰仗于您，才让我冒着敌军刀刃，突破重围，从万死之中将自己托付给您，只有您才能使他留存。 
English: Because you have the name of benevolence and righteousness, and can rescue people in distress, so Kong Beihai is very admired, looked forward to, and relied on you. It was because of you that I braved the enemy's blade, broke through the encirclement, and entrusted myself to you from death. Only you can keep him.

古文：备敛容答曰： 孔北海知世间有刘备邪！ 
现代文：刘备收敛容色回答说： 孔北海知道这人间还有我刘备在啊! 
English: Liu Bei averted his eyes and replied: Kong Beihai knows that I, Liu Bei, still exist in this world!

古文：即遣精兵三千人随慈。
现代文：当即派三千精兵跟随太史慈前去救助。
English: He immediately dispatched three thousand elite soldiers to follow Taishi Ci to the rescue.

古文：贼闻兵至，解围散走。
现代文：敌军得知救兵已到，撤围逃散离开。
English: When the enemy troops learned that the rescuers had arrived, they withdrew, fled and dispersed.

古文：融既得济，益奇贵慈，曰： 卿吾之少友也。 
现代文：孔融渡过困境后，更加认为太史慈是个奇才而加以敬重，说： 您是我的年少明友。 
English: After Kong Rong overcame the difficulties, he thought that Taishi was a great talent and respected him even more, saying: You are my young friend.

古文：事毕，还启其母，母曰： 我喜汝有以报孔北海也。 
现代文：事情结束后，太史慈回家禀告母亲，母亲说： 我很高兴你能这样报答孔北海。 
English: After the incident was over, Ms. Shi returned home to tell her mother, who said, "I'm glad you were able to repay Kong Beihai in this way.

古文：扬州刺史刘繇与慈同郡，慈自辽东还，未与相见，暂渡江到曲阿见繇，未去，会孙策至。
现代文：扬州刺史刘繇与太史慈是同郡人，太史慈从辽东返回，两人未能相见，不久渡江到曲阿见到刘繇，还没离去，恰遇孙策到来。
English: Yangzhou chief historian Liu Wei and Tai Shi Ci are from the same county. Tai Shi Ci returned from Liaodong, but the two could not see each other. Soon they crossed the river to Qu'ao to see Liu Wei. Before they left, they happened to meet Sun Ce.

古文：或劝繇可以慈为大将军，繇曰： 我若用子义，许子将不当笑我邪？ 
现代文：有人劝刘繇可以任用太史慈为大将军，刘繇说： 如果我用太史慈，许劭不就讥笑我吗? 
English: Someone advised Liu Ye that he could appoint Taishi Ci as grand general. Liu Ye said: If I use Taishi Ci, won't Xu Ye laugh at me?

古文：但使慈侦视轻重。
现代文：只派太史慈去侦察孙策的兵力情况。
English: He only sent Taishi Ci to reconnoiter Sun Ce's troop situation.

古文：时独与一骑卒遇策。
现代文：当时太史慈只带一个骑兵突然遇到孙策。
English: At that time, Taishi Ci, with only one cavalryman, suddenly encountered Sun Ce.

古文：策从骑十三，皆韩当、宋谦、黄盖辈也。
现代文：孙策的随从有十三人，都是韩当、宋谦、黄盖这样的将领。
English: Sun Ce had thirteen attendants, all of whom were generals such as Han Dang, Song Qian and Huang Gai.

古文：慈便前斗，正与策对。
现代文：太史慈就上前挑战，正与孙策相对。
English: Tai Shih Ci has stepped up to the challenge and is on the opposite side of Sun Ce.

古文：策刺慈马，而揽得慈项上手戟，慈亦得策兜鍪。
现代文：孙策刀刺太史慈的马匹，夺走太史慈插在身背后的手戟，太史慈也拿到了孙策的头盔。
English: Sun Ce stabbed his horses with a knife and took away the handcuffs that Sun Ce had stuck behind his back. Sun Ce also took Sun Ce's helmet.

古文：会两家兵骑并各来赴，於是解散。
现代文：适逢两边的步、骑大队人马各自赶到，于是两方散开。
English: As the two sides were marching, the cavalry arrived separately, and the two sides dispersed.

古文：慈当与繇俱奔豫章，而遁於芜湖，亡入山中，称丹杨太守。
现代文：太史慈应当和刘繇一起逃往豫章，可是他悄悄前住芜湖，逃入山中，自称丹杨太守。
English: Taishi Ci should have fled to Yuzhang with Liu Bei, but he secretly went to live in Wuhu and fled into the mountains, claiming to be Danyang's daimyo.

古文：是时，策已平定宣城以东，惟泾以西六县未服。
现代文：当时，孙策军队已平定宣城以东地区，只剩下泾县以西六县没有归服。
English: At that time, Sun Tse's army had already subdued the areas east of Xuancheng, leaving only six counties west of Jixian unconquered.

古文：慈因进住泾县，立屯府，大为山越所附。
现代文：太史慈就进驻泾县，设立屯府，很多山越夷民前来归附。
English: Taishi Ci was stationed in Jixian and set up a garrison, and many mountain barbarians came to join him.

古文：策躬自攻讨，遂见囚执。
现代文：孙策亲自率军前来攻打，于是太史慈被抓获。
English: Sun Ce personally led an army to attack, and Tai Shih Ci was captured.

古文：策即解缚，捉其手曰： 宁识神亭时邪？
现代文：孙策当即解开他的束缚，握着他的手说： 还记得在神亭的时候吗?
English: Sun Ce immediately untied his shackles, shook his hand and said: Do you remember the time in the shrine?

古文：若卿尔时得我云何？ 
现代文：如果你当时抓住我，会怎么样呢? 
English: If you had caught me then, what would have happened?

古文：慈曰： 未可量也。 
现代文：太史慈说： 没有办法估计。 
English: "There is no way to estimate," Mr. Taishi said.

古文：策大笑曰： 今日之事，当与卿共之。 
现代文：孙策放声大笑说： 现在国家大事，我当和你共同处理。 
English: Sun Ce laughed loudly and said, "This is a national emergency, I should deal with it together with you."

古文：即署门下督，还吴授兵，拜折冲中郎将。
现代文：当即任命太史慈为门下督，返还吴郡后又授给他兵马，升为折冲中郎将。
English: He immediately appointed Taishi Ci as a subordinate governor, and after returning Wu County, he also awarded him soldiers and horses, and was promoted to the position of a junior general.

古文：后刘繇亡於豫章，士众万馀人未有所附，策命慈往抚安焉。
现代文：后来刘繇在豫章去世，一万多人士兵无所归附，孙策命太史慈前去安抚他们。
English: Later, Liu Bei died in Yuzhang, and more than ten thousand soldiers had nowhere to go. Sun Ce ordered Taishi Ci to go and pacify them.

古文：左右皆曰： 慈必北去不还。 策曰： 子义舍我，当复与谁？ 
现代文：孙策身边的人说： 太史慈这次北行一定不会回来。 孙策说： 子义除了我，还能归服谁? 
English: The people around Sun Ce said, "Too Shi Ci will definitely not return from this trip to the north." Sun Ce said, "Who can Ziyi submit to but me?

古文：饯送昌门，把腕别曰： 何时能还？ 
现代文：于是在昌门为太史慈饯行，握住他的手腕说： 何时能回来? 
English: So he went to Changmen to see Taishi Ci, held his wrist and said, "When can I come back?"

古文：答曰： 不过六十日。 
现代文：太史慈回答说： 不过六十天。 
English: Taishi replied, "Only sixty days."

古文：果如期而反。
现代文：后来果然如期而归。
English: He later returned as scheduled.

古文：刘表从子磐，骁勇，数为寇於艾、西安诸县。
现代文：刘表的侄儿刘磐，非常骁勇，多次侵扰艾县、西安各县。
English: Liu Ban, the nephew of Liu Biao, was very brave and repeatedly invaded Ai County and Xi'an counties.

古文：策於是分海昬、建昌左右六县，以慈为建昌都尉，治海昬，并督诸将拒磐。
现代文：孙策于是将海民曰、建昌周围六县分开，以太史慈为建昌都尉，治所设在海民曰，并且督领将领抗击刘磐。
English: Sun Ce then divided the six counties around Jianchang into Haimin and Jianchang, with Ether Shi Ci as the governor of Jianchang, the government office was set up in Haimin, and the commander-in-chief fought against Liu Bang.

古文：磐绝迹不复为寇。
现代文：刘磐自是不见踪影，不再侵犯。
English: Liu Bang himself is nowhere to be seen, no longer encroaching.

古文：慈长七尺七寸，美须髯，猿臂善射，弦不虚发。
现代文：太史慈身长七尺七寸，须发很漂亮，手臂很长善于射箭，且弦不虚发。
English: Taishi Ci is seven feet and seven inches tall, with a beautiful mustache. He has long arms and is good at archery.

古文：尝从策讨麻保贼，贼於屯里缘楼上行詈，以手持楼棼，慈引弓射之，矢贯手著棼，围外万人莫不称善。
现代文：曾跟随孙策征讨麻保的贼寇。贼兵在军营里缘楼上大骂，手扶着楼的横梁，太史慈引弓搭箭，一箭穿透那人的手并钉在梁上，包围的上万名兵士无人不称好。
English: Thieves and robbers who had followed Sun Ce to recruit and fight against Ma Bao. Thieves and robbers were cursing loudly on the ledge of the building in the military camp, holding the beams of the building with their hands. Taishi Ci drew a bow and arrows, and one arrow pierced the man's hand and was nailed to the beam. The tens of thousands of soldiers who were surrounded were all pleased.

古文：其妙如此。
现代文：他的箭法精妙到如此地步。
English: His archery is so exquisite.

古文：曹公闻其名，遗慈书，以箧封之，发省无所道，而但贮当归。
现代文：曹操听说太史慈的名声，给他写信，用小匣子密封着，打开一看，里面并无什么书信，只是放了当归。
English: Cao Cao heard of Taishi Ci's reputation and wrote him a letter. It was sealed in a small box. When he opened it, there was no letter inside, but it was left for him to return.

古文：孙权统事，以慈能制磐，遂委南方之事。
现代文：孙权总管大事，认为太史慈能制衡刘磐，就将南方的事务委托给他。
English: Sun Quan, who was in charge of major affairs, believed that Taishi Ci could control Liu Bang, so he entrusted the affairs of the south to him.

古文：年四十一，建安十一年卒。子享，官至越骑校尉。
现代文：建安十一年，太史慈去世，儿子太史享，官至越骑校尉。
English: In the eleventh year of Jian'an, Tai Shih Ci died, and his son, Tai Shih Huan, rose to the rank of Viet Cavalry Captain.

古文：士燮字威彦，苍梧广信人也。
现代文：士燮，字威彦，苍梧郡广信县人。
English: Shi Yao, also known as Wei Yan, was from Guangxin County, Gou County.

古文：其先本鲁国汶阳人，至王莽之乱，避地交州。
现代文：他的先祖本是鲁国汶阳人，到王莽作乱时，到交州避乱。
English: His ancestors were originally from Wenyang in the State of Lu. When Wang Mang made a disturbance, they went to Jiaozhou to escape the disturbance.

古文：六世至燮父赐，桓帝时为日南太守。
现代文：传了六代到士燮的父亲士赐，汉桓帝时，士赐担任日南太守。
English: Shizue, the father of Shizue, who has been passed down to Shizue for six generations, served as Nichinan Taishu (provincial governor-general) during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：燮少游学京师，事颍川刘子奇，治左氏春秋。
现代文：士燮年少时到京城游学，向颍川人刘子奇学习，研究《左氏春秋》。
English: When he was young, Shisheng traveled to Beijing to study, learning from Liu Ziqi, a native of Luochuan, and researching Zuo's Spring and Autumn.

古文：察孝廉，补尚书郎，公事免官。
现代文：士燮后来被推举为孝廉，补任尚书郎，因公事被免官。
English: Shisheng was later promoted to filial piety, and was appointed to fill the post of Shang Shuro, but was dismissed for official business.

古文：父赐丧阕后，举茂才，除巫令，迁交阯太守。
现代文：他父亲士赐去世安葬后，他被推举为茂才，担任巫县县令，升任为交阝止太守。
English: After his father Shizai died and was buried, he was promoted to Motsai, served as the magistrate of Wuxian County, and was promoted to the governor of Jiaozuo.

古文：弟壹，初为郡督邮。
现代文：士燮的弟弟士壹，起初是郡中督邮。
English: Shifu's younger brother, Shiyi, was initially the county vice-governor.

古文：刺史丁宫徵还京都，壹侍送勤恪，宫感之，临别谓曰： 刺史若待罪三事，当相辟也。 
现代文：刺史丁宫受到征召返回京都，士壹护送他，路上殷勤尽责，丁宫很是感激，临别时对他说： 我这个刺史如果跻身三公之位，一定征召你。 
English: Ding Gong was summoned to return to Kyoto, and the judges escorted him on the way. Ding Gong was very grateful, and said to him at the time of parting: If I, Ding Shi, become one of the three princes, I will definitely conscript you.

古文：后宫为司徒，辟壹。
现代文：后来丁宫为司徒，征召士壹。
English: Later, Ding Gong became an apprentice and was conscripted into the army.

古文：比至，宫已免，黄琬代为司徒，甚礼遇壹。
现代文：等士壹来到，丁宫已被免职，黄琬接替他为司徒，也很礼待士壹。
English: Ding Gong has been relieved of his duties, and Huang Qi has replaced him as a scholar. He also treated the scholar with great courtesy.

古文：董卓作乱，壹亡归乡里。
现代文：董卓作乱，士壹逃归故乡。
English: Dong Zhuo caused a riot, and the scholars fled back to their hometown.

古文：交州刺史朱符为夷贼所杀，州郡扰乱。
现代文：交州刺史朱符被少数民族的贼人杀害，州郡骚乱。
English: Jiaozhou Jishi Zhu Fu was killed by ethnic minority thieves, leading to unrest in the county.

古文：燮乃表壹领合浦太守，次弟徐闻令〈黄有〉领九真太守，〈黄有〉弟武，领南海太守。
现代文：士燮就上表请任士壹兼任合浦太守，二弟徐闻县县令士黄有兼任九真太守，士黄有弟士武，兼任南海太守。
English: On the basis of the above table, Shi Yan asked the first to serve as the governor of Hepu, the second to serve as the governor of Jiu Zhen, and the third to serve as the governor of Nanhai.

古文：燮体器宽厚，谦虚下士，中国士人往依避难者以百数。
现代文：士燮性情宽厚，很有器量，对士人很谦虚，上百名中原士人前去避难依附。
English: Shi Yan was generous in nature, very resourceful, and very humble to scholars. Hundreds of Central Plains scholars went to him for refuge and attachment.

古文：耽玩春秋，为之注解。
现代文：他沉迷于钻研《春秋》，为它作注解。
English: He was obsessed with studying "Spring and Autumn" and annotating it.

古文：陈国袁徽与尚书令荀彧书曰： 交阯士府君既学问优博，又达於从政，处大乱之中，保全一郡，二十馀年疆埸无事，民不失业，羁旅之徒，皆蒙其庆，虽窦融保河西，曷以加之？
现代文：陈国人袁徽给尚书令荀彧的信说： 交阯郡的士府君学问渊博，又通明政事，身处大乱之中，保全州郡，二十多年间疆界内没有动乱，百姓安居乐业，异乡漂泊之人，都蒙受他的好处。
English: The letter from Yuan Hui, a citizen of Chen Guozhong, to Shang Shuling Yao said: Shifu Jun of Jiaozuo County is well-educated and knowledgeable in politics. He is in the midst of great turmoil, protects the county and state, there has been no unrest within the borders for more than 20 years, the people live and work in peace, and those who wander in foreign lands all benefit from him.

古文：官事小阕，辄玩习书传，春秋左氏传尤简练精微，吾数以咨问传中诸疑，皆有师说，意思甚密。
现代文：及时向窦融保卫河西之地，又怎么能超过他呢!处理公事之余，他还研习书、传，对《春秋左氏传》的钻研尤其简练精微，我曾多次就该书中的一些疑难之处向他咨询，他都能以师者身份讲授，解释甚为详密。
English: In addition to dealing with business affairs, he also studies books and biographies. The study of "The Biography of Spring and Autumn Zuo" is particularly concise and delicate. I have consulted him many times about some of the difficulties in the book. He can teach as a teacher, and the explanation is very detailed.

古文：又尚书兼通古今，大义详备。
现代文：对《尚书》他能兼通古、今文，对其中大义理解十分详备。
English: He is able to read both ancient and modern texts of the Shangshu, and has a very detailed understanding of the great meaning of the texts.

古文：闻京师古今之学，是非忿争，今欲条左氏、尚书长义上之。 
现代文：得知京师古文经学派与今文经学派，对是非争论不休，他现在正想要分条论析《左氏春秋》、《尚书》的正确涵义上奏。 
English: Having learned that the ancient and modern schools of literature in Beijing are constantly arguing about the rights and wrongs, he is now trying to break down and analyze the correct meaning of "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" and "Shang Shu."

古文：其见称如此。
现代文：士燮被人如此称赞。
English: Shifang has been praised so much.

古文：燮兄弟并为列郡，雄长一州，偏在万里，威尊无上。
现代文：士燮兄弟都是各郡郡守，强有力地掌管着一州事务，距离京城万里之遥，所以威望尊贵非常。
English: The Shiyan brothers are all county governors of counties, powerfully in charge of one-state affairs, thousands of miles away from the capital, so their prestige is very high.

古文：出入鸣锺磬，备具威仪，笳箫鼓吹，车骑满道，胡人夹毂焚烧香者常有数十。
现代文：他们出入鸣钟响磬，威势礼仪非常齐备，笳箫鼓吹，车马满路，常有几十位胡人夹在车马群中焚香。
English: They enter and leave to the sound of chiming bells, complete with pompous etiquette, trumpets, and chariots and horses. There are often dozens of Hu people burning incense in the midst of the chariots and horses.

古文：妻妾乘辎軿，子弟从兵骑，当时贵重，震服百蛮，尉他不足逾也。
现代文：他们的妻妾都乘坐配有盖、帷的小车，子弟都有兵士骑马跟随，当时他们的贵重显赫，震服各少数民族，以往的南越王尉他也不能超过他们。
English: Their wives and concubines all rode in covered and curtained carriages, and their children were accompanied by soldiers on horseback. At that time, their value was outstanding, shocking all ethnic minorities. As a former South Vietnamese lieutenant, he could not surpass them.

古文：武先病没。
现代文：士武最先因病去世。
English: Shibu was the first to die from the disease.

古文：朱符死后，汉遣张津为交州刺史，津后又为其将区景所杀，而荆州牧刘表遣零陵赖恭代津。
现代文：朱符去世后，汉朝廷派遣张津担任交州刺史，张津后来又被自己部下将领区景杀害，而荆州牧刘表派遣零陵人赖恭代替张津。
English: After Zhu Fu's death, the Han court sent Zhang Tian to serve as Jiaozhou's chief historian. Zhang Tian was later killed by his own subordinates, the general Zou Jing, while Jingzhou's Mu Liu sent the tomb raider Lai Gong to replace Zhang Tian.

古文：是时苍梧太守史璜死，表又遣吴巨代之，与恭俱至。
现代文：当时苍梧太守史璜去世，刘表又派遣吴巨去接替史王黄，和赖恭一起到达。
English: At that time, the Cangwu daimyō, Shi Yan, died, and Liu Biao sent Wu Jiu to succeed Shi Wanghuang, arriving together with Lai Gong.

古文：汉闻张津死，赐燮玺书曰： 交州绝域，南带江海，上恩不宣，下义壅隔，知逆贼刘表又遣赖恭闚看南土，今以燮为绥南中郎将，董督七郡，领交阯太守如故。 
现代文：汉朝廷得知张津已死，就赐予士燮有玺印、封号的书信说： 交州地处与中原隔绝之处，南边连接江海，朝廷之恩不能宣达，臣下义言受到塞阻，听说逆贼刘表又派赖恭窥探南方土地，现在任命士燮为绥南中郎将，总督七郡，依然兼任交阝止太守。 
English: When the Han court learned that Zhang Jin had died, they gave Shi Yan a letter with a seal and seal number, saying: Jiaozhou is located in a place isolated from the Central Plains, the south side is connected to the river sea, the grace of the court can not be announced, the vassal's speech was blocked, it was heard that the rebel Liu table also sent Lai Gong to spy on the southern land, and now appointed Shi Yan as the vice-governor of the south, the governor of seven counties, and still concurrently served as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：后燮遣吏张旻奉贡诣京都，是时天下丧乱，道路断绝，而燮不废贡职，特复下诏拜安远将军，封龙度亭侯。
现代文：后来士燮派遣吏役张郃带着贡品到京都，当时天下动乱，道路断绝，而士燮没有放弃进贡的职责，皇帝特意再次下诏任命他为安远将军、封为龙度亭侯。
English: Later, the Shishu sent the official Zhang Xuan to Kyoto with the tribute. At that time, the world was in turmoil, roads were cut off, and the Shishu did not give up the duty of paying tribute. The emperor specially issued a decree again to appoint him as General Anyuan and the prince of Longdu.

古文：后巨与恭相失，举兵逐恭，恭走还零陵。
现代文：后来吴巨与赖恭不睦，吴巨起兵驱逐赖恭，赖恭逃回零陵。
English: Later, Wu Jiu and Lai Gong fell out, Wu Jiu raised an army to expel Lai Gong, and Lai Gong fled back to Luling.

古文：建安十五年，孙权遣步骘为交州刺史。
现代文：建安十五年，孙权派遣步骘担任交州刺史。
English: In the 15th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan dispatched Bu Xi to serve as the secretary of Jiaozhou.

古文：骘到，燮率兄弟奉承节度。
现代文：步骘到任，士燮率领兄弟们接受节制调度。
English: When Bu Xuan took office, Shi Xuan led the brothers to accept the restrained scheduling.

古文：而吴巨怀异心，骘斩之。
现代文：而吴巨有不臣之心，步骘处死了他。
English: However, Wu Jiu had a rebellious heart, and he was put to death.

古文：权加燮为左将军。
现代文：孙权加官士燮为左将军。
English: Sun Quan was promoted to General of the Left.

古文：建安末年，燮遣子廞入质，权以为武昌太守，燮、壹诸子在南者，皆拜中郎将。
现代文：建安末年，士燮遣送儿子士貵去作人质，孙权以士貵为武昌太守，士燮、士壹在南方的儿子们，都被授予中郎将。
English: At the end of the Jianan era, Shizhen sent his son Shizhen to serve as a hostage, Sun Quan made Shizhen the governor of Wuchang, and both Shizhen and Shizhen's sons in the south were awarded the title of middle-ranking general.

古文：燮又诱导益州豪姓雍闿等，率郡人民使遥东附，权益嘉之，迁卫将军，封龙编侯，弟壹偏将军，都乡侯。
现代文：士燮又招诱益州的豪族雍闿等人率领郡中百姓，遥遥向东依附孙权，孙权更加赞赏士燮，提升他为卫将军，封为龙编侯，升任士壹为偏将军，封为都乡侯。
English: Shifu also invited and enticed Yizhou's powerful clansmen, such as Yong Qi and others, to lead the county's middle-class people, and depended on Sun Quan far to the east. Sun Quan appreciated Shifu even more, promoted him to the general of Wei, named him Longquan Hou, promoted him to the general of Hanzhong, and named him the mayor of the capital.

古文：燮每遣使诣权，致杂香细葛，辄以千数，明珠、大贝、流离、翡翠、玳瑁、犀、象之珍，奇物异果，蕉、邪、龙眼之属，无岁不至。
现代文：士燮经常派遣使者去拜见孙权，进献各种香料和细纹葛布，经常数以千计，明珠、大贝、琉璃、翡翠、玳瑁、犀角、象牙等珍品，还有奇物异果，香蕉、椰子、龙眼之类，每年都进贡。
English: The scholars often sent envoys to visit Sun Quan, offering all kinds of spices and fine-textured georgette, often thousands of them, pearls, large shellfish, glass, jade, gourd, rhinoceros horn, ivory and other treasures, as well as exotic fruits, bananas, coconuts, longan and the like, every year.

古文：壹时贡马凡数百匹。
现代文：士壹有时进献几百匹良马。
English: Sometimes, he donates hundreds of good horses.

古文：权辄为书，厚加宠赐，以答慰之。
现代文：孙权经常亲自致信，加以恩宠，以回报慰抚他们。
English: Sun Quan often wrote to them personally, bestowing favors and consoling them in return.

古文：燮在郡四十馀岁，黄武五年，年九十卒。
现代文：士燮在郡中四十多年，黄武五年，九十岁时去世。
English: Shizhao has been in the county for more than forty years, Huang Wu five years, died at the age of ninety.

古文：权以交阯县远，乃分合浦以北为广州，吕岱为刺史；交阯以南为交州，戴良为刺史。
现代文：孙权因为交址郡地处偏远，就将合浦以北分为广州，任命吕岱为刺史;交址以南为交州，任命戴良为刺史。
English: Because of the remoteness of the intersection county, Sun Quan divided the intersection north of Hepu into Guangzhou and appointed Lv Ying as the chief historian; the intersection south of Hepu into Jiaozhou and appointed Dai Liang as the chief historian.

古文：又遣陈时代燮为交阯太守。
现代文：又派遣陈时接替士燮担任交址太守。
English: He also dispatched Chen Shiji to succeed Shizhao as the junction governor.

古文：岱留南海，良与时俱前行到合浦，而燮子徽自署交阯太守，发宗兵拒良。
现代文：吕岱留在南海，戴良和陈时一起前往合浦，而士燮的儿子士徽自任为交址太守，发动宗族亲兵抵御戴良。
English: Lv Ying stayed in the South China Sea, Dai Liang and Chen Shihong went to Hapu together, while Shih Ying's son Shi Hui appointed himself as the junction governor and mobilized his family's soldiers to resist Dai Liang.

古文：良留合浦。
现代文：戴良留在合浦。
English: Dai Liang stayed in Hepu.

古文：交阯桓邻，燮举吏也，叩头谏徽使迎良，徽怒，笞杀邻。
现代文：交址人桓邻，是士燮举荐的官吏，他叩头劝谏士徽派人迎接戴良，士徽大怒，将桓邻鞭打致死。
English: The addressee, Huan Jiao, was a government official recommended by Shi Yan. He kowtowed and persuaded Shi Hui to send someone to meet Dai Liang. Shi Hui was furious and whipped Huan Jiao to death.

古文：邻兄治子发又合宗兵击徽，徽闭门城守，治等攻之数月不能下，乃约和亲，各罢兵还。
现代文：桓邻哥哥桓治和儿子桓发又集合宗族亲兵攻打士徽，士徽紧闭城门拒守，桓治等进攻几个月也未能攻克，于是订立盟约，两方联姻，各自退撤军返回。
English: Huan's neighboring brother, Huan Zhi, and his son, Huan Fa, also gathered their clan soldiers to attack Shihui. Shihui closed the city gate and refused to defend it, and Huan Zhi's attack could not be defeated for several months, so they signed a covenant, the two sides allied, and each retreated and returned.

古文：而吕岱被诏诛徽，自广州将兵昼夜驰入，过合浦，与良俱前。
现代文：而吕岱收到诏书要诛杀士徽，从广州率领部队日夜奔赴，路经合浦，和戴良一道前行。
English: However, Lv Ying received an imperial edict to assassinate Shi Hui, and led the troops from Guangzhou to rush day and night, passing through Hapu, and marching with Dai Liang.

古文：壹子中郎将匡与岱有旧，岱署匡师友从事，先移书交阯，告喻祸福，又遣匡见徽，说令服罪，虽失郡守，保无他忧。
现代文：士壹的儿子中郎将士匡与吕岱有交情，吕岱替代士匡为师友从事，先写信到交阝止，向士徽说明利害得失，又派士匡去见士徽，劝说他归服认罪。虽然失去郡守的官职，但确保他没有其他忧愁。
English: The son of one of the judges, Zhong Lang, befriended Shi Kuang and Lv Ying. Lv Ying replaced Shi Kuang as his mentor. He first wrote to Shi Kuang to explain the advantages and disadvantages to Shi Hui, and then sent Shi Kuang to Shi Hui to persuade him to surrender and confess. Although he lost the post of county governor, he made sure that he had no other worries.

古文：岱寻匡后至，徽兄祗，弟幹、颂等六人肉袒奉迎。
现代文：吕岱在士匡之后到达，士徽的哥哥士祗、弟弟士干、士颂等六人，袒露胳膊奉迎吕岱。
English: Lyu Hao arrived after Shi Kuang. Six people, including Shi Hui's elder brother Shijun, younger brother Shikan, and Shisong, greeted Lyu Hao with open arms.

古文：岱谢令复服，前至郡下。
现代文：吕岱答谢还礼让他们重新穿上衣服，前往郡府下马。
English: Lv Ying thanked them and told them to put their clothes back on and go to the county seat to dismount.

古文：明旦早施帐幔，请徽兄弟以次入，宾客满坐。
现代文：第二天一早就布置帐幕，请士徽兄弟依次进入，宾客满座。
English: Early the next morning, the tents were set up, and the Shihui brothers were invited to enter in turn. The guests were all seated.

古文：岱起，拥节读诏书，数徽罪过，左右因反缚以出，即皆伏诛，传首诣武昌。
现代文：吕岱起身，手持符节宣读诏书，历数士徽的罪过，左右侍从就将士徽等捆绑推出帐幕，当即全部处死，并将他们首级传到武昌。
English: Lv Xuan stood up, read out the imperial edict with a rune in his hand, and enumerated the sins of the warriors. The attendants on his right and left bundled the warriors' emblems out of the tent, immediately executed them all, and sent their heads to Wuchang.

古文：壹、〈黄有〉、匡后出，权原其罪，及燮质子廞，皆免为庶人。
现代文：士壹、士黄有、士匡后来出来平叛，孙权宽赦了他们罪行，将他们以及士燮送作人质的儿子士貵，都贬为平民。
English: Judge I, Judge Huang You, and Judge Kuang later came out to quell the rebellion, and Sun Quan pardoned their crimes and reduced them, as well as Shi Yan's son Shi Yan, who was sent as a hostage, to civilians.

古文：数岁，壹、〈黄有〉坐法诛。
现代文：几年后，士壹、士黄有因违法而被处死。
English: A few years later, Shi Yi and Shi Huang You were executed for breaking the law.

古文：廞病卒，无子，妻寡居，诏在所月给俸米，赐钱四十万。
现代文：士貵病死，没有儿子，他的妻子独自居住，孙权下令当地官府每月供应她俸米，赏赐四十万钱。
English: Shisheng died of illness without a son, and his wife lived alone. Sun Quan ordered the local government to provide her with a monthly stipend of 400,000 yuan.

古文：评曰：刘繇藻厉名行，好尚臧否，至於扰攘之时，据万里之土，非其长也。
现代文：评曰：刘繇修养名声德行，喜好品评人物，至于在动乱时期，占据万里疆土，不是他的所长。
English: The review said: "Liu Gan cultivates fame and virtue, and likes to evaluate people. As for occupying thousands of miles of territory in times of turmoil, it is not his forte.

古文：太史慈信义笃烈，有古人之分。
现代文：太史慈忠诚信义，笃定刚烈，有古人的风范。
English: Taishi Ci is loyal and faithful, determined and strong, and has the demeanor of the ancients.

古文：士燮作守南越，优游终世，至子不慎，自贻凶咎，盖庸才玩富贵而恃阻险，使之然也。
现代文：士燮守卫南越土地，终身悠闲游乐，到了子孙后代，不够慎重，自己招致凶祸过错，大概是庸才倚仗险阻玩弄富贵，才导致这样的结果吧。
English: The aristocrats guarded the land of South Vietnam and enjoyed a life of leisure, but when it came to future generations, they were not careful enough and brought about their own misfortune. It was probably the mediocrity that relied on danger to play with wealth that led to such a result.

