古文：惟三祀十有二月朔，伊尹以冕服奉嗣王归于亳，作书曰： 民非后，罔克胥匡以生；后非民，罔以辟四方。
现代文：太甲继位第三年，十二月初一，伊尹戴着礼帽穿着礼服迎接嗣王太甲回到亳都，给王上书说： 百姓没有君主，不能互相匡正而生活；君主没有百姓，就不能治理四方。
English: On the first day of December, the third year of Taiga's succession, Yi Yin, wearing a ceremonial hat and a ceremonial robe, welcomed his heir, King Taiga, back to Shandong. He wrote a letter to the king, saying: "Without a monarch, the people cannot live a righteous life; without a people, the monarch cannot govern the four directions."

古文：皇天眷佑有商，俾嗣王克终厥德，实万世无疆之休。 
现代文：上天顾念帮助商朝，让王能培养出高尚的品德，实在是万代无疆之美啊！ 
English: Heaven's care to help the Shang Dynasty, so that Wang can cultivate a noble character, is really a boundless beauty for all generations!

古文：王拜手稽首曰： 予小子不明于德，自厎不类。
现代文：王拜跪叩头说： 我不知道什么是德，自己招致不善。
English: Wang Bai kneeled and bowed and said, "I don't know what virtue is. I have brought bad things upon myself."

古文：欲败度，纵败礼，以速戾于厥躬。
现代文：多欲就败坏法度，放纵就败坏礼制，因此给自身召来了罪过。
English: Too much desire corrupts the law, and overindulgence corrupts the etiquette, thus bringing sin upon oneself.

古文：天作孽，犹可违；自作孽，不可逭。
现代文：上天造成的灾祸，还可回避；自己造成的灾祸，就无法逃避了。
English: Heaven-inflicted disasters can still be avoided; self-inflicted disasters cannot be avoided.

古文：既往背师保之训，弗克于厥初，尚赖匡救之德，图惟厥终。 
现代文：以前我违背老师的教训，没有在开始就开个好头；还望依靠您的匡救的恩德，才能得到好的结果。 
English: In the past, I disobeyed my teacher's instruction and did not make a good start at the beginning; I still hope to rely on your help to get a good result.

古文：伊尹拜手稽首曰： 修厥身，允德协于下，惟明后。
现代文：伊尹跪拜叩头，说： 提高自身的修养，又用诚信的美德和谐臣下，这就是明君应该做的。
English: Yi Yin kneeled, bowed and said, "Improving one's self-cultivation and harmonizing one's vassals with the virtue of sincerity, this is what Ming Jun should do."

古文：先王子惠困穷，民服厥命，罔有不悦。
现代文：先王成汤爱护穷困的百姓，所以百姓服从他的教导，没有不高兴的。
English: King Seung-tang loved and cared for the poor people, so the people obeyed his teachings and were never unhappy.

古文：并其有邦厥邻，乃曰：王懋乃德，视乃厥祖，无时豫怠。
现代文：连邻国百姓也拥护他，便说：等待我们的君主吧，我们的君主来了，就没有祸患了。王想要培养自身的美德，不妨看看先祖的所作所为，不可有顷刻的安乐懈怠。
English: Even the neighbouring people supported him, saying: "Wait for our sovereign, when our sovereign comes, there will be no calamity. If the king wants to cultivate his own virtue, he may wish to look at the deeds of his ancestors. There must not be a moment of laxity.

古文：奉先思孝，接下思恭。
现代文：事奉先人，当思孝顺；接待臣下，当思恭敬。
English: When serving predecessors, one should think of filial piety; when receiving vassals, one should think of respect.

古文：视远惟明；听德惟聪。
现代文：观察远方要眼明，顺从有德要耳聪。
English: It is necessary to be clear-sighted to observe the distance, and it is necessary to be obedient and virtuous to listen.

古文：朕承王之休无斁。 
现代文：能够这样，我享受王的幸福就会没有止境。 
English: If I can do this, I will be able to enjoy the king's happiness endlessly.

