古文：古人云： 千载一圣，犹旦暮也；五百年一贤，犹比髆也。 
现代文：古人说： 一千年出一位圣人，还近得像从早到晚之间；五百年出一位贤人，感觉已经密集得像肩并肩一样了。 
English: The ancients said: A saint born in a thousand years is still as near as if he were born from morning to night; a sage born in five hundred years is already as close as if they were standing shoulder to shoulder.

古文：言圣贤之难得，疏阔如此。
现代文：这是说圣贤难得，要隔很长时间才会出一位。
English: This means that sages are rare, and it takes a long time for one to emerge.

古文：傥遭不世明达君子，安可不攀附景仰之乎？
现代文：假如遇上世间少有的明达君子，哪里能不攀附景仰啊！
English: If you meet a rare enlightened gentleman in the world, where can you not admire him?

古文：吾生于乱世，长于戎马，流离播越，闻见已多；所值名贤，未尝不心醉魂迷向慕之也。
现代文：我出生在动荡的年代，成长于兵马之间，四处漂泊，所见所闻已经够多。但遇上名流贤士，没有不心醉魂迷地向往仰慕。
English: I was born in a turbulent era, grew up among soldiers and horses, wandered around, and have seen and heard enough. But when I met famous sages, I was not intoxicated with admiration.

古文：人在年少，神情未定，所与款狎，熏渍陶染，言笑举动，无心于学，潜移暗化，自然似之；何况操履艺能，较明易习者也？
现代文：人在年少时候，精神意态还未定型，和情投意合的朋友交往亲密，受到熏渍陶染，人家的一言一笑一举一动，就算无心去学习，也会潜移默化，自然与朋友相似，何况人家的操行技能，是更为明显易於学习的东西呢！
English: When people are young, their mental attitude is not yet stereotyped, and they are intimate with friends who are like-minded, and they are smeared with fumigation. People's words, smiles, and every move, even if they have no intention to learn, will be subtle, naturally similar to friends. What's more, people's handling skills are more obviously easy to learn!

古文：是以与善人居，如入芝兰之室，久而自芳也；与恶人居，如入鲍鱼之肆，久而自臭也。
现代文：因此和善人在一起，就如同进到了养育许多芝兰的花房，时间一久连自己也变得芬芳；若是和恶人在一起，就如同进入卖鲍鱼的店铺，时间一久自己也变得腥臭。
English: Therefore, if you are with a good person, it is like entering a flower shop that grows a lot of geraniums, and over time you will become fragrant; if you are with a wicked person, it is like entering an abalone shop, and over time you will become stinky.

古文：墨子悲于染丝，是之谓矣。
现代文：墨子看到染丝的情况，感叹丝染在什么颜色里就会变成什么颜色。
English: Mozi saw the situation of silk dyeing and lamented what color silk dyed in what color it would become.

古文：君子必慎交游焉。
现代文：所以君子在交友方面必须谨慎。
English: Therefore, a gentleman must be cautious in making friends.

古文：孔子曰： 无友不如己者。 
现代文：孔子说： 不要和不如自己的人做朋友。 
English: Confucius said: Don't be friends with people who are not as good as you.

古文：颜、闵之徒，何可世得！但优于我，便足贵之。
现代文：像颜回、闵损那样的人，哪能常有，只要有胜过我的地方，就很可贵。
English: People like Yan Hui and Xiang Yu, who can always be there, are very valuable as long as they have something better than me.

古文：世人多蔽，贵耳贱目，重遥轻近。
现代文：世上的人大多有一种偏见：重视听到的而轻视看见的，重视远处的事物而轻视身边的事物。
English: Most of the people in the world have a prejudice: they value what they hear and despise what they see, they value things far away and despise things around them.

古文：少长周旋，如有贤哲，每相狎侮，不加礼敬；他乡异县，微借风声，延颈企踵，甚于饥渴。校其长短，核其精麤，或彼不能如此矣。
现代文：从小到大常往来的人中，如果有谁是贤士哲人，往往人们也会对他轻慢，缺少礼貌尊敬。而对身居别县他乡的人，只要稍微有一点名气，就会伸长脖子、踮起脚跟的朝思暮盼，如饥似渴地想见一见，其实比较二者的短长，审察二者，很可能远处的人还不如身边的人，所以鲁人会把孔子叫做 东家丘 ，而不认为他是圣人。
English: Among people who have been in frequent contact from childhood to adulthood, if there is someone who is a sage and philosopher, people will often treat him with contempt and lack of courtesy and respect. And for people who live in other counties and towns, as long as they have a little bit of fame, they will stretch their necks and stomp their heels in the morning, eager to see each other. In fact, if you compare the short and long of the two, and examine the two, it is likely that people at a distance are not as good as people around you. Therefore, Lu people will call Confucius Dongjiaqiu, but do not think he is a saint.

古文：所以鲁人谓孔子为东家丘，昔虞国宫之奇，少长于君，君狎之，不纳其谏，以至亡国，不可不留心也。
现代文：从前虞国的宫之奇从小生长在虞君身边，虞君轻视他，不听他的劝谏，最终落了个亡国的结局，这样的简讯不能不留心啊！
English: Once upon a time, the miracle of the palace of the former state of Yugou grew up around Yugou, Yugou despised him, did not listen to his advice, and eventually ended up with the end of a ruined country, such a text message cannot but be noticed!

古文：用其言，弃其身，古人所耻。
现代文：采纳了某人的意见却抛弃这个人，这种行为在古人看来是很可耻的。
English: The ancients considered it shameful to adopt someone's opinion and then abandon that person.

古文：凡有一言一行，取于人者，皆显称之，不可窃人之美，以为己力；虽轻虽贱者，必归功焉。
现代文：凡采纳一个建议、办理一件事情，如果得到了别人的帮助，就应该赞扬人家，不可窃取他人成果，当成自己的功劳。即使是地位低下的人，也一定要肯定他的功劳。
English: Anyone who adopts a suggestion, handles a matter, and if he gets help from others, he should praise others. He should not steal other people's achievements and take credit for them. Even if he is a low-ranking person, he must affirm his merit.

古文：窃人之财，刑辟之所处；窃人之美，鬼神之所责。
现代文：窃取别人的钱财，会遭到法律的制裁；窃取别人的功绩，必然会遭到鬼神的谴责。
English: Stealing other people's money will be punished by the law; stealing other people's merits will inevitably be condemned by ghosts and gods.

古文：梁孝元前在荆州，有丁觇者，洪亭民耳，颇善属文，殊工草隶；孝元书记，一皆使之。
现代文：梁元帝在荆州的时候，有个叫丁觇的，是洪亭的人，很擅长写作文章，尤其擅长写草书、隶书，元帝的往来书信，全部交给他代写。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan was in Jingzhou, there was a man named Ding Jun, who was from Hongting. He was very good at writing articles, especially at writing cursive and cursive. All of Emperor Yuan's correspondence was written on his behalf.

古文：军府轻贱，多未之重，耻令子弟以为楷法，时云： 丁君十纸，不敌王褒数字。 
现代文：可是军府里的人都轻视他，对他的书法不重视，不愿自己的子弟学习他的书法，当时流传着 丁君写的十张纸，比不上王褒几个字 的说法。
English: However, people in the military government despised him, did not attach importance to his calligraphy, and did not want their children to learn his calligraphy. At that time, it was said that the ten pieces of paper written by Ding Jun were not as good as Wang Bo's "a few words."

古文：吾雅爱其手迹，常所宝持。
现代文：我却非常喜爱丁觇的书法，还把它们珍藏起来。
English: On the other hand, I am very fond of Ding Xi's calligraphy and have treasured it.

古文：孝元尝遣典签惠编送文章示萧祭酒，祭酒问云： 君王比赐书翰，及写诗笔，殊为佳手，姓名为谁？那得都无声问？ 
现代文：后来，孝元帝派一个叫惠编的掌管文书的的送文章给祭酒官萧子云看，萧子云问道： 君王最近写信给我，还有他所写的诗歌文章书法都非常好，此人姓什么叫什么，怎么会毫无名声？ 
English: Later, Emperor Xiaoyuan sent a letter written by a clerk named Hui Hen to the sacrificial wine officer Xiao Ziyun. Xiao Ziyun asked: The king recently wrote to me, and his poetry and calligraphy are very good. What is this person's surname? How can he have no reputation?

古文：编以实答。子云叹曰： 此人后生无比，遂不为世所称，亦是奇事。 
现代文：惠编如实回答，萧子云叹道： 此人在后生中没有谁能比得上，却不为世人称道，也算是奇怪事情！ 
English: Hui Hen truthfully answered, Xiao Ziyun sighed: There is no one who can match this person in the afterlife, but it is not praised by the world. It is also a strange thing!

古文：于是闻者稍复刮目。
现代文：以后听到这话的对人才对丁觇稍稍刮目相看。
English: After hearing this, the pair of talents were slightly impressed by Ding Yao.

古文：稍仕至尚书仪曹郎，末为晋安王侍读，随王东下。
现代文：丁觇也逐步做上尚书仪曹郎，后来丁觇又做了晋安王的侍读，随晋安王东下。
English: Ding Yao also gradually became Shang Shuxi's assistant, and later Ding Yao also became the attendant of King Jinan, and followed King Jinan to the east.

古文：古人云： 巢父、许由，让于天下；市道小人，争一钱之利。 
现代文：等到元帝被杀西台陷落，书信文件散失埋没，丁觇不久也死于扬州。以前那轻视丁觇的人，后来想要丁觇的一纸书法也是不可能了。
English: By the time Emperor Yuan was killed and West Taiwan fell, the correspondence documents were scattered and buried, and Ding Xi also died in Yangzhou. Those who despised Ding Xi in the past, later wanted a piece of Ding Xi's calligraphy was also impossible.

古文：亦已悬矣。齐文宣帝即位数年，便沈湎纵恣，略无纲纪；尚能委政尚书令杨遵彦，内外清谧，朝野晏如，各得其所，物无异议，终天保之朝。
现代文：侯景刚进入建康的时候，台门虽已闭守，而官员和普通百姓一片混乱，人人不得自保。太子左卫率羊侃坐镇东掖门，部署安排，一夜齐备，才能抗拒凶逆到一百多天。这时台城里有四万多人，王少朝官，不下一百，就是靠羊侃一个人才使大家安定，才能高下相差如此可见。齐文宣帝即位几年，就沉迷酒色、放纵恣肆，法纪全无。但还能把政事委托给尚书令杨遵彦，才使内外安定，朝野平静，大家各得其所，而无异议，整个天保一朝都如此。
English: When Hou Jing had just entered Jiankang, the gate of Taicheng was closed, but the officials and ordinary people were in chaos, and everyone could not protect themselves. Prince Zuo Wei led the sheep to sit on the east gate of the town, and the deployment arrangements were ready overnight, in order to resist the fierce rebellion for more than 100 days. At this time, there were more than 40,000 people in Taicheng, the king was a minor court official, and less than a hundred, it was only by relying on the sheep to keep everyone stable, and the ability to make the difference between high and low was so visible. Qiwen Xuandi was enthroned for several years, indulging in

古文：遵彦后为孝昭所戮，刑政于是衰矣。
现代文：杨遵彦后来被孝昭帝所杀，刑政于是衰弱。
English: Yang Zunhan was later killed by Emperor Xiaozhao, and the criminal justice system was weakened.

古文：斛律明月齐朝折冲之臣，无罪被诛，将士解体，周人始有吞齐之志，关中至今誉之。
现代文：斛律明月，是齐朝抵御敌人的功臣，却无罪被杀，将士人心离散，周人才有灭齐的想法，关中到现在还称颂这位斛律明月。
English: Zhou Rongmingyue was a hero of the Qi Dynasty who resisted the enemy, but he was killed without guilt. Zhou Rongmingyue had the idea of eliminating Qi, and Guanzhong still praises this Zhou Rongmingyue.

古文：此人用兵，岂止万夫之望而已哉！国之存亡，系其生死。
现代文：将军这个人的用兵，何止是万夫之望而已，而是他的生死，关系到国家的存亡命运。
English: The general's use of soldiers is nothing more than the hope of millions, but his life and death are related to the survival and fate of the country.

古文：张延隽之为晋州行台左丞，匡维主将，镇抚疆埸，储积器用，爱活黎民，隐若敌国矣。
现代文：张延隽任晋州行台左丞时，辅佐主将，镇守边疆，储藏物资，爱护百姓，其威严庄重使得晋州城仿佛可与一国相匹敌。
English: When Zhang Yanxuan was the left-hand man of the Jinzhou Campaign, he was the second-in-command, guarded the frontier, stored materials, and cared for the people. His majesty and solemnity made Jinzhou City seem to be comparable to a country.

古文：群小不得行志，同力迁之；既代之后，公私扰乱，周师一举，此镇先平。
现代文：那些卑鄙小人不能按自己的意愿行事，就联合起来排挤他。后来取代他的人，公私不分，将晋州治理得一片混乱，北周军队起兵伐齐，晋州城首先被攻破。
English: Those scumbags could not act according to their own wishes, so they banded together to oust him. The people who later replaced him, both public and private, brought chaos to the governance of Jinzhou. The Northern Zhou army launched an all-out attack, and Jinzhou City was the first to be breached.

古文：齐亡之迹，启于是矣。
现代文：北齐败亡的迹象，就是从这里开始的。
English: The signs of Beiqi's defeat began here.

