古文：周公旦者，周武王弟也。
现代文：周公旦，是周武王的弟弟。
English: Zhou Gongdan is the younger brother of King Zhouwu.

古文：自文王在时，旦为子孝，笃仁，异于群子。
现代文：文王还在世时，旦作为儿子非常孝顺，忠厚仁爱，胜过其他兄弟。
English: When King Wen was still alive, as his son, Dan was very dutiful, loyal and benevolent, surpassing other brothers.

古文：及武王即位，旦常辅翼武王，用事居多。
现代文：到武王即位，旦经常佐助辅弼武王，处理很多政务。
English: When King Wu ascended the throne, Dan often assisted and assisted King Wu, handling many government affairs.

古文：武王九年，东伐至盟津，周公辅行。
现代文：武王九年，亲自东征至盟津，周公随军辅助。
English: In the ninth year of King Wu, he personally went on an eastward expedition to Meitsu, assisted by Zhou Gong who accompanied the army.

古文：十一年，伐纣，至牧野，周公佐武王，作《牧誓》。
现代文：十一年，武王讨伐殷纣，军至牧野，周公佐助武王，发布了动员战斗的《牧誓》。
English: In the eleventh year, King Wu campaigned against Yin Xi, the army went to Makino, Zhou Gongsa assisted King Wu, and issued the "Pastoral Vow" to mobilize the battle.

古文：破殷，入商宫。
现代文：周军攻破殷都，进入殷王宫。
English: The Zhou army broke through the Yin capital and entered the Yin royal palace.

古文：已杀纣，周公把大钺，召公把小钺，以夹武王，衅社，告纣之罪于天，及殷民。
现代文：杀死殷纣以后，周公手持大钺，召公手持小钺，左右夹辅武王，举行衅社之礼，向上天与殷朝百姓昭布纣王的罪状。
English: After killing Yin Zhao, Zhou Gong, holding a large scepter, and Zhao Gong, holding a small scepter, clasped Wang Wu on his right and left, held a provocation ceremony, and announced the crime of Wang Zhao to the heavens and the people of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：释箕子之囚。
现代文：释放被囚禁的箕子。
English: Release the imprisoned cripple.

古文：封纣子武庚禄父，使管叔、蔡叔傅之，以续殷祀。
现代文：封纣王的儿子武庚禄父，命管叔、蔡叔辅助他，以承续殷之祭祀。
English: He was the father of King Fengxuan's son, King Wu Ganglu, and was assisted by his uncle, King Cai, to continue Yin's sacrificial rites.

古文：遍封功臣同姓戚者。
现代文：之后遍封功臣，以及周王室的亲族。
English: After that, all the meritorious vassals, as well as the relatives of the Zhou royal family, followed.

古文：封周公旦于少昊之虚曲阜，是为鲁公。
现代文：封周公于少昊故墟曲阜，称为鲁公。
English: Feng Zhou Gong is located in Shao Hao's former residence, Qufu, and is called Lu Gong.

古文：周公不就封，留佐武王。
现代文：但不让周公去自己的封国，而是留在朝延辅佐武王。
English: However, he did not allow Zhou Gong to go to his own fief, but remained in Asanobu to assist King Samu.

古文：武王克殷二年，天下未集，武王有疾，不豫，群臣惧，太公、召公乃缪卜。
现代文：武王战胜殷纣的第二年，天下统一之业尚未成功，武王患病，身体不适，群臣恐惧，太公和召公就想虔敬地占卜以明吉凶。
English: In the second year of King Wu's victory over Yin Xi, the cause of unifying the world had not yet succeeded. King Wu was ill, physically unwell, and the courtiers were afraid. The Grand Duke and the Grand Secretary wanted to reverently tell fortunes.

古文：周公曰： 未可以戚我先王。 
现代文：周公说： 不可以令我们先王忧虑悲伤。 
English: Zhou Gong said, "We must not make our forefather worried and sad.

古文：周公于是乃自以为质，设三坛，周公北面立，戴璧秉圭，告于太王、王季、文王。
现代文：周公于是以自身为质，设立三个祭坛，周公向北站立，捧璧持圭，向太王、王季、文王之灵祈祷。
English: Zhou Gong then set up three altars with himself as the pledge. Zhou Gong stood to the north, holding a cross, and prayed to the spirits of King Taowang, King Ji, and King Wen.

古文：史策祝曰： 惟尔元孙王发，勤劳阻疾。
现代文：命史官作册文祝告说： 你们的长孙周王发。辛劳成疾。
English: The life history official wrote a congratulatory message, saying: Your eldest grandson, Zhou Wangfa, has become ill from hard work.

古文：若尔三王是有负子之责于天，以旦代王发之身。
现代文：如果三位先王欠上天一个儿子，请以旦代替周王发。
English: If the three kings owe a son to heaven, please replace Zhou Wangfa with Dan.

古文：旦巧能，多材多艺，能事鬼神。
现代文：旦灵巧能干，多才多艺，能事奉鬼神。
English: Skillful and capable, versatile, able to serve ghosts and gods.

古文：乃王发不如旦多材多艺，不能事鬼神。
现代文：周王发不如旦多才多艺，不会事奉鬼神。
English: Zhou Wangfa is not as versatile as Tantan, and will not serve ghosts and gods.

古文：乃命于帝庭，敷佑四方，用能定汝子孙于下地，四方之民罔不敬畏。
现代文：但周王发受命于天庭，要普济天下，而且能使你们的子孙在人世安定地生活，四方人民无不敬畏他。
English: However, King Zhou was sent by Heaven to spread prosperity throughout the world and to enable your children and grandchildren to live a stable life on earth. People in all four directions fear him.

古文：无坠天之降葆命，我先王亦永有所依归。
现代文：他能使天赐宝运长守不失，我们的先王也能永享奉祀。
English: He is able to keep the heaven-given fortune intact, and our former king can also enjoy eternal worship.

古文：今我其即命于元龟，尔之许我，我以其璧与圭归，以俟尔命。
现代文：现在我通过占卜的大龟听命于先王，你们若能答应我的要求，我将圭璧献上，听从您的吩咐。
English: Now I am obeying the orders of the former king through the turtle of divination. If you can agree to my request, I will present Gui Bi and obey your orders.

古文：尔不许我，我乃屏璧与圭。 
现代文：你们若不答应，我就把圭璧收藏起来。 
English: If you don't agree, I'll put Gui Bi in my collection.

古文：周公已令史策告太王、王季、文王，欲代武王发，于是乃即三王而卜。
现代文：周公命史官作册文向太王、王季、文王祝告要用己身代替武王发之后，就到三王祭坛前占卜。
English: After Zhou Gongmei, the official historian who wrote the chronicle, told the great king, Wang Ji, and King Wen that he would use his own body to replace King Wu, he went to the altar of the three kings for divination.

古文：卜人皆曰吉，发书视之，信吉。
现代文：卜人都说吉利，翻开兆书一看，果然是吉。
English: All the people said that it was auspicious, and when they opened the omen book, they saw that it was indeed auspicious.

古文：周公喜，开籥，乃见书遇吉。
现代文：周公十分高兴，又开锁察看藏于柜中的占兆书，也是吉象。
English: Zhou Gong was very happy, and opened the lock to see the book of horoscopes hidden in the cabinet, which was also auspicious.

古文：周公入贺武王曰： 王其无害。
现代文：周公即进宫祝贺武王说： 您没有灾祸，我刚接受三位先王之命，让您只需考虑周室天下的长远之计，别无他虑。
English: Zhou Gong immediately entered the palace to congratulate King Wu and said: You have no disaster, I have just accepted the order of the three kings, so you only need to consider the long-term strategy of Zhou Dynasty, don't worry.

古文：旦新受命三王，维长终是图，兹道能念予一人。 周公藏其策金縢é匮中，诫守者勿敢言。
现代文：此所谓上天为天子考虑周到啊。 周公把册文收进金丝缠束的柜中密封，告诫守柜者不许泄露。
English: This so-called heaven for the son of heaven is thoughtful. Zhou Gong put the book into the gold wire-wrapped cabinet and sealed it, warning the keeper not to leak it.

古文：明日，武王有瘳。
现代文：第二天，武王霍然痊愈。
English: The next day, King Wu suddenly recovered.

古文：其后武王既崩，成王少，在强葆之中。
现代文：后来武王去世，成王年幼，尚在襁褓之中。
English: Later, King Wu passed away, and King Chengwang was still in his infancy.

古文：周公恐天下闻武王崩而畔，周公乃践阼代成王摄行政当国。
现代文：周公担心天下人听说武王去世而背叛朝廷，就登位替成王代为处理政务，主持国家大权。
English: Zhou Gong was worried that people around the world had heard that King Wu had died and betrayed the imperial court, so he ascended the throne in place of King Cheng to handle government affairs and preside over state power.

古文：管叔及其群弟流言于国曰： 周公将不利于成王。 
现代文：管叔和他的诸弟在国中散布流言说： 周公将对成王不利。 
English: Uncle Guan and his brothers spread a rumor in the country saying: Zhou Gong will be unfavorable to Cheng Wang.

古文：周公乃告太公望、召公奭曰： 我之所以弗辟而摄行政者，恐天下畔周，无以告我先王太王、王季、文王。
现代文：周公就告诉太公望、召公奭说： 我之所以不避嫌疑代理国政，是怕天下人背叛周室，没法向我们的先王太王、王季、文王交代。
English: Zhou Gong told Taigongwang and Zhaogonglu: "The reason why I do not avoid suspicion and act as a state official is that I am afraid that people around the world will betray the Zhou family, and I will not be able to tell our predecessors Wang Taigong, Wang Ji, and Wang Wen.

古文：三王之忧劳天下久矣，于今而后成。
现代文：三位先王为天下之业忧劳甚久，现在才刚成功。
English: The three forefathers have been working hard for the cause of the world for a long time, and now they have just succeeded.

古文：武王蚤终，成王少，将以成周，我所以为之若此。 
现代文：武王早逝，成王年幼，只是为了完成稳定周朝之大业，我才这样做。 
English: King Wu died early and King Cheng was young. I only did this in order to complete the great cause of stabilizing the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：于是卒相成王，而使其子伯禽代就封于鲁。
现代文：于是终究辅佐成王，而命其子伯禽代自己到鲁国受封。
English: As a result, he ended up assisting King Seongjo, and ordered his son, Ungyo, to go to Korea to receive the title in his place.

古文：周公戒伯禽曰： 我文王之子，武王之弟，成王之叔父，我于天下亦不贱矣。
现代文：周公告诫伯禽说： 我是文王之子、武王之弟，成王之叔父，在全天下人中我的地位不算低了。
English: I am the son of King Wen, the brother of King Wu, and the uncle of King Cheng, and my status among the people of the world is not low.

古文：然我一沐三捉发，一饭三吐哺，起以待士，犹恐失天下之贤人。
现代文：但我却洗一次头要三次挽起头发，吃一顿饭三次吐出正在咀嚼的食物，起来接待贤士，即便这样还怕错过天下的贤才。
English: However, I have to wash my hair once, comb my hair three times, eat a meal three times, spit out the food I'm chewing, and get up to receive sages. Even so, I'm afraid of missing out on the world's sages.

古文：子之鲁，慎无以国骄人。 
现代文：你到鲁国之后，千万不要因有国土而骄慢于人。 
English: When you come to Russia, don't be proud of your country.

古文：管、蔡、武庚等果率淮夷而反。
现代文：管叔、蔡叔、武庚等人果然率领淮夷发动叛乱。
English: Guan Xiu, Cai Xiu, Wu Geng and others led Huaiyi to launch a rebellion.

古文：周公乃奉成王命，兴师东伐，作《大诰》。
现代文：周公便奉成王之命，举兵东征，写了《大诰》。
English: Zhou Gong obeyed the order of King Cheng Rong, raised an army to go to the east, and wrote "The Great Calamity."

古文：遂诛管叔，杀武庚，放蔡叔。
现代文：于是诛斩管叔，杀掉武庚，流放蔡叔。
English: So he beheaded Uncle Guan, killed Wu Geng, and exiled Uncle Cai.

古文：收殷余民，以封康叔于卫。封微子于宋，以奉殷祀。
现代文：收伏殷之遗民，封康叔于卫，封微子于宋，让他奉行殷之祭祀。
English: He subdued the remnants of Yin's people, fencing Uncle Kang to Wei and fencing Weizi to Song, and made him follow Yin's sacrificial rites.

古文：宁淮夷东土，二年而毕定。
现代文：又用了两年时间，平定淮夷及东部其他地区。
English: It took another two years to pacify Huaiyi and other eastern regions.

古文：诸侯咸服宗周。
现代文：诸侯都宗顺周王朝。
English: All the lords were from the Shun Zhou Dynasty.

古文：天降祉福，唐叔得禾，异母同颖，献之成王，成王命唐叔以馈周公于东土，作《馈禾》。
现代文：天降福瑞，唐叔得到二茎共生一穗的粟禾，献给成王，成王命唐叔到东部周公军队驻地赠给周公，写了《馈禾》。
English: As a result of God's blessing, Uncle Tang received two stalks of corn and one ear of millet, which he dedicated to King Cheng. King Cheng ordered Uncle Tang to go to Zhou Gong's military base in the east to present it to Zhou Gong, and he wrote "Feeding the Corn."

古文：周公既受命禾，嘉天子命，作《嘉禾》。
现代文：周公接受后，感激赞颂天子之命，写了《嘉禾》。
English: After Zhou Gong accepted, he was grateful and praised the life of the heavenly son, and wrote "Jiahe."

古文：东土以集，周公归报成王，乃为诗贻王，命之曰《鸱鸮》。
现代文：东方安定后，周公回报成王，作诗赠给成王，其诗名为《鸱鸮》。
English: After the East was stabilized, Zhou Gong returned to Cheng Wang and presented him with a poem, which was called "The Dragonfly."

古文：王亦未敢训周公。
现代文：成王也未敢责备周公。
English: Cheng Wang did not dare to reproach Zhou Gong.

古文：成王七年二月乙未，王朝步自周，至丰，使太保召公先之雒相土。
现代文：成王七年二月乙未日，成王在镐京朝拜武王庙，然后步行至丰京朝拜文王庙，命太保召公先行到洛邑勘察地形。
English: On the 18th day of the 2nd month of the 7th year of King Cheng's reign, King Cheng paid homage to King Wu's temple in Shijing, and then walked to King Wen's temple in Tongjing. His father-in-law, Bao Zhao, went to Luoyang to survey the terrain.

古文：其三月，周公往营成周雒邑，卜居焉，曰吉，遂国之。
现代文：三月，周公去洛邑营造成周京城，并进行占卜，结果显示吉利，于是就以洛邑为国都。
English: In March, Zhou Gong went to Luoyang to build the capital city of Zhou, and performed divination. The result was auspicious, so Luoyang became the national capital.

古文：成王长，能听政。
现代文：成王长大，能够处理国事了。
English: Cheng Wang has grown up and is able to handle state affairs.

古文：于是周公乃还政于成王，成王临朝。
现代文：于是周公就把政权还给成王，成王临朝听政。
English: As a result, Zhou Gong returned the power to Cheng Wang, and Cheng Wang listened to the government.

古文：周公之代成王治，南面倍依以朝诸侯。
现代文：过去周公代替成王治天下时，面向南方，背对扆壁，接受诸侯朝拜。
English: In the past, when Zhou Gong replaced Cheng Wang to rule the world, he faced the south, turned his back on the Great Wall, and accepted the worship of the princes.

古文：及七年后，还政成王，北面就臣位，匔ō匔如畏然。
现代文：七年之后，还政于成王，周公面向北站在臣子之位上，仍谨慎恭敬如履薄冰。
English: Seven years later, Zhou was back in power in Chengwang, and Zhou Gong, facing north, stood in the position of a vassal, still cautious and respectful as if walking on thin ice.

古文：初，成王少时，病，周公乃自揃其蚤沉之河，以祝于神曰： 王少未有识，奸神命者乃旦也。 
现代文：当初，成王幼小时，有一次患病，周公就剪下自己的指甲沉入河中，向神祝告说： 王年幼没有主张，冒犯神命的是旦。 
English: At first, when Cheng Wang Rong was a child, he fell ill once, and Zhou Gong cut his fingernails and sank into the river. He congratulated God and said, "Wang Rong Rong has no idea, but it is wrong to offend God's order."

古文：亦藏其策于府。成王病有瘳。
现代文：也把那祝告册文藏于秘府，成王病果然痊愈。
English: He also kept the congratulatory book in a secret place, and his illness was cured.

古文：及成王用事，人或谮周公，周公奔楚。
现代文：到成王临朝后，有人说周公坏话，周公逃亡到楚国。
English: After Cheng Wang came to the imperial court, some people spoke ill of Zhou Gong, and Zhou Gong fled to Chu.

古文：成王发府，见周公祷书，乃泣，反周公。
现代文：成王打开秘府，发现周公当年的祈祷册文，感动得泪流满面，立即请回周公。
English: Cheng Wang opened the secret palace and found Zhou Gong's prayer book of that year. He was moved to tears and immediately asked Zhou Gong to come back.

古文：周公归，恐成王壮，治有所淫佚，乃作《吐司》，作《毋逸》。
现代文：周公归国后，怕成王年轻，在治国时有纵欲放荡之处，就写了《多士》《毋逸》。
English: After Zhou Gong returned to China, he was afraid that King Cheng Rong was young and indulged in debauchery when he ruled the country, so he wrote "Toshi" and "Needless to Say."

古文：《毋逸》称： 为人父母，为业至长久，子孙骄奢忘之，以亡其家，为人子可不慎乎！
现代文：《毋逸》中说： 做父母者，创业极其长久艰难，其子孙骄奢淫佚忘记了祖先的困苦，毁败了家业，为人子的，不可不谨慎啊！
English: "Needless to say," he said, "if you are a parent, starting a business is extremely long and difficult, and your children and grandchildren are arrogant and forget the hardships of their ancestors and ruin the family business. If you are a son, you must be cautious!

古文：故昔在殷王中宗，严恭敬畏天命，自度治民，震惧不敢荒宁，故中宗飨国七十五年。
现代文：因此过去殷王中宗，庄重恭敬地畏惧天命，治民时严以律己，竞竞业业不敢荒废事业自图逸乐，所以中宗拥有国家七十五年之久。
English: Therefore, in the past, King Zhongzong, solemnly and respectfully feared the fate of heaven, governed the people with strict self-discipline, and dared not waste the cause of seeking happiness, so Zhongzong owned the country for seventy-five years.

古文：其在高宗，久劳于外，为与小人。作其即位，乃有亮闇，三年不言。言乃欢，不敢荒宁，密靖殷国，至于小大无怨，故高宗飨国五十五年。
现代文：殷之高宗，久在民间劳碌，与小民共同生活，他即位后居丧，三年不言语，一旦说话就得到臣民拥戴，不敢荒淫逸乐，使殷国家安定，小民大臣均无怨言，所以高宗在位五十五年。
English: Gaozong of Yin worked for a long time among the common people and lived together with the common people. After he ascended the throne, he lived in mourning. He did not speak for three years. As soon as he spoke, he was embraced by his subjects. He did not dare to indulge in debauchery and pleasure. He made the Yin country stable. The ministers of the common people did not complain. Therefore, Gaozong reigned for fifty-five years.

古文：其在祖甲，不义惟王，久为小人于外，知小人之依，能保施小民，不侮鳏ā寡，故祖甲飨国三十三年。 
现代文：殷王祖甲，觉得自己并非长子，为王不合道义，因此长时间逃避于民间，深知人民需要，他安定国家、施惠于民，不悔慢鳏寡孤独之人，所以祖甲拥有国家三十三年。 
English: King Yin's ancestor Jia felt that he was not the eldest son and was not a moral king, so he evaded the people for a long time. He was well aware of the people's needs. He stabilized the country, benefited the people, and did not regret being a lonely man. Therefore, the ancestor Jia owned the country for 33 years.

古文：《吐司》称曰： 自汤至于帝乙，无不率祀明德，帝无不配天者。
现代文：《多士》说： 自汤至帝乙，殷代诸王无不遵循礼制去祭祀，勉力向德，都能上配天命。
English: "Toshi" said: From Tang to Emperor B, all the kings of the Yin Dynasty followed the etiquette to sacrifice, and tried their best to be virtuous, and were able to match the heavenly destiny.

古文：在今后嗣王纣，诞淫厥佚，不顾天及民之从也，其民皆可诛。 
现代文：后来到殷纣时，大为荒淫逸乐，不顾天意民心，万民都认为他该杀。 
English: Later, when he came to Yinzi, he was wild and debauched, disregarding the will of heaven and the hearts of the people, and everyone thought he should be killed.

古文： 文王日中昃不暇食，飨国五十年。 
现代文： 周文王每天日头偏西还顾不上吃饭，拥有国家五十年。 
English: Zhou Wenwang can't afford to eat every day with the sun setting in the west, and he has owned the country for fifty years.

古文：作此以诫成王。
现代文：周公写了这些用来告诫成王。
English: Zhou Gong wrote these to admonish Cheng Wang.

古文：成王在丰，天下已安，周之官政未次序。于是周公作《周官》，官别其宜，作《立政》，以便百姓。百姓说。
现代文：成王居于丰京，当时天下虽已安定，但周朝的官职制度尚未安排得当，于是周公写了《周官》，划定百官职责。写了《立政》，以利百姓，百姓欢悦。
English: Cheng Wang lived in Toyokyo. At that time, although the world was stable, the official position system of the Zhou Dynasty had not yet been properly arranged. Therefore, Zhou Gong wrote "Zhou Guan" to delineate the duties of a hundred officials. He wrote "Establishment of Government" to benefit the people and make the people happy.

古文：周公在丰，病，将没，曰： 必葬我成周，以明吾不敢离成王。 
现代文：周公在丰京患病，临终时说： 一定要把我埋葬在成周，以表明我不敢离开成王。 
English: Zhou Gong fell ill in Toyokyo and said on his deathbed: I must be buried in Cheng Zhou to show that I dare not leave Cheng Wang.

古文：周公既卒，成王亦让，葬周公于毕，从文王，以明予小子不敢臣周公也。
现代文：周公死后，成王也谦让，最后把周公葬于毕邑，伴随文王，来表示成王不敢以周公为臣。
English: After the death of Zhou Gong, Cheng Wang also humbly conceded, and finally buried Zhou Gong in Biyi, accompanied by King Wen, to show that Cheng Wang did not dare to take Zhou Gong as a vassal.

古文：周公卒后，秋未获，暴风雷，禾尽偃，大木尽拔。
现代文：周公去世以后，正当秋季尚未收获，突然间狂风大作，雷电交加，庄稼全部倒伏，大树被连根拔起。
English: After Zhou Gong's death, just as the autumn harvest was yet to be harvested, there was a sudden storm of wind, lightning and electricity, the crops were all overturned, and large trees were uprooted.

古文：周国大恐。
现代文：周国上下大为惊恐。
English: Zhou Guozhong was greatly alarmed.

古文：成王与大夫朝服以开金縢书，王乃得周公所自以为功代武王之说。
现代文：这时成王便和大夫们穿上礼服，打开金縢之书，便看到了当初周公愿意以自己为人质替武王而死的简书。
English: At this time, Cheng Wang and the doctors put on ceremonial robes, opened the book of the Golden Kite, and saw the simple book in which Zhou Gong was willing to take himself as a hostage to die for King Wu.

古文：二公及王乃问史百执事，史百执事曰： 信有，昔周公命我勿敢言。 
现代文：太公、召公和成王向史官和其他众官员求证，他们回答说： 确有此事，当时周公命令我们不许说出去。 
English: Taigong, Zhao Gong and Chengwang asked the historian and other officials for proof, and they replied: "It is true. At that time, Zhou Gong ordered us not to speak out.

古文：成王执书以泣，曰： 自今后其无缪卜乎！
现代文：成王手持简书哭道： 从今以后恐怕再也没有这样虔诚的占卜了。
English: Cheng Wang, holding a simple book, cried: From now on, I'm afraid there will never be such a pious divination.

古文：昔周公勤劳王家，惟予幼人弗及知。
现代文：从前周公为王室辛劳，我这个年幼的人还不知道。
English: As a young man, I didn't know about the royal drudgery of the previous week.

古文：今天动威以彰周公之德，惟朕小子其迎，我国家礼亦宜之。 
现代文：如今上天显示威严，以此表彰周公的德行，我要亲自去迎接神灵，按我国的礼仪也应该这样做。 
English: Now that heaven has shown its majesty, in recognition of Zhou Gong's virtue, I want to greet the gods in person, according to our country's etiquette should also do so.

古文：王出郊，天乃雨，反风，禾尽起。
现代文：于是，成王出城在城郊举行祭天之礼，天立即下起雨来，风向也倒转了，倒伏的庄稼又都直立起来。
English: As a result, Cheng Wang went out of the city to hold a festival on the outskirts of the city. The sky immediately rained, the wind direction reversed, and the fallen crops stood upright.

古文：二公命国人，凡大木所偃，尽起而筑之。
现代文：太公、召公让人们扶起所有被刮倒的大树，用土将树根培土夯实。
English: Taigong and Zhao Gong asked people to lift up all the big trees that had been knocked down and use the soil to strengthen the roots of the trees.

古文：岁则大孰。
现代文：这一年全国都获得了大丰收。
English: The whole country had a bumper harvest that year.

古文：于是成王乃命鲁得郊祭文王。
现代文：于是成王命令鲁国国君可以举行郊祭并祭祀文王。
English: As a result, King Seongwang ordered the King of Lu to hold a suburb festival and worship King Mun.

古文：鲁有天子礼乐者，以褒周公之德也。
现代文：鲁国拥有天子的礼乐，就是用来褒奖周公的德行的。
English: Lu country has the music of the heavenly son, which is used to praise Zhou Gong's virtue.

古文：周公卒，子伯禽固已前受封，是为鲁公。
现代文：周公去世时，他的儿子伯禽早在以前接受封国，就是鲁公。
English: At the time of Zhou Gong's death, his son, Baoji, had already received the title of the country, that is, Lu Gong.

古文：鲁公伯禽之初受封之鲁，三年而后报政周公。
现代文：鲁公伯禽当初受封至鲁，三年以后才向周公汇报施政情况。
English: Lu Gong's uncle was originally given the title of Lu, and three years later he reported to Zhou Gong on the state of governance.

古文：周公曰： 何迟也？ 
现代文：周公说： 为何如此迟晚？ 
English: Zhou Gong said: Why is it so late?

古文：伯禽曰： 变其俗，革其礼，丧三年然后除之，故迟。 
现代文：伯禽说： 变其风俗，改其礼仪，要等服丧三年除服之后才能看到效果，因此迟了。 
English: "It is too late to change their customs and etiquette, because it takes three years after the funeral to see the effects," he said.

古文：太公亦封于齐，五月而报政周公。
现代文：太公受封于齐国，五个月后就向周公汇报施政情况。
English: Taigong was enthroned in Qi Province, and five months later he reported to Zhou Gong on the state of governance.

古文：周公曰： 何疾也？ 
现代文：周公说： 为何如此迅速？ 
English: Zhou Gong said: Why so quickly?

古文：曰： 吾简其君臣礼，从其俗为也。 
现代文：太公说： 我简化其君臣之间的仪节，一切从其风俗去做。 
English: The grand duke said: I will simplify the ceremonies between his lords and vassals, and do everything according to his customs.

古文：及后闻伯禽报政迟，乃叹曰： 呜呼，鲁后世其北面事齐矣！夫政不简不易，民不有近；平易近民，民必归之。 
现代文：等后来太公听说伯禽汇报政情很迟，叹息说： 唉！鲁国后代将要为齐国之臣了，为政不简约易行，人民就不会亲近；政令平易近民，百姓必然归附。 
English: Later, when the grand duke heard that the bird was late in reporting the political situation, he sighed and said: Alas! The descendants of Lu will be the subjects of Qi. If the government is not simple and easy to carry out, the people will not be close; if the government order is easy to approach, the people will inevitably adhere to it.

古文：伯禽即位之后，有管、蔡等反也，淮夷、徐戎亦并兴反。
现代文：伯禽即位之后，有管、蔡等造反之事，淮夷、徐戎也一起兴兵造反。
English: After the enthronement of the Emperor, there were rebellions such as Guan and Cai, and Huaiyi and Xu Rong also rebelled together.

古文：于是伯禽率师伐之于肸ì，作《肸誓》，曰： 陈尔甲胄，无敢不善。
现代文：于是伯禽率军至肸邑讨伐之，写了《肸誓》，说： 准备你们的战甲头盔，必须良好。
English: As a result, Bo Jiao led the army to fight in Zouyi and wrote "Oath," saying: "Prepare your battle armor helmet, it must be good.

古文：无敢伤牿ù。
现代文：不许毁坏牛栏马圈。
English: Do not destroy the corrals and stables.

古文：马牛其风，臣妾逋逃，勿敢越逐，敬复之。
现代文：马牛走失，奴隶逃跑，军士不得擅离职守去追捕，他人之马牛奴隶跑到自己处要归还。
English: A horse-cow strays, a slave runs away, a sergeant is not allowed to leave his post without permission to pursue it, and a horse-cow slave of another runs to his place to return it.

古文：无敢寇攘，逾墙垣。
现代文：不许劫略侵扰，不许入户盗窃。
English: Do not rob or intrude, do not enter the house to steal.

古文：鲁人三郊三隧，歭尔刍茭、糗ǔ粮、桢干，无敢不逮。
现代文：鲁国西、南、北三方近郊远郊之人，备办粮草桢幹，不许缺少。
English: People in the western, southern and northern parts of the country, near the suburbs and in the far suburbs, should prepare grain and grass trunks and should not be short of them.

古文：我甲戌筑而征徐戎，无敢不及，有大刑。 
现代文：甲戌日我军修筑工事征伐徐戎，不许届时不至，否则处以极刑。 
English: Armor Japan, our army is building a construction project to conquer Xu Rong, do not miss it, otherwise you will be punished with capital punishment.

古文：作此《肸誓》，遂平徐戎，定鲁。
现代文：发布《肸誓》后，就讨平徐戎，安定了鲁国。
English: After issuing the "Oath," he leveled Xu Rong and stabilized Lu.

古文：鲁公伯禽卒，子考公酋立。
现代文：鲁公伯禽去世以后，其子考公酋继位。
English: After the death of Lu Gong's uncle, his son Gao Gongxi succeeded to the throne.

古文：考公四年卒，立弟熙，是谓炀公。
现代文：考公四年后去世，他的弟弟熙继位，就是炀公。
English: He died four years after the imperial examination, and his younger brother, Xi, succeeded to the throne.

古文：炀公筑茅阙门。
现代文：炀公修建了茅阙门。
English: Zeng Gong built the thatched-roof gate.

古文：六年卒，子幽公宰立。
现代文：在位六年后炀公去世，他的儿子幽公宰继位。
English: Six years after his enthronement, Gong Gong died and was succeeded by his son, Yu Gongzai.

古文：幽公十四年，幽公弟杀幽公而自立，是为魏公。
现代文：幽公十四年，他的弟弟杀死了幽公自立为君，就是魏公。
English: In the fourteenth year of Yugong's reign, his younger brother killed Yugong and declared himself ruler, that is, Wei Gong.

古文：魏公五十年卒，子厉公擢立。
现代文：魏公在位五十年后去世，他的儿子厉公擢继位。
English: Wei Gong died after reigning for 50 years and was succeeded by his son, Li Gongjun.

古文：厉公三十七年卒，鲁人立其弟具，是为献公。
现代文：厉公在位三十七年后去世，鲁人立他的弟弟具为国君，就是献公。
English: Liguo died after thirty-seven years on the throne, and Lu Ren appointed his younger brother Gu as the sovereign, which was a dedication.

古文：献公三十二年卒，子真公濞立。
现代文：献公在位三十二年去世，他的儿子真公濞继位。
English: He died in the thirty-second year of his reign, and his son, Zhen Gongjun, succeeded to the throne.

古文：真公十四年，周厉王无道，出奔彘，共和行政。
现代文：真公十四年，周厉王为政无道，出逃于彘邑，周公、召公共同执政。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenggong's reign, King Zhou Li, who had no interest in politics, fled to Jinyi, and Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong jointly ruled the country.

古文：二十九年，周宣王即位。
现代文：二十九年，周宣王即位。
English: In the 29th year, King Zhou Xuan ascended the throne.

古文：三十年，真公卒，弟敖立，是为武公。
现代文：三十年，真公去世，他的弟弟敖继位，就是武公。
English: Thirty years later, Zhen Gong died and was succeeded by his brother Zou Wu Gong.

古文：武公九年春，武公与长子括，少子戏，西朝周宣王。
现代文：武公九年春，武公和他的长子括、小儿子戏，西行朝拜周宣王。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of King Wukong's reign, King Wukong and his eldest son Guan and youngest son He, went west to pay homage to King Zhou Xuan.

古文：宣王爱戏，欲立戏为鲁太子。
现代文：宣王喜欢戏，想立戏为鲁国太子。
English: Emperor Xuanzong liked theater and wanted to establish a theater for the prince of the State of Lu.

古文：周之樊仲山父谏宣王曰： 废长立少，不顺；不顺，必犯王命；犯王命，必诛之：故出令不可不顺也。
现代文：周国的大夫樊仲山甫劝谏宣王说： 废弃长子而立少子，不符合于礼制；不符合礼制，必然触犯先王之命；触犯先王之命，就一定要诛杀他：所以发令不可违背礼制。
English: Zhou's doctor, Zhaozhong Shanfu, advised Zhen Xuan Wang: Abandoning the eldest son and raising a younger son does not conform to the etiquette; if it does not conform to the etiquette, it will inevitably violate the former king's order; if it violates the former king's order, it must be killed. Therefore, the order must not violate the etiquette.

古文：令之不行，政之不立；行而不顺，民将弃上。
现代文：命令难以实行，政令就没有权威；命令被实行而又违背礼制，百姓就会背弃君王。
English: If an order is difficult to carry out, the decree has no authority; if an order is carried out and violates etiquette, the people will turn their backs on the monarch.

古文：夫下事上，少事长，所以为顺。
现代文：而下级服务于上级，年轻者服务于年长者，这才符合礼制。
English: The lower ranks serve the higher ranks, and the younger ones serve the older ones, which is in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：今天子建诸侯，立其少，是教民逆也。
现代文：现在天子您立诸侯之继承人，而立其少子，是教百姓做事不符合制度法令。
English: Now that you, the son of heaven, have set up the successor of the princes, and set up his younger son, it is to teach the people to do things that do not conform to the system and laws.

古文：若鲁从之，诸侯效之，王命将有所壅；若弗从而诛之，是自诛王命也。
现代文：如果鲁国遵从您的命令，其他诸侯也效仿而行，先王之命必然阻塞难行；如果鲁国不遵从您废长立少的命令，您必要诛伐鲁国，就相当于您自己违背了先王的训命。
English: If the Lu nation obeys your order, and other lords follow suit, the former king's order will inevitably be blocked and difficult to carry out; if the Lu nation does not obey your order to abolish the chief and establish a lesser one, and you have to invade the Lu nation, it is equivalent to you yourself violating the former king's order.

古文：诛之亦失，不诛亦失，王其图之。 
现代文：那时您诛伐鲁国是错误，不诛伐也是错误，请您慎重考虑。 
English: At that time, it was a mistake for you to invade Lu, and it was also a mistake not to invade. Please consider this carefully.

古文：宣王弗听，卒立戏为鲁太子。
现代文：宣王不听，最终还是立戏为鲁太子。
English: Emperor Xuanwang did not listen, but eventually made a play for the crown prince.

古文：夏，武公归而卒，戏立，是为懿公。
现代文：夏天，武公回鲁国后去世，戏继位，就是懿公。
English: In the summer, after Wu Gong returned to Lu, he died, and the succession of the play was Zang Gong.

古文：懿公九年，懿公兄括之子伯御与鲁人攻弑懿公，而立伯御为君。
现代文：懿公九年，懿公之兄括的儿子伯御和鲁国人攻杀懿公，立起伯御为鲁相。
English: In the ninth year of King Min, King Min's elder brother's son, King Bo, and the people of Lu attacked and killed King Min, setting up King Bo as the ruler of Lu.

古文：伯御即位十一年，周宣王伐鲁，杀其君伯御，而问鲁公子能道顺诸侯者，以为鲁后。
现代文：伯御在位十一年，周宣王伐鲁，杀死其君伯御，而询问鲁国公子中谁能启发训导诸侯，让他做鲁国嗣君。
English: In the eleventh year of his uncle's reign, King Zhou Xuan of Lu killed his uncle, and asked who among the princes of Lu could inspire and guide the princes, and make him the heir of Lu.

古文：樊穆仲曰： 鲁懿公弟称，肃恭明神，敬事耆老；赋事行刑，必问于遗训而咨于固实；不干所问，不犯所咨。 
现代文：樊穆仲说： 鲁懿公之弟称，庄重恭谨敬事神灵，敬重长者；处理事务执行法规时，必定咨询先王遗训和正确经验，不干犯先王遗训，不抵触正确经验。 
English: Zou Muzhong said: Lu Yongkong's younger brother said, solemnly respect and honor the gods, respect the elders; when dealing with the implementation of laws and regulations, we must consult the last king's teachings and correct experience, do not violate the last king's teachings, and do not contradict the correct experience.

古文：宣王曰： 然，能训治其民矣。 
现代文：宣王说： 好，这样就能训导治理其民众了。 
English: The king said, "Very well, then you will be able to instruct and govern your people."

古文：乃立称于夷宫，是为孝公。
现代文：于是在夷宫立称为鲁君，就是孝公。
English: Therefore, he was called Rukun, which means filial piety.

古文：自是后，诸侯多畔王命。
现代文：此后，诸侯多有违抗王命的。
English: After that, many lords disobeyed the king's order.

古文：孝公二十五年，诸侯畔周，犬戎杀幽王。
现代文：孝公二十五年，诸侯背叛周室，犬戎人杀死幽王。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaogong, the princes betrayed the Zhou family, and the dogs killed King Youwang.

古文：秦始列为诸侯。
现代文：秦开始列为诸侯。
English: Qin began to be listed as a vassal.

古文：二十七年，孝公卒，子弗湟立，是为惠公。
现代文：二十七年，孝公去世，其子弗湟继位，就是惠公。
English: In the 27th year, Prince Takakuni died, and his son Fusako succeeded to the throne, that is, Prince Megumi.

古文：惠公三十年，晋人弑其君昭侯。
现代文：惠公三十年，晋国人杀死了他们的国君昭侯。
English: Thirty years after Emperor Huigong's death, the people of Jin killed their sovereign, Prince Zhaohou.

古文：四十五年，晋人又弑其君孝侯。
现代文：四十五年，晋国人又杀死了他们的国君孝侯。
English: Forty-five years later, the people of Jin also killed their sovereign, Prince Takaharu.

古文：四十六年，惠公卒，长庶子息摄当国，行君事，是为隐公。
现代文：四十六年，惠公去世，长庶子息代理政务，执掌君权，就是隐公。
English: In 46, Emperor Huigong died, and his eldest illegitimate son took over the government affairs and held the power of the monarchy, that is, Emperor Huigong.

古文：初，惠公适夫人无子，公贱妾声子生子息。
现代文：当初，惠公正妻无子，其贱妾声子生儿子息。
English: At first, Hui Zhengyi's wife had no children, but his concubine, Shou Zi, gave birth to a son.

古文：息长，为娶于宋。
现代文：息长大后，惠公为息娶宋国女。
English: After he grew up, Huigong married a woman from the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋女至而好，惠公夺而自妻之。
现代文：宋女来到鲁国，惠公看她美丽就夺为自己的妻子。
English: When Song Nian came to the State of Lu, Huigong saw her beauty and took her as his wife.

古文：生子允。
现代文：生下儿子允。
English: She gave birth to a son, Jun.

古文：登宋女为夫人，以允为太子。
现代文：惠公将宋女升为正妻，立允为太子。
English: Huigong promoted Song Nien as his lawful wife, and Liyun as the crown prince.

古文：及惠公卒，为允少故，鲁人共令息摄政，不言即位。
现代文：到惠公死时，因为允太幼小，鲁人共同让息代理国政，不叫作即位。
English: At the time of Huigong's death, because Yun was too young, the Lu people jointly delegated the state affairs, which was not called enthronement.

古文：隐公五年，观渔于棠。
现代文：隐公五年，在棠地观看捕鱼。
English: In the fifth year of his retirement, he watched the fisherman fishing in the meadow.

古文：八年，与郑易天子之太山之邑祊及许田，君子讥之。
现代文：八年，与郑国交换天子所赐之封邑太山的枋和许田，君子讥贬这件事。
English: In the eighth year, he exchanged with Zheng Guo the fief of Taishan and Xu Tian, which was given by the Son of Heaven. The gentleman scoffed at this matter.

古文：十一年冬，公子挥谄谓隐公曰： 百姓便君，君其遂立。
现代文：十一年冬，公子挥向隐公进谗言说： 百姓认为您当国君于民有利，您就不要代理而正式做国君吧。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, the prince waved to the retired emperor and said: The people think that it is beneficial for the people to have you as the sovereign, so don't act as a proxy, but officially become the sovereign.

古文：吾请为君杀子允，君以我为相。 
现代文：我请求您杀掉子允，然后您任命我为国相。 
English: I ask you to kill Ziyong, and then you appoint me as minister of state.

古文：隐公曰： 有先君命。
现代文：隐公说： 先君有命在前。
English: The steward said, "You have your life ahead of you.

古文：吾为允少，故摄代。
现代文：我是因为允幼小，所以代理国政。
English: I am the acting head of state because of my young age.

古文：今允长矣，吾方营菟ù裘之地而老焉，以授子允政。 
现代文：现在允已长大，我正营造菟裘这个地方准备养老，再把国政交给子允。 
English: Now that Yun has grown up, I am building this place to prepare for old age, and then I will hand over the national affairs to Zi Yun.

古文：挥惧子允闻而反诛之，乃反谮隐公于子允曰： 隐公欲遂立，去子，子其图之。
现代文：公子挥害怕子允听到自己的话而杀他，反而向子允说隐公的坏话诬陷说： 隐公想正式做国君，除掉你，你要尽早做好打算。
English: The prince was afraid that Ziyong would hear his words and kill him. Instead, he told Ziyong bad things about the prince and framed him, saying, "The prince wants to officially become the king. If you get rid of him, you should make a plan as soon as possible."

古文：请为子杀隐公。 
现代文：请允许我为你杀死隐公。 
English: Allow me to kill your father-in-law for you.

古文：子允许诺。
现代文：子允答应了。
English: Ziyong agreed.

古文：十一月，隐公祭钟巫，齐于社圃，馆于蒍氏。
现代文：十一月，隐公将要祭祀钟巫之神，在社圃斋戒，住在氏家中。
English: In November, the hermit will offer a sacrifice to the god of witchcraft, fast in the community garden, and live in the family home.

古文：挥使人弑隐公于蒍氏，而立子允为君，是为桓公。
现代文：公子挥派人在蒍氏家杀死隐公，而立子允为鲁君，就是桓公。
English: Nobuko Wako sent someone to kill Inko at the Shinshi family, and Tatsuko Yoshinobu became Rukun, that is, Kanko.

古文：桓公元年，郑以璧易天子之许田。
现代文：桓公元年，郑国用玉璧换取天子赐给鲁的封邑许田。
English: In the year of Kuan, Zheng Guo used jade gems in exchange for the fief of Xu Tian, which was given to Lu by the Son of Heaven.

古文：二年，以宋之赂鼎入于太庙，君子讥之。
现代文：二年，鲁君命把宋国赂送的鼎放入太庙，君子讥贬此事。
English: In the second year, Lu Jun ordered to put the tripod bribed by Song into the Great Temple, and the gentleman scorned the matter.

古文：三年，使挥迎妇于齐为夫人。
现代文：三年，派公子挥到齐国接娶齐女为桓公夫人。
English: Three years later, he sent his son to Qi Province to marry Qi's daughter, the wife of Prince Kan.

古文：六年，夫人生子，与桓公同日，故名曰同。
现代文：六年，夫人生下一子，其生日与桓公相同，所以起名叫 同 。
English: Six years later, his wife gave birth to a son, whose birthday was the same as Huan's, so he was named Tong.

古文：同长，为太子。
现代文：同长大，为太子。
English: They grew up together and became princes.

古文：十六年，会于曹，伐郑，入厉公。
现代文：十六年，桓公与诸侯在曹国盟会，讨伐郑国，支持郑厉公回国执政。
English: Sixteen years later, Prince Huan and the princes gathered at the Cao League to fight against Zheng and support Zheng Liguo's return to power.

古文：十八年春，公将有行，遂与夫人如齐。
现代文：十八年春，桓公准备外出，与夫人一同去齐国。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Prince Kan was preparing to go out, and he and his wife went to Qi Province.

古文：申繻谏止，公不听，遂如齐。
现代文：申繻劝谏阻拦，桓公不听，于是去了齐国。
English: Huan Gong did not listen to his advice and went to Qi Province.

古文：齐襄公通桓公夫人。
现代文：齐襄公与桓公夫人私通。
English: Prince Qizang had an affair with Lady Kuan.

古文：公怒夫人，夫人以告齐侯。
现代文：桓公知道了怒责夫人，夫人把桓公责骂之事告诉了齐襄公。
English: Prince Huan learned of his wife's scolding, and his wife told Prince Qixiang about Huan's scolding.

古文：夏四月丙子，齐襄公飨公，公醉，使公子彭生抱鲁桓公，因命彭生折其胁，公死于车。
现代文：夏四月丙子日，齐襄公宴请桓公，桓公酒醉后，齐襄公命公子彭生抱住桓公，又命彭生折断桓公肋骨，桓公死于车中。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Qixiang held a public banquet for Huan Gong. After Huan Gong got drunk, Qixiang ordered his son Peng Sheng to hold Huan Gong, and ordered Peng Sheng to break Huan Gong's ribs. Huan Gong died in the car.

古文：鲁人告于齐曰： 寡君畏君之威，不敢宁居，来修好礼。
现代文：鲁人告于齐人说： 我们国君畏敬您的威严，不敢安居，到齐国修两国友睦之礼。
English: The Lu people told the Qi people: "Our sovereign reveres your majesty and dares not live in peace. He has come to Qi to mend the friendship between the two countries.

古文：礼成而不反，无所归咎，请得彭生以除丑于诸侯。 
现代文：礼成而人未归，罪责无法追究，只要求得到彭生以在诸侯面前洗掉丑闻。 
English: Li Cheng Rong did not return, and the culpability could not be investigated. He only asked for Peng Sheng to wash away the scandal in front of the princes.

古文：齐人杀彭生以说鲁。
现代文：齐人杀死彭生以向鲁解释。
English: Qi killed Peng Sheng to explain to Lu.

古文：立太子同，是为庄公。
现代文：鲁国人立太子同为君，就是庄公。
English: The people of Lu established the crown prince together with Zhuang, that is, Zhuang.

古文：庄公母夫人因留齐，不敢归鲁。
现代文：庄公的母亲，也就是鲁桓公的夫人因此留在齐国，不敢回到鲁国。
English: Zhuang Gong's mother, Lu Huan Gong's wife, therefore stayed in Qi and did not dare to return to Lu.

古文：庄公五年冬，伐卫，内卫惠公。
现代文：庄公五年冬，伐卫，武力支持卫惠公回国执政。
English: In the winter of Zhuanggong's fifth year, Wei Huigong, supported by force, returned to power.

古文：八年，齐公子纠来奔。
现代文：八年冬，齐国公子纠逃亡来鲁国。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, the prince of Qi fled to Lu.

古文：九年，鲁欲内子纠于齐，后桓公，桓公发兵击鲁，鲁急，杀子纠。召忽死。
现代文：九年，鲁国想护送子纠返齐国为君，但落后于齐桓公，齐桓公发兵攻鲁，鲁国危急，只能杀了子纠，召忽殉死。
English: In the 9th year, Lu wanted to escort Ziguang back to Qi for the king, but he lagged behind Qi Kuan. Qi Kuan sent an army to attack Lu, and Lu was in a critical situation. He could only kill Ziguang and summon him to martyrdom.

古文：齐告鲁生致管仲。
现代文：齐人告知鲁国一定要活捉管仲并把他送到齐国。
English: Qi people told Lu that they must capture Guanzhong alive and send him to Qi.

古文：鲁人施伯曰： 齐欲得管仲，非杀之也，将用之，用之则为鲁患。
现代文：鲁人施伯说： 齐国想得到管仲，并非想杀他，而是将要任用他，如果管仲被重用，必为鲁之大患。
English: Shi Bo, a Lu person, said, "Qi Guo wanted to get Guanzhong, not to kill him, but to appoint him. If Guanzhong is re-appointed, it will be a great disaster for Lu."

古文：不如杀，以其尸与之。 
现代文：不如杀死管仲，把他尸体给齐国。 
English: It would be better to kill Guanzhong and give his corpse to Qi Guo.

古文：庄公不听，遂囚管仲与齐。
现代文：庄公不听，把管仲押解到齐。
English: Zhuang Gong did not listen, and ordered the middlemen to be disbanded.

古文：齐人相管仲。
现代文：齐人用管仲为相。
English: Qi people use pipes to communicate with each other.

古文：十三年，鲁庄公与曹沬会齐桓公于柯，曹沬劫齐桓公，求鲁侵地，已盟而释桓公。
现代文：十三年，鲁庄公和大夫曹沫在柯地与齐桓公盟会，曹沫武力劫持齐桓公，索要鲁被齐侵占的土地，盟誓后释放桓公。
English: In the thirteenth year, Lu Zhuang and his wife Cao Miao held an alliance with Qi Huan in Ke Di. Cao Miao abducted Qi Huan by force, demanded the land occupied by Qi from Lu, and swore to release Huan.

古文：桓公欲背约，管仲谏，卒归鲁侵地。
现代文：桓公想毁约，管仲谏止，终于归还给鲁国被侵之地。
English: Kanko wanted to break the treaty, stop the interference, and finally return to the invaded land of Lu.

古文：十五年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：十五年，齐桓公开始称霸于诸侯。
English: In the fifteenth year, Prince Qi Kuan began to dominate the provinces.

古文：二十三年，庄公如齐观社。
现代文：二十三年，庄公到齐国去观看社祭。
English: In 233, Zhuang Gong went to Qi Province to watch the social festival.

古文：三十二年，初，庄公筑台临党氏，见孟女，说而爱之，许立为夫人，割臂以盟。
现代文：三十二年，当初，庄公修筑一台正好俯临党氏之家，见到了党氏的女儿孟任，十分喜爱，答应立她为夫人，割破胳膊订下盟誓。
English: In thirty-two years, at the beginning, Zhuang Gong built a carriage house right next to the house of the Party clan. He met the daughter of the Party clan, Meng Ren, and was very fond of her. He promised to make her his wife, cut his arm and swore an oath.

古文：孟女生子斑。
现代文：后来孟女生下儿子斑。
English: Later, Ms. Meng gave birth to a son.

古文：斑长，说梁氏女，往观。
现代文：斑长大后，喜爱梁氏之女，前去她家看她。
English: After he grew up, he took a liking to Mr. Liang's daughter and went to her house to see her.

古文：圉人荦自墙外与梁氏女戏。
现代文：看见养马官荦在墙外和梁氏的女儿嬉戏。
English: He saw a horse-breeding official playing with Mr. Liang's daughter outside the wall.

古文：斑怒，鞭荦ò。
现代文：斑大怒，鞭打荦。
English: He flew into a rage and lashed out.

古文：庄公闻之，曰： 荦有力焉，遂杀之，是未可鞭而置也。 
现代文：庄公听说此事，说： 荦非常有力气，应杀掉他，这人不能打完后就放了。 
English: When Zhuang Gong heard about this, he said, "He is very powerful. You should kill him. This man can't fight, so let him go."

古文：斑未得杀。
现代文：斑未来得及杀荦。
English: Spots won't have time to kill the maggots.

古文：会庄公有疾。
现代文：这是正赶上庄公生病。
English: This was just in time for Zhuang Gong to fall ill.

古文：庄公有三弟，长曰庆父，次曰叔牙，次曰季友。
现代文：庄公有三个弟弟，长名庆父，次曰叔牙，幼名季友。
English: Zhuangong has three younger brothers, his first name is Qingfu, his second name is Shuya, and his youngest name is Ji You.

古文：庄公取齐女为夫人曰哀姜。
现代文：庄公娶齐国的女子为夫人，名哀姜。
English: Zhuang Gong married a woman from Qi Province, whose name was Rui Jiang.

古文：哀姜无子。哀姜娣曰叔姜，生子开。
现代文：哀姜没有儿子，哀姜的妹妹名叔姜，她为庄公生下儿子开。
English: Ailingang did not have a son. Ailingang's younger sister, named Uncle Jiang, gave birth to a son for Zhuanggong.

古文：庄公无适嗣，爱孟女，欲立其子斑。
现代文：庄公正夫人无子，因喜爱孟女，想立其子斑为太子。
English: Lady Zhuang Jiaochuan had no son, but because of her love for Meng Niang, she wanted to make her son Zi Bao the crown prince.

古文：庄公病，而问嗣于弟叔牙。
现代文：庄公病重的时候，向他的弟弟叔牙询问谁可继承君位。
English: When Zhuang Gong was gravely ill, he asked his younger brother, Shu Ya, who should inherit the throne.

古文：叔牙曰： 一继一及，鲁之常也。
现代文：叔牙说： 父死子继，兄死弟及，这是鲁国常规。
English: Uncle Fang said: "Father, son, brother, step-son, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother, step-brother.

古文：庆父在，可为嗣，君何忧？ 
现代文：现有庆父，可为嗣君，您担忧什么？ 
English: What are you worried about, that your current father-in-law may become your heir?

古文：庄公患叔牙欲立庆父，退而问季友。
现代文：庄公担心叔牙想立庆父，无人时又问季友。
English: Zhuang Gong was worried that his uncle wanted to appoint Qingfu, and when there was no one, he asked Ji You.

古文：季友曰： 请以死立斑也。 
现代文：季友说： 请让我用我的生命担保来拥立斑为国君。 
English: Ji You said, "Please let me use my life insurance to support you to become the king."

古文：庄公曰： 曩者叔牙欲立庆父，奈何？ 
现代文：庄公说： 刚才叔牙想立庆父，我该怎么办？ 
English: Zhuang Gong said, "Just now, Uncle Fang wanted to establish Qingfu, what should I do?

古文：季友以庄公命命牙待于针巫氏，使针季劫饮叔牙以鸩，曰： 饮此则有后奉祀；不然，死且无后。 
现代文：季友就以庄公名义命令叔牙在针巫氏家中待命，派针季强迫叔牙喝毒酒，向叔牙说： 你喝了这个，可以不杀你的后人；不然，你死了，你的后人也将被杀。 
English: Ji You, in the name of Zhuang Gong, ordered Uncle Tooth to be on standby at Needle Witch's home, and sent Needle Tooth to force Uncle Tooth to drink poisoned wine, saying to Uncle Tooth: "If you drink this, you can avoid killing your descendants; otherwise, if you die, your descendants will also be killed."

古文：牙遂饮鸩而死，鲁立其子为叔孙氏。
现代文：叔牙于是饮毒酒而死，鲁国立叔牙之子为叔孙氏。
English: As a result, Uncle Tooth drank poisoned wine and died, and the son of Uncle Tooth of the State of Lu became Uncle Sun.

古文：八月癸亥，庄公卒，季友竟立子斑为君，如庄公命。
现代文：八月癸亥日，庄公去世，季友终于立子斑为君，遵照庄公的命令行事。
English: In August, on the day of the Year of the Boar, Zhuangong died, and Ji You finally became his son-in-law, acting in accordance with Zhuangong's orders.

古文：侍丧，舍于党氏。
现代文：子斑有丧在身，住于党氏家。
English: Zi Maku is still alive and lives in the family of the Dang clan.

古文：先时庆父与哀姜私通，欲立哀姜娣子开。
现代文：当初庆父与哀姜私通，庆父想立哀姜妹妹的儿子开。
English: At first, Qingfu had a personal relationship with Aijiang. Qingfu wanted to adopt Aijiang's younger sister's son.

古文：及庄公卒而季友立斑，十月己未，庆父使圉人荦杀鲁公子斑于党氏。
现代文：结果庄公死后季友立斑为君，十月己未日，庆父派圉人荦在党氏家杀死鲁公子斑。季友逃到陈国。
English: As a result, after the death of Zhuang Gong, Ji You became the ruler, and before October was over, Qingfu sent a man to kill Lu Gongzibao in the house of the party. Ji You fled to Chen Province.

古文：季友奔陈。庆父竟立庄公子开，是为愍公。
现代文：庆父终立庄公子开，就是名湣公。
English: When the founding father finally established the manor, it was the beginning of a new era.

古文：愍公二年，庆父与哀姜通益甚。
现代文：愍公二年，庆父与哀姜私通愈加频繁。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xizong's reign, the adultery between Qingfu and Aijiang became more and more frequent.

古文：哀姜与庆父谋杀愍公而立庆父。
现代文：哀姜与庆父商量想杀死愍公而立庆父为鲁君。
English: Ailingang and Qingfu discussed the idea of killing Xingguo, and Qingfu became Lu Jun.

古文：庆父使卜齮袭杀愍公于武闱。
现代文：庆父派卜齮在武闱杀死愍公。
English: Gyeongbokgung sent Buyeo to kill Yeonggong in Buyeo.

古文：季友闻之，自陈与愍公弟申如邾，请鲁求内之。
现代文：季友听说了这件事，与愍公的弟弟申从陈至邾，要求鲁人接纳申为鲁君。
English: When Ji You heard about this, he and Shen Cong Chen, the younger brother of Gong Gong, asked Lu people to accept Shen as Lu Jun.

古文：鲁人欲诛庆父。
现代文：鲁人想杀庆父。
English: Lu wanted to kill Qingfu.

古文：庆父恐，奔莒。
现代文：庆父十分害怕，逃到莒。
English: Qingfu was very scared and fled to Handan.

古文：于是季友奉子申入，立之，是为厘公。
现代文：于是季友拥戴子申回到鲁国，立为国君，就是釐公。
English: As a result, Ji You, supported by his son Shen, returned to the State of Lu and became the ruler of the State, that is, the Duke of Xing.

古文：厘公亦庄公少子。
现代文：釐公也是庄公少子。
English: Shoko was also the youngest son of Shoko.

古文：哀姜恐，奔邾。
现代文：哀姜害怕，逃到邾。
English: Ailingang was scared and fled to the reeds.

古文：季友以赂如莒求庆父，庆父归，使人杀庆父，庆父请奔，弗听，乃使大夫傒斯行哭而往。
现代文：季友送礼给莒人索要庆父，庆父被送回，季友派人杀庆父，庆父要求允许他流亡国外，季友不答应，派大夫奚斯哭着去告诉庆父。
English: Ji You sent a gift to Xingren to ask for Qingpu, Qingpu was sent back, Ji You sent someone to kill Qingpu, Qingpu asked for permission to exile abroad, Ji You did not agree, and sent Doctor Xie crying to tell Qingpu.

古文：庆父闻傒斯音，乃自杀。
现代文：庆父听到奚斯的哭声，心中明白只好自杀而死。
English: When Qingfu heard the cries of the donkey, he knew in his heart that he had no choice but to kill himself.

古文：齐桓公闻哀姜与庆父乱以危鲁，及召之邾而杀之，以其尸归，戮之鲁。
现代文：齐桓公听到哀姜与庆父乱危害鲁国，就从邾国把哀姜召回杀死，把她尸体送归鲁国，陈尸示众。
English: When King Qi Huan heard that the rebellion of Aikang and Gyeongbokgung was endangering Lu, he recalled Aikang from Gyeongbokgung and killed her. He then sent her body back to Lu, where it was displayed to the public.

古文：鲁厘公请而葬之。
现代文：鲁釐公求情后埋葬了哀姜。
English: Lu Yigong pleaded for mercy and buried the mourning ginger.

古文：季友母陈女，故亡在陈，陈故佐送季友及子申。
现代文：季友母亲乃陈国之女，所以季友逃亡时去陈国，陈国帮助护送季友和子申。
English: Ji You's mother was Chen Guo's daughter, so Ji You fled to Chen Guo, and Chen Guo helped escort Ji You and his son Shen.

古文：季友之将生也，父鲁桓公使人卜之，曰： 男也，其名曰 友 ，间于两社，为公室辅。
现代文：季友临降生时，桓公令人为之占卜，卜人说： 这是一个男孩，其名叫作 友 ，将来位于两社之间，定将成为公室重臣。
English: When Ji You was about to be born, King Kuan made people do divination for him. The diviners said, "This is a boy whose name is Zhuo You. He will be located between the two companies in the future, and he will definitely become the head of the government office."

古文：季友亡，则鲁不昌。 
现代文：季友死后，鲁国将衰。 
English: After Ji You's death, Lu Province will decline.

古文：及生，有文在掌曰 友 ，遂以名之，号为成季。
现代文：到降生时，其掌中有纹路为 友 字，就以友命名，取号叫成季。
English: When he was born, his palm was marked with the character "友," so he was named "友" and given the number "成季."

古文：其后为季氏，庆父后为孟氏也。
现代文：其后人就是季氏，庆父的后人为孟氏。
English: His descendants were the Ji clan, and Qingfu's descendants were the Meng clan.

古文：厘公元年，以汶阳鄪封季友。
现代文：釐公元年，把汶阳与鄪邑封赐季友。
English: In the 7th year of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17

古文：季友为相。
现代文：季友为鲁相。
English: Kiyotomo is Ruso.

古文：九年，晋里克杀其君傒齐、卓子。
现代文：九年，晋国的大夫里克杀死他的国君奚齐、卓子。
English: In the ninth year, Rick, the doctor of Jin, killed his sovereigns, Ruqi and Zhuo Zi.

古文：齐桓公率厘公讨晋乱，至高梁而还，立晋惠公。
现代文：齐桓公率领鲁釐公讨伐晋国之乱，到达晋国的高梁才返回，拥立晋惠公为国君。
English: Prince Qi Kuan led Prince Lu Xun to fight the Jin Rebellion, and it was not until Prince Gao Liang arrived in Jin that he returned to support Prince Jin Hui as the sovereign.

古文：十七年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：十七年，齐桓公去世。
English: Seventeen years later, Prince Qi Kan passed away.

古文：二十四年，晋文公即位。
现代文：二十四年，晋文公即位。
English: Twenty-four years later, Emperor Jinwen ascended the throne.

古文：三十三年，厘公卒，子兴立，是为文公。
现代文：三十三年，釐公去世，他的儿子兴继位，就是文公。
English: Thirty-three years later, Shigong died, and his son Xing succeeded to the throne, that is, Wenguang.

古文：文公元年，楚太子商臣弑其父成王，代立。
现代文：文公元年，楚国太子商臣杀死自己的父亲成王，自立为君。
English: In the year of Wen, the prince of Chu and a merchant killed his father, Chengwang, and established himself as king.

古文：三年，文公朝晋襄公。
现代文：三年，文公朝会晋襄公。
English: Three years later, he became a member of the Wen Gong Dynasty Association of Jinxiang.

古文：十一年十月甲午，鲁败翟于咸，获长翟乔如，富父终甥舂其喉以戈，杀之，埋其首于子驹之门，以命宣伯。
现代文：十一年十月甲午日，鲁人在咸大败狄人，俘虏长狄乔如，鲁大夫富父终甥用戈刺乔如之喉，杀死了他，把乔如的首级埋于子驹门，并以乔如二字为宣伯命名。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st, the 11th year, Lu people defeated Di people in Hamdan, and the head of captivity, Di Qiao Ru, the nephew of Dr. Lu's rich father, stabbed Qiao Ru's throat, killed him, buried Qiao Ru's head in the gate of Ziyang, and named Xuan Bo with the word Qiao Ru.

古文：初，宋武公之世，鄋瞒伐宋，司徒皇父帅师御之，以败翟于长丘，获长翟缘斯。
现代文：当初，宋武公之时，鄋瞒讨伐宋国，司徒皇父帅领军队抵抗，在长丘击败狄人，俘获长狄缘斯。
English: At the beginning, when Song Wukong was fighting against the Song Dynasty, Emperor Shitou's father Shuai led the army to resist, defeated the Di people in Changqiu, and captured Chang Diyangs.

古文：晋之灭路，获乔如弟棼如。
现代文：晋国灭掉路国时，俘获乔如的弟弟棼如。
English: When Jin wiped out Lu, he captured Qiao Ru's younger brother Xing Ru.

古文：齐惠公二年，鄋瞒伐齐，齐王子城父获其弟荣如，埋其首于北门。
现代文：齐惠公二年，鄋瞒讨伐齐国，齐国的王子城父俘获乔如的弟弟荣如，并将他的首级埋在北门。
English: In the second year of Qi Huigong's reign, the prince of Qi Province captured Qiao Ru's younger brother Rong Ru and buried his head in the north gate.

古文：卫人获其季弟简如。
现代文：卫国人俘获鄋瞒最小的弟弟简如。
English: The defenders of the country captured his youngest brother, Jian Ru.

古文：鄋瞒由是遂亡。
现代文：鄋瞒从此灭亡。
English: From then on, the concealment died out.

古文：十五年，季文子使于晋。
现代文：十五年，季文子到晋国出使。
English: In the fifteenth year, Ji Fumiko went on a mission to Jin Province.

古文：十八年二月，文公卒。
现代文：十八年二月，鲁文公死。
English: In February 18th, Lu Wen Gong passed away.

古文：文公有二妃：长妃齐女为哀姜，生子恶及视；次妃敬嬴，嬖爱，生子俀。
现代文：文公有两个妃子：长妃齐女是哀姜，生儿子恶和视；次妃是敬嬴，甚受宠爱，生子俀。
English: King Wen had two concubines: the eldest concubine Qi's daughter was Ai Jiang, and she gave birth to a son named Qi He Rong; the second concubine was Jing Yao, who was greatly loved, and she gave birth to a son named Zi Yao.

古文：俀私事襄仲，襄仲欲立之，叔仲曰不可。
现代文：俀暗中笼络襄仲，襄仲想立俀为君，叔仲说不行。
English: In the dark, you are entangled with your partner. Your partner wants to be your husband, but you can't tell your partner.

古文：襄仲请齐惠公，惠公新立，欲亲鲁，许之。
现代文：襄仲就请齐惠公帮忙，齐惠公刚即位，想拉拢鲁国，就答应了。
English: Xiangzhong asked Qi Huigong for help. As soon as Qi Huigong ascended the throne, he wanted to win over Lu, so he agreed.

古文：冬十月，襄仲杀子恶及视而立俀，是为宣公。
现代文：冬十月，襄仲杀死恶与视而立俀为鲁君，就是宣公。
English: In the winter of October, Xiangzhong killed the evil and regarded it as Lu Jun, which was the proclamation.

古文：哀姜归齐，哭而过市，曰： 天乎！
现代文：哀姜回齐国，号哭而过闹市，说： 天哪！
English: Ailing Jiang returned to Qi Province, crying loudly and passing through the bustling city, saying: My God!

古文：襄仲为不道，杀适立庶！ 
现代文：襄仲大逆不道，杀嫡立庶！ 
English: Xiangzhong is a traitor, and it's wrong to kill a legitimate child!

古文：市人皆哭，鲁人谓之 哀姜 。
现代文：市上人都跟着哭泣，鲁国人都称她为 哀姜 。
English: People in the city cried with her, and the people of Lu all called her "Ai Jiang."

古文：鲁由此公室卑，三桓强。
现代文：从此公国室衰微，而孟孙氏、叔孙氏、季孙氏、三桓之族强盛起来。
English: From then on, the Duchy waned, while the Mengsun, Unclesun, Ji Sun, and Sanhaku clans flourished.

古文：宣公俀十二年，楚庄王强，围郑。
现代文：宣公俀十二年，楚庄王强大，围攻郑国。
English: In the twelfth year of Xuan Gong, the powerful king of Chuzhuang besieged Zheng.

古文：郑伯降，复国之。
现代文：郑伯投降，后庄王又恢复郑封国的地位。
English: Zheng Bo surrendered, after which Zhuang Wang restored the status of Zhengfei.

古文：十八年，宣公卒，子成公黑肱立，是为成公。
现代文：十八年，宣公死，其子成公黑肱继位，就是成公。
English: In the 18th year of Xuan Gong's death, his son Chenggong Heixuan succeeded to the throne, that is, Chenggong.

古文：季文子曰： 使我杀适立庶失大援者，襄仲。 
现代文：季文子说： 使我国杀嫡立庶失去诸侯支持的人，是襄仲。 
English: Ji Wenzi said: The person who caused our country to lose the support of the lords was Xiangzhong.

古文：襄仲立宣公，公孙归父有宠。
现代文：襄仲立起宣公后，襄仲之子公孙归父备受宣公宠爱。
English: After Xiangzhong stood up for the proclamation of the emperor, Xiangzhong's son, grandson and father-in-law were favored by the proclamation.

古文：宣公欲去三桓，与晋谋伐三桓。
现代文：宣公想除掉三桓，与晋国商量讨伐三桓。
English: Xuan Gong wanted to get rid of the Three Kingdoms, and discussed with Jin to fight the Three Kingdoms.

古文：会宣公卒，季文子怨之，归父奔齐。
现代文：适值宣公死去，季文子怨恨公孙归父，归父逃到齐国。
English: When Sun Quan died at the right time, Ji Fanzi resented Sun Quan and fled to Qi.

古文：成公二年春，齐伐取我隆。
现代文：成公二年春，齐国讨伐鲁国占据隆邑。
English: In the spring of the second year of his reign, Longyi was occupied by Qi and Lu.

古文：夏，公与晋郄克败齐顷公于鞍，齐复归我侵地。
现代文：夏季，成公与晋国大夫郤克联军在鞌地大败齐顷公的军队，齐国归还占我之地。
English: In the summer, Chenggong and the allied forces of the Jin State Doctor Zengke defeated the army of the Qi State in Zandi, and the Qi State returned to occupy my land.

古文：四年，成公如晋，晋景公不敬鲁。
现代文：四年，成公之晋国，晋景公不尊重成公。
English: In four years, Shingong was promoted to the State Council, and Shingong did not respect Shingong.

古文：鲁欲背晋合于楚，或谏，乃不。
现代文：成公想背叛晋国与楚联盟，有人谏止，才作罢。
English: Cheng Gong wanted to betray the Jin and Chu alliance, but someone stopped him.

古文：十年，成公如晋。
现代文：十年，成公至晋国。
English: Ten years later, he became a prince and went to Jin Province.

古文：晋景公卒，因留成公送葬，鲁讳之。十五年，始与吴王寿梦会钟离。
现代文：晋景公死，晋人留下成公送葬，鲁人讳言此事，十五年鲁第一次与吴国来往，与吴王寿梦在钟离盟会。
English: When Jin Jinggong died, the Jin people left Chenggong to attend his funeral. The Lu people kept the matter quiet. In the 15th year, Lu visited Wu for the first time, and he and Wu Wang Shoumen left the League at the stroke of midnight.

古文：十六年，宣伯告晋，欲诛季文子。
现代文：十六年，宣伯请求晋国，想让晋人杀掉季文子。
English: Sixteen years later, Sun Bo asked Jin Guo to let Jin people kill Ji Wenzi.

古文：文子有义，晋人弗许。
现代文：因为季文子是节义之人，晋人没有答应宣伯的请求。
English: Because Ji Wenzi was a man of righteousness, the Jin people did not agree to Xuan Bo's request.

古文：十八年，成公卒，子午立，是为襄公。
现代文：十八年，成公死，其子午继位，就是襄公。
English: In 18 years, Chenggong died, and his son succeeded to the throne, that is Xianggong.

古文：是时襄公三岁也。
现代文：这时襄公才三岁。
English: At this time, Prince Xiang was only three years old.

古文：襄公元年，晋立悼公。
现代文：襄公元年，晋人立悼公为君。
English: In the year of Xiang, the Jin people set up a mourning for the king.

古文：往年冬，晋栾书弑其君厉公。
现代文：去年冬季，晋大夫栾书杀其君厉公。
English: In the winter of last year, Dr. Jin wrote a book about the murder of his uncle.

古文：四年，襄公朝晋。
现代文：四年，襄公到晋国朝会。
English: In four years, Prince Xiang went to the Imperial Court of Jin.

古文：五年，季文子卒。
现代文：五年，季文子死。
English: Five years later, Ji Fumiko died.

古文：家无衣帛之妾，厩无食粟之马，府无金玉，以相三君。
现代文：其家中无穿丝绸之妾，马棚中没有吃谷子的马，府中无金玉之器，就这样俭朴地做了三代国君的相。
English: There was no concubine wearing silk in his family, no horse eating grain in the stable, and no gold ornaments in the palace, so he frugally made the three generations of sovereigns.

古文：君子曰： 季文子廉忠矣。 
现代文：君子说： 季文子真是廉洁忠正啊！ 
English: The gentleman said, "Kiwonji is so honest and loyal!"

古文：九年，与晋伐郑。
现代文：九年，鲁国与晋国共同伐郑。
English: In the ninth year, Lu and Jin jointly defeated Zheng.

古文：晋悼公冠襄公于卫，季武子从，相行礼。
现代文：晋悼公在卫国为襄公举行冠礼，季武子随从，辅助举行冠礼仪式。
English: Emperor Jinmu held a coronation ceremony for Prince Xiang at the Great Patriotic War, and Ji Wuzi accompanied and assisted in the coronation ceremony.

古文：十一年，三桓氏分为三军。
现代文：十一年，三桓氏分别掌握鲁国三军。
English: In the eleventh year, the three armies of Lu were separately controlled by the three Kan clans.

古文：十二年，朝晋。
现代文：十二年，朝会晋国。
English: In the twelfth year, the Imperial Court was promoted to the throne.

古文：十六年，晋平公即位。
现代文：十六年，晋平公即位。
English: Sixteen years later, Emperor Jinpyeong ascended the throne.

古文：二十一年，朝晋平公。
现代文：二十一年，朝会晋平公。
English: In 1921, he was promoted to the peerage by the Imperial Court.

古文：二十二年，孔丘生。
现代文：二十二年，孔丘降生。
English: Twenty-two years later, Kong Qiu was born.

古文：二十五年，齐崔杼弑其君庄公，立其弟景公。
现代文：二十五年，齐国大夫崔杼杀其君庄公，立庄公弟景公为齐君。
English: Twenty-five years ago, the doctor of Qi, Cui Zhen, killed his younger brother, Zhuang Gong, and his younger brother, Jing Gong, became Qi Jun.

古文：二十九年，吴延陵季子使鲁，问周乐，尽知其意，鲁人敬焉。
现代文：二十九年，吴国的延陵季子出使鲁国，观周乐，能全部解说其意，鲁人十分敬重他。
English: In the 29th year, Yanling Jizi of Wuxi sent an envoy to Lu to watch Zhoule. He was able to fully explain its meaning, and the people of Lu highly respected him.

古文：三十一年六月，襄公卒。
现代文：三十一年六月，襄公死。
English: In June 31st, Prince Xiang died.

古文：其九月，太子卒。
现代文：其年九月，太子死。
English: In September of the same year, the Crown Prince died.

古文：鲁人立齐归之子裯为君，是为昭公。
现代文：鲁人立襄公夫人妹齐归之子裯为鲁君，就是昭公。
English: Lu Ren's younger sister Qi Gui, the wife of Prince Xiang, had a son named Lu Jun, also known as Zhaogong.

古文：昭公年十九，犹有童心。
现代文：昭公十九岁时，还是幼稚顽皮。
English: At the age of nineteen, Shoko was still childish and naughty.

古文：穆叔不欲立，曰： 太子死，有母弟可立，不即立长。
现代文：穆叔不想立他，说： 太子去世以后，有他同母之弟可立为君，如无同母弟，才立庶子中的长子。
English: Mu uncle did not want to appoint him, saying: After the death of the prince, a younger brother of the same mother can be appointed as the prince. If there is no younger brother of the same mother, then the eldest son of the illegitimate son should be appointed.

古文：年钧择贤，义钧则卜之。
现代文：年龄相同的就要择其才能，才能也相同则占卜以决定。
English: If you are the same age, you should choose your talent. If you have the same talent, you should use divination to decide.

古文：今裯ā非适嗣，且又居丧意不在戚而有喜色，若果立，必为季氏忧。 
现代文：现在裯不是嫡子，而且居丧时并不悲伤，反有喜色，若真的立了他，必为季氏之忧。 
English: He is not the legitimate son now, and when he was in mourning, he was not sad, but joyful. If he is really the legitimate son, it will be a great sorrow for the Ji clan.

古文：季武子弗听，卒立之。
现代文：季武子不听，终于立裯为君。
English: Jiwuko didn't listen, and eventually he became the leader.

古文：比及葬，三易衰。
现代文：等到襄公下葬时，裯已因顽皮穿坏了三件丧服。
English: By the time of Prince Xiang's burial, Zhai had already worn out three mourning clothes due to his naughtiness.

古文：君子曰： 是不终也。 
现代文：君子说： 这人不得善终。 
English: The gentleman said, "This man will not have a good end.

古文：昭公三年，朝晋至河，晋平公谢还之，鲁耻焉。
现代文：昭公三年，朝拜晋国到达黄河边，晋平公婉言拒绝，让昭公返回，鲁人以为耻辱。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Zhaogong, when he arrived at the Yellow River to pay homage to the State of Jin, King Jinping politely refused to allow King Zhaogong to return, which was considered a disgrace by the Lu people.

古文：四年，楚灵王会诸侯于申，昭公称病不往。
现代文：四年，楚灵王要诸侯到申地盟会，昭公称病不去。
English: In the fourth year, King Chuling wanted the princes to go to the prefectural assembly, but Zhao Gong said that he was too ill to go.

古文：七年，季武子卒。
现代文：七年，季武子死。
English: Seven years later, Ji Takeko died.

古文：八年，楚灵王就章华台，召昭公。
现代文：八年，楚灵王建成章华台，召见昭公。
English: Eight years later, King Chuling built the Zhanghuatai and summoned Zhao Gong.

古文：昭公往贺，赐昭公宝器；已而悔，复诈取之。
现代文：昭公前往祝贺，灵王赐给昭公宝器；后又反悔，又骗取回来。
English: Zhaogong went to congratulate him, and the King of Soul gave Zhaogong a treasure; he later repented and was tricked into returning it.

古文：十二年，朝晋至河，晋平公谢还之。
现代文：十二年，昭公朝会晋国至黄河，晋平公又辞谢，昭公返回。
English: In the twelfth year, Shoko's court would go to Jin Province to the Yellow River. Jin Ping also resigned, and Shoko returned.

古文：十三年，楚公子弃疾弑其君灵王，代立。
现代文：十三年，楚公子弃疾杀死其君灵王，自立为楚王。
English: In the thirteenth year, Chu boy abandoned his illness, killed his king spirit king, and became the king of Chu.

古文：十五年，朝晋，晋留之葬晋昭公，鲁耻之。
现代文：十五年，昭公朝会晋国，晋人留下他给晋昭公送葬，鲁人以为耻辱。
English: In the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Zhaogong of Jin, the Jin people left him to attend the funeral of Emperor Zhaogong of Jin, and the Lu people thought it was a disgrace.

古文：二十年，齐景公与晏子狩竟，因入鲁问礼。
现代文：二十年，齐景公与晏子在边境巡狩，顺便到鲁国询问礼制。
English: For twenty years, Lord Qi Jing and his mule have been patrolling the border, dropping in to Lu Province to inquire about the etiquette.

古文：二十一年，朝晋至河，晋谢还之。
现代文：二十一年，昭公朝会晋国至黄河，晋国辞谢，昭公返回。
English: In the twenty-first year, Zhaogong's imperial concubine went to the Yellow River to join the Jin Dynasty. After the Jin Dynasty abdicated, Zhaogong returned.

古文：二十五年春，鸜鹆来巢。
现代文：二十五年春，有鸲鹆鸟来鲁国巢居。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, an ostrich came to nest in the country of Lu.

古文：师己曰： 文成之世童谣曰 鸜鹆来巢，公在干侯。
现代文：师己说： 文公和成公有童谣说： 鸲鹆来巢到鲁国，国君出居到乾侯。
English: Teacher said, "There is a nursery rhyme about Wengong and Chenggong, which says, "Wengong came to Lu, and the king went to Qianhou."

古文：鸜鹆入处，公在外野 。 
现代文：鸲鹆住进来，国君去野外。  
English: If you stay indoors, the sovereign goes outdoors.

古文：季氏与郈氏斗鸡，季氏芥鸡羽，郈氏金距。
现代文：季氏和郈氏斗鸡，季氏给鸡套上铁甲，郈氏给鸡套上金属制的爪子。
English: Mr. Ji and Mr. Zou had a cockfight. Mr. Ji put iron armor on the chicken, while Mr. Zou put metal claws on the chicken.

古文：季平子怒而侵郈氏，郈昭伯亦怒平子。
现代文：季平子因为斗鸡失败十分愤怒，于是侵占了郈氏的田产，郈昭伯也十分怨恨季平子。
English: Ji Ping Zi was very angry because of the failure of the cockfight, so he occupied the land of the Zou clan. Zou Zhao Bo was also very resentful of Ji Ping Zi.

古文：臧昭伯之弟会伪谗臧氏，匿季氏，臧昭伯囚季氏人。
现代文：臧昭伯的弟弟臧会假装诬陷臧氏，并躲到季氏家中，臧昭伯囚禁了季氏家的人。
English: Zou Zhao Bo's younger brother Zou would pretend to frame Mr. Zou and hide in Mr. Ji's home. Zou Zhao Bo imprisoned the members of the Ji family.

古文：季平子怒，囚臧氏老。
现代文：季平子很愤怒，囚禁了臧氏的家臣宰。
English: Ji Ping Zi was very angry and imprisoned the chief vassal of the Min clan.

古文：臧、郈氏以难告昭公。
现代文：臧氏、郈氏把两家遭受的灾难告诉了昭公。
English: Mr. Zou and Mr. Zou told Mr. Zhao about the disaster suffered by the two families.

古文：昭公九月戊戌伐季氏，遂入。
现代文：于是昭公在九月戊戌日讨伐季氏，并侵入他的宅邑。
English: As a result, Akihiro marched against Ji on September 30, and invaded his homestead.

古文：平子登台请曰： 君以谗不察臣罪，诛之，请迁沂上。 
现代文：平子登上高台请求说： 君王因为谗言而不明察我的罪过，前来诛杀我，请允许我将自己流放到沂水边上。 
English: Hirako went up to the platform and pleaded: "Your majesty, because of your slander, did not notice my sin and came to kill me. Please allow me to exile myself to the edge of Surabaya.

古文：弗许。
现代文：昭公不允许。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：请囚于鄪，弗许。
现代文：又请求把他囚禁到鄪邑，昭公也不允许。
English: He also requested that he be imprisoned in Ye, but the Shogun would not allow it.

古文：请以五乘亡，弗许。
现代文：再次请求让他带着五辆车逃亡，昭公仍然不允许。
English: He again requested that he be allowed to flee with five cars, but Akio still did not allow it.

古文：子家驹曰： 君其许之。
现代文：子家驹说： 君王还是同意他吧。
English: Zi Jiayu said: The king should still agree with him.

古文：政自季氏久矣，为徒者众，众将合谋。 
现代文：鲁国的国政把持在季氏手中已经很长时间了，他们的党羽非常多，那些人会联合起来对付你的。 
English: The Ji's have been in control of Lu's politics for a long time. They have a lot of followers, and they will gang up on you.

古文：弗听。
现代文：昭公并不听从。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：郈氏曰： 必杀之。 
现代文：郈氏说： 一定要杀了他。 
English: Mr. Zou said, "We must kill him."

古文：叔孙氏之臣戾谓其众曰： 无季氏与有，孰利？ 
现代文：叔孙氏的家臣戾对他的属下说： 没有季氏和有季氏，哪种情况对我们更加有利呢？ 
English: Uncle Sun's vassal Zou said to his subordinates: Without Ji and with Ji, which situation is more beneficial to us?

古文：皆曰： 无季氏是无叔孙氏。 
现代文：大家都说： 没有季氏，也就没有了叔孙氏。 
English: Everyone said: If there is no Ji clan, there will be no Unshun clan.

古文：戾曰： 然，救季氏！ 
现代文：戾又说： 这样，我们就去援救季氏吧！ 
English: Hao also said: So, let's go and rescue Ji!

古文：遂败公师。
现代文：于是打败了昭公的军队。
English: As a result, they defeated Akihiko's army.

古文：孟懿子闻叔孙氏胜，亦杀郈昭伯。
现代文：孟懿子听说叔孙氏取得了胜利，也追杀郈昭伯。
English: Meng Xunzi heard that his uncle and grandson had won the victory and also chased and killed Zou Zhao Bo.

古文：郈昭伯为公使，故孟氏得之。
现代文：郈昭伯作为昭公的使臣被派往孟氏家，因此孟氏抓到了他。
English: Zhai Zhao Bo was sent to Meng's house as a messenger of Zhao Zhao, so Meng caught him.

古文：三家共伐公，公遂奔。
现代文：三家联合讨伐昭公，昭公于是逃奔国外。
English: The three families joined forces to fight Shoko, who then fled abroad.

古文：己亥，公至于齐。
现代文：己亥日，昭公逃到齐国。
English: On Ji Hai Day, Shao Gong fled to Qi Province.

古文：齐景公曰： 请致千社待君。 
现代文：齐景公对昭公说： 愿意奉送一千社以接待国君。 
English: Lord Qi Jing said to Lord Zhao: I am willing to send a thousand shrines to receive the sovereign.

古文：子家曰： 弃周公之业而臣于齐，可乎？ 
现代文：子家说： 放弃周公的基业而臣服于齐，可以这样做吗？ 
English: Zi Jia said, "If you give up Zhou Gong's inheritance and submit to Qi, can you do this?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止了这种行为。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：子家曰： 齐景公无信，不如早之晋。 
现代文：子家说： 齐景公这个人不讲信用，不如尽早到晋国去。 
English: His son said: Qi Jing Gong is not trustworthy, it is better to go to Jin Province as soon as possible.

古文：弗从。
现代文：昭公并不听从。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：叔孙见公还，见平子，平子顿首。
现代文：叔孙氏到齐国看到昭公后返回鲁国，去见平子，平子叩头。
English: Uncles and grandsons went to Qi Province to see King Zhaogong, and then returned to Lu Province to meet and pay homage to King Ping Zi.

古文：初欲迎昭公，孟孙、季孙后悔，乃止。
现代文：起初，他们想迎回昭公，但是孟孙、季孙后悔，于是没有那么做。
English: At first, they wanted to welcome back Akihiro, but Meng Sun and Ji Sun regretted it, so they didn't do it.

古文：二十六年春，齐伐鲁，取郓而居昭公焉。
现代文：二十六年春，齐伐鲁，占领郓邑让鲁昭公居住。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, Qi Waru occupied Ye County and let Lu Zhaogong live there.

古文：夏，齐景公将内公，令无受鲁赂。
现代文：夏季，齐景公想武力护送昭公回国，命部下不得接受鲁国的礼物。
English: In the summer, Qi Jing Gong wanted to escort Zhaogong back to China by force. His subordinates were not allowed to accept gifts from Lu.

古文：申丰、汝贾许齐臣高龁、子将粟五千庾。
现代文：鲁大夫申丰、汝贾许诺给齐大夫高龁、子将粟谷八万斗。
English: Dr. Lu Shenfeng and Ru Jia promised to give Dr. Qi Gao Jun and his son General Awatani 80,000 do.

古文：子将言于齐侯曰： 群臣不能事鲁君，有异焉。
现代文：子将就向齐侯说： 鲁群臣不服从鲁君，有奇怪现象。
English: His son-in-law said to Qi Hou, "There is a strange phenomenon that Lu's vassals do not obey Lu Jun.

古文：宋元公为鲁如晋，求内之，道卒。
现代文：宋元公为鲁昭公到晋国求援，想支持昭公回国，死于途中。
English: Song Yuan Gong went to Jin Province to seek help for Lu Zhaogong and wanted to support Zhaogong to return to China, but died on the way.

古文：叔孙昭子求内其君，无病而死。
现代文：叔孙昭子请求让鲁君回国，无病而死。
English: His great-uncle Akiko pleaded for Lu Jun to be allowed to return to China, and he died without illness.

古文：不知天弃鲁乎？抑鲁君有罪于鬼神也？
现代文：不知是上天抛弃鲁君，还是他得罪了鬼神？
English: I don't know if God abandoned Lu Jun, or if he offended the gods?

古文：愿君且待。 
现代文：请您再等等看吧。 
English: Please wait and see.

古文：齐景公从之。
现代文：齐景公听从了他的话。
English: Qi Jinggong obeyed his words.

古文：二十八年，昭公如晋，求入。
现代文：二十八年，昭公到晋国，要求支持他回国为君。
English: In the 28th year, Shoko went to Jin Province to ask for support for his return to Japan.

古文：季平子私于晋六卿，六卿受季氏赂，谏晋君，晋君乃止，居昭公干侯。
现代文：季平子贿赂晋国的六卿，六卿接受了季氏礼物，就去谏止晋君，晋君也就不再坚持，只让昭公居住在乾侯。
English: Ji Ping Zi bribed the six nobles of Jin, and when the six nobles accepted the gift from Ji, they went to stop Jin, and Jin no longer insisted, but only let Akigong live in Qianhou.

古文：二十九年，昭公如郓。
现代文：二十九年，昭公至郓邑。
English: In the 29th year, Shoko came to Yeon-eup.

古文：齐景公使人赐昭公书，自谓 主君 。
现代文：齐景公派人给昭公送信，信中称昭公为 主君 。
English: Prince Qi Jing sent a letter to Prince Zhao, in which he referred to Prince Zhao as his master.

古文：昭公耻之，怒而去干侯。
现代文：昭公以之为耻辱，一怒之下又去了乾侯。
English: Shoko took it as a disgrace, and in a fit of rage, he went back to the dry farm.

古文：三十一年，晋欲内昭公，召季平子。
现代文：三十一年，晋人想支持昭公回鲁，召见季平子。
English: In the 31st year, the Jin people wanted to support Zhaogong Huilu and summoned Ji Pingzhuo.

古文：平子布衣跣行，因六卿谢罪。
现代文：季平子身着布衣赤脚而行，通过六卿谢罪。
English: Ji Ping Zi walked barefoot in cloth, and passed through the six nobles to apologize.

古文：六卿为言曰： 晋欲内昭公，众不从。 
现代文：六卿替季平子说话，说： 晋国虽支持昭公，但鲁人不愿意。 
English: The six nobles spoke on behalf of Ji Ping Zi, saying: Although Jin supported Akim, Lu people did not want to.

古文：晋人止。
现代文：晋君也就作罢。
English: Jinjun also gave up.

古文：三十二年，昭公卒于干侯。
现代文：三十二年，昭公死在乾侯。
English: Thirty-two years later, Akihiko died in Kansho.

古文：鲁人共立昭公弟宋为君，是为定公。
现代文：鲁人一同立起昭公之弟宋为君，就是定公。
English: Lu people stood up together with Song, the younger brother of Zhaogong, to become the ruler, that is, Dingong.

古文：定公立，赵简子问史墨曰： 季氏亡乎？ 
现代文：定公继立，赵简子向史墨询问说： 季氏会灭亡吗？ 
English: Zhao Jianzi asked Shi Mo, "Will the Ji Clan perish?

古文：史墨对曰： 不亡。
现代文：史墨回答说： 不会灭亡。
English: Shi Mo replied, "It will not be destroyed."

古文：季友有大功于鲁，受鄪为上卿，至于文子、武子，世增其业。
现代文：季友对鲁国有非常大的功劳，被封在鄪邑，成为上卿，一直到文子、武子，累世扩充了基业。
English: Ji You made a great contribution to the state of Lu. He was enshrined in Zouyi and became a high-ranking nobleman. All the way to Wen Zi and Wu Zi, he expanded the foundation over the years.

古文：鲁文公卒，东门遂杀适立庶，鲁君于是失国政。
现代文：鲁文公去世以后，东门就杀掉嫡子拥立庶子为鲁国国君，鲁国国君于是失去国政大权。
English: After the death of Prince Luwen, Dongmen killed his legitimate son and set up his illegitimate son as the Prince of Lu. The Prince of Lu then lost his political power.

古文：政在季氏，于今四君矣。
现代文：国政操纵在季氏手中，到如今已经经历了四位国君。
English: The manipulation of state affairs is in the hands of Ji, who has now experienced the rise of four sovereigns.

古文：民不知君，何以得国！
现代文：人民不知道他们的国君，国君凭借什么掌握国家的行政大权呢！
English: The people do not know their sovereign, or by what authority the sovereign wields the executive power of the state!

古文：是以为君慎器与名，不可以假人。 
现代文：正因为这样，国君要谨慎地对待国家的车服器物和爵位名号，不能轻易地给予别人。 
English: Because of this, the sovereign must be careful with the country's vehicles, clothing, and titles, and cannot easily give them to others.

古文：定公五年，季平子卒。
现代文：定公五年，季平子去世。
English: In the fifth year of Sadamasa's reign, Jiheishi died.

古文：阳虎私怒，囚季桓子，与盟，乃舍之。
现代文：阳虎心怀私愤，囚禁了季桓子，与他订立了盟约，才放了他。
English: Yanghu harbored a private grudge, imprisoned Ji Huan Zi, and made a covenant with him before releasing him.

古文：七年，齐伐我，取郓，以为鲁阳虎邑以从政。
现代文：七年，齐军讨伐鲁国，攻取郓邑，将它作为鲁国阳虎的封邑，并让他参与政事。
English: In the seventh year, the Qi army fought against Lu and captured Zouyi, using it as a fief for Yanghu of Lu, and allowed him to participate in government affairs.

古文：八年，阳虎欲尽杀三桓适，而更立其所善庶子以代之；载季桓子将杀之，桓子诈而得脱。
现代文：八年，阳虎想要杀掉三桓所有的嫡系继承人，而改立和他关系密切的庶子取代嫡系的继承人；阳虎用车载着季桓子，并趁机要杀掉他，桓子用欺骗的手段得以脱身。
English: In the eighth year, Yang Hu wanted to kill all the legitimate heirs of Sanhuan, and replace the legitimate heirs with an illegitimate son who was closely related to him; Yang Hu carried Ji Huan Zi in a car and took the opportunity to kill him, and Huan Zi was able to escape by means of deception.

古文：三桓共攻阳虎，阳虎居阳关。
现代文：三桓联合起来攻打阳虎，阳虎占据阳关。
English: The three cranes united to attack the yang tiger, and the yang tiger occupied Yangguan.

古文：九年，鲁伐阳虎，阳虎奔齐，已而奔晋赵氏。
现代文：九年，鲁国人讨伐阳虎，阳虎逃奔齐国，不久又前去投奔晋国的赵氏。
English: In the ninth year, the Lu people fought against the Yang tiger, the Yang tiger fled to Qi, and soon the Zhao clan went to Jin.

古文：十年，定公与齐景公会于夹谷，孔子行相事。
现代文：十年，定公与齐景公在夹谷相会，孔子主持礼仪。
English: Ten years later, Ding Gong and Qi Jing Gong met in the valley, and Confucius presided over the ceremony.

古文：齐欲袭鲁君，孔子以礼历阶，诛齐淫乐，齐侯惧，乃止，归鲁侵地而谢过。
现代文：齐人想袭击定公，孔子按礼仪登阶而上，诛责齐国秦淫乐的乐人，齐侯害怕，未敢袭害定公，而且归还侵占的鲁国土地来谢罪。
English: The Qi people wanted to attack Ding Gong, Confucius ascended the steps according to etiquette, and rebuked the Qin fornicators in Qi. Qi Hou was afraid and did not dare to attack and harm Ding Gong, and returned the occupied land of Lu to apologize.

古文：十二年，使仲由毁三桓城，收其甲兵。
现代文：十二年，派仲由拆毁三桓家族的城墙，没收他们的铠甲武器。
English: In the twelfth year, Huizhong destroyed the city wall of the Sanhuan family and confiscated their armor weapons.

古文：孟氏不肯堕城，伐之，不克而止。
现代文：孟氏不肯拆毁其城，定公派兵攻伐，不能战胜而作罢。
English: The Meng clan did not want to demolish their city, so they sent soldiers to attack it, but they could not defeat it and gave up.

古文：季桓子受齐女乐，孔子去。
现代文：季桓子接受齐国的美女乐工，孔子离开鲁国。
English: Ji Hanzi accepted the beautiful musician from Qi, and Confucius left Lu.

古文：十五年，定公卒，子将立，是为哀公。
现代文：十五年，定公去世，他的儿子将继位，就是哀公。
English: Fifteen years later, Sadamasa died, and his son, Aiko, will succeed him.

古文：哀公五年，齐景公卒。
现代文：哀公五年，齐景公去世。
English: After five years of mourning, Qi Jing Gong passed away.

古文：六年，齐田乞弑其君孺子。
现代文：六年，齐大夫田乞杀其君孺子。
English: Six years later, Dr. Qi Tian begged for his son's death.

古文：七年，吴王夫差强，伐齐，至缯，征百牢于鲁。
现代文：七年，吴王夫差的势力很强大，派兵讨伐齐国，到了缯地，向鲁国人征发牛、羊、猪各一百头。
English: In the seventh year, the power of King Fucha of Wu was very strong. He sent troops to fight against Qi, and arrived in Yunnan to collect one hundred heads of cattle, sheep, and pigs from the people of Lu.

古文：季康子使子贡说吴王及太宰嚭，以礼诎之。
现代文：季康子派子贡前去游说吴王和太宰嚭，依照礼仪驳斥他们。
English: Ji Kangzi sent his son Gong to lobby the King of Wu and the Grand Vizier, and refuted them in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：吴王曰： 我文身，不足责礼。 
现代文：吴王说： 我是断发文身的蛮夷人，不要用中原的礼仪来斥责我。 
English: King Wu said, "I am a barbarian with tattoos. Don't use the etiquette of Central Plains to reprimand me.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止对鲁国人的索取。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：八年，吴为邹伐鲁，至城下，盟而去。齐伐我，取三邑。
现代文：八年，吴国为邹国攻伐鲁，至城下，与鲁订盟约而离去，齐伐鲁，占领三邑。
English: In the eighth year, the State of Wu attacked and besieged Lu on behalf of the State of Yan. They went to the outskirts of the city, signed a treaty with Lu and left. They besieged Lu and occupied Sanyi.

古文：十年，伐齐南边。
现代文：十年，鲁伐齐国南部边境。
English: 10 years, the southern border of Rwanda.

古文：十一年，齐伐鲁。
现代文：十一年，齐国又伐鲁。
English: In the eleventh year, the country of Qi once again fell to Lu.

古文：季氏用冉有有功，思孔子，孔子自卫归鲁。
现代文：季氏任用冉有甚有成效，因此思念孔子，孔子就自卫国归返鲁国。
English: Ji's appointment of Ran was very effective, so he missed Confucius, and Confucius returned to Lu with the intention of defending the country.

古文：十四年，齐田常弑其君简公于俆州。
现代文：十四年，齐国大夫田常在俆州杀死齐君简公。
English: Fourteen years ago, Dr. Tian Chang of Qi Province killed Qi Jun Jian Gong in Zhangzhou.

古文：孔子请伐之，哀公不听。
现代文：孔子要求哀公出兵征伐田常，哀公不从。
English: Confucius asked Aiko to send soldiers to cut down the fields, but Aiko refused.

古文：十五年，使子服景伯、子贡为介，适齐，齐归我侵地。
现代文：十五年，派子服景伯为使节，子贡为副手，去至齐国。齐归还侵鲁之地。
English: In 15 years, he sent Zifu Jingbo as an envoy and Zigong as a deputy to Qi. Qi returned to the land of the invasion of Lu.

古文：田常初相，欲亲诸侯。
现代文：田常初为齐国相，想要亲睦诸侯，所以如此。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Tian Changchu was Qi's minister of state, and he wanted to be close to the princes, which is why this happened.

古文：十六年，孔子卒。
现代文：十六年，孔子逝世。
English: Sixteen years later, Confucius died.

古文：二十二年，越王句践灭吴王夫差。
现代文：二十二年，越王勾践灭掉吴王夫差。
English: In the 22nd year, Yue Wang Guozhang eradicated Wu Wangfuzha.

古文：二十七年春，季康子卒。
现代文：二十七年春季，季康子去世。
English: In the spring of 1927, Ji Yasuko passed away.

古文：夏，哀公患三桓，将欲因诸侯以劫之，三桓亦患公作难，故君臣多间。
现代文：夏季，鲁哀公认为三桓是鲁国的忧患，想要借助诸侯的力量剥夺三桓的权利，三桓也担心哀公会发难，因此君臣间产生了许多隔阂。
English: In the summer, Lu Ye Gong thought that the three kings were the sorrow of Lu, and wanted to use the power of the princes to deprive the three kings of their rights. The three kings were also worried that the three kings would be in trouble, so there were many estrangements between the princes.

古文：公游于陵坂，遇孟武伯于街，曰： 请问余及死乎？ 
现代文：哀公到陵坂出游，在街上遇见孟武伯，哀公说： 请问我就要死了吗？ 
English: Aiko went on a trip to Neosan and met Meng Wubo on the street. Aiko said, "Excuse me, am I going to die?"

古文：对曰： 不知也。 
现代文：孟武伯回答说： 不知道啊。 
English: Meng Wubo replied, "I don't know.

古文：公欲以越伐三桓。
现代文：哀公想要借助越人的力量讨伐三桓。
English: Aigong wants to use the power of the Viets to fight the Sanhuans.

古文：八月，哀公如陉氏。
现代文：八月，哀公来到陉氏。
English: In August, Aiko came to Tsukuda.

古文：三桓攻公，公奔于卫，去如邹，遂如越。
现代文：三桓攻打哀公，哀公逃奔到卫国，又逃到邹国，接着又前往越国。
English: Sankan attacked Aigong three times, and Aigong fled to Weiguo, and then to Shizhuo, and then to Yue.

古文：国人迎哀公复归，卒于有山氏。
现代文：鲁国人又迎接哀公回到鲁国，哀公最后死在有山氏的家里。
English: The people of Lu also welcomed Aigong back to Lu. Aigong eventually died at the home of the Ariyama clan.

古文：子宁立，是为悼公。
现代文：他的儿子宁即位，就是悼公。
English: The accession of his son Ning to the throne is a public mourning.

古文：悼公之时，三桓胜，鲁如小侯，卑于三桓之冢。
现代文：悼公时代，三桓强盛，鲁国的国君就像一个小侯，比三桓之家还要卑弱。
English: In the Eulogy Era, when the Three Kings were strong and prosperous, the ruler of Lu was like a petty lord, even weaker than the Three Kings.

古文：十三年，三晋灭智伯，分其地有之。
现代文：十三年，韩、赵、魏三晋灭掉智伯，瓜分其地为三家所有。
English: In the thirteenth year, Han, Zhao, and Wei wiped out Zhibo and divided its land into three families.

古文：三十七年，悼公卒，子嘉立，是为元公。
现代文：三十七年，悼公去世，他的儿子嘉继位，就是元公。
English: In the thirty-seventh year, Yue Gong died, and his son Jia Zuo succeeded to the throne, that is, Yuan Gong.

古文：元公二十一年卒，子显立，是为穆公。
现代文：元公二十一年去世，他的儿子显继位，就是穆公。
English: Yuan Gong died in the twenty-first year, and his son Xian Zong succeeded to the throne, that is, Mu Gong.

古文：穆公三十三年卒，子奋立，是为共公。
现代文：穆公三十三年去世，他的儿子奋继位，就是共公。
English: Mu Gong died at the age of thirty-three, and his son was enthroned as co-emperor.

古文：共公二十二年卒，子屯立，是为康公。
现代文：共公二十二年去世，他的儿子屯继位，就是康公。
English: He died in the 22nd year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son Tun, known as Kang.

古文：康公九年卒，子匽立，是为景公。
现代文：康公九年去世，他的儿子匽继位，就是景公。
English: Kang Gong died nine years later and was succeeded by his son Zou, also known as Jing Gong.

古文：景公二十九年卒，子叔立，是为平公。
现代文：景公二十九年去世，他的儿子叔继位，就是平公。
English: Jing Gong died in the 29th year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son and uncle, Ping Gong.

古文：是时六国皆称王。
现代文：此时六国皆自称为王。
English: At this time, all six countries claimed to be the king.

古文：平公十二年，秦惠王卒。
现代文：平公十二年，秦惠王去世。
English: In the twelfth year of Heiguo, Qin Hui Wang passed away.

古文：二十年，平公卒，子贾立，是为文公。
现代文：二十年，平公去世，其子贾继位，就是文公。
English: Twenty years later, Ping Gong died and was succeeded by his son Jia Zuo, also known as Wengong.

古文：文公元年，楚怀王死于秦。
现代文：文公元年，楚怀王死于秦国。
English: In the year of Wen, King Chu Huai died in Qin.

古文：二十三年，文公卒，子雠立，是为顷公。
现代文：二十三年，文公去世，其子雠继位，就是顷公。
English: Twenty-three years later, King Wen passed away, and his son, Emperor He, succeeded to the throne.

古文：顷公二年，秦拔楚之郢，楚顷王东徙于陈。
现代文：顷公二年，秦攻克楚国郢都，楚顷王向东迁都于陈。
English: In the second year of He Kung, Qin conquered the capital of Chu, and the king of Chu moved the capital to the east to Chen.

古文：十九年，楚伐我，取徐州。
现代文：十九年，楚伐鲁，战区徐州。
English: Nineteen years, Chuvaru, war zone Xuzhou.

古文：二十四年，楚考烈王伐灭鲁。
现代文：二十四年，楚考烈王伐灭鲁国。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, King Chu Kao went to the country of Lu.

古文：顷公亡，迁于下邑，为家人，鲁绝祀。
现代文：顷公逃亡，迁居到都外小邑，成为平民，鲁国祭祀灭绝。
English: The duke fled at once, moved to a small town outside the capital, became a civilian, and the sacrificial rites of the state of Lu became extinct.

古文：顷公卒于柯。
现代文：顷公在柯邑死去。
English: He died suddenly in Koeup.

古文：鲁起周公至顷公，凡三十四世。
现代文：鲁国自周公至顷公，总计三十四代。
English: From Zhou Gong to He Gong, there were a total of thirty-four generations in the State of Lu.

古文：太史公曰：余闻孔子称曰 甚矣鲁道之衰也！
现代文：太史公说：我听说孔子曾说 鲁国的道德真是衰微至极了！
English: Taishigong said, "I heard that Confucius once said, 'The morality of Lu is really extremely low!'"

古文：洙泗之间龂龂如也 。
现代文：洙水泗水之间人们争辩计较不已。 
English: People are still arguing among themselves.

古文：观庆父及叔牙闵公之际，何其乱也。
现代文：看看庆父、叔牙和闵公即位之时，鲁国多么混乱不堪！
English: Look at how chaotic the country of Lu was at the time of the enthronement of King Gyeongbokgung, King Taejo, and King Yeongjo!

古文：隐桓之事；襄仲杀适立庶；三家北面为臣，亲攻昭公，昭公以奔。
现代文：隐公桓公交替之事；襄仲杀嫡立庶；孟孙、叔孙、季孙三家本是臣子，却亲身攻打昭公，以致昭公逃亡。
English: Hinkonghuan's change of residence; Xiangzhong killed his father-in-law; Meng Sun, his uncle-in-law's son, and his grandson-in-law's son were originally vassals, but they personally attacked Zhaogong, causing Zhaogong to flee.

古文：至其揖让之礼则从矣，而行事何其戾也？
现代文：他们虽一直遵循礼仪揖让之节，但实际行事又多么与此违背啊！
English: Although they have always followed the rules of etiquette, how contrary to this they actually act!

