古文：柯陵之会，单襄公见晋厉公视远步高，晋郤锜，见其语犯；郤犨，见其语迂；郤至，见其语伐；齐国佐，见其语尽。
现代文：在柯陵盟会上，单襄公看到晋厉公走路时眼望远处，脚抬得很高。又见到晋国的郤锜语多冒犯，郤犫谈吐善绕弯子，郤至则自吹自擂，齐国的大臣国佐说话毫无忌讳。
English: At the Ke Ling League meeting, Shan Xianggong saw that when Jin Li Gong walked, his eyes were far away and his feet were raised very high. He also saw that the slang in Jin Province was more offensive, that the talk was good and round, and that the talk was boastful, and that the minister of Qi Province, Guo Zuo, spoke without restraint.

古文：鲁成公见，言及晋难及郤犨之谮。
现代文：鲁成公会见单襄公时，谈到晋对鲁的责备以及郤犨在晋侯面前诬陷自己的事。
English: When Lu Chenggong met with Shan Xianggong, he talked about Jin's reproach of Lu and how Yan framed himself in front of Jin.

古文：单子曰： 君何患焉！
现代文：单襄公说： 你有什么可担心的呢？
English: Shan Xianggong said, "What do you have to worry about?

古文：晋将有乱，其君与三郤其当之乎！ 
现代文：晋国很快就要发生内乱，国君和三郤恐怕要大难临头了。 
English: Civil strife is about to break out in Jin soon, and I'm afraid the sovereign and the Three Emperors are in for a rough ride.

古文：鲁侯曰： 寡人惧不免于晋，今君曰 将有乱 ，敢问天道乎，抑人故也？ 
现代文：鲁成公说： 我担心躲不过晋国的问罪，如今你说 晋将有内乱 ，请问这是从占卜得知的天意呢，还是推测的呢？ 
English: Lu Chenggong said, "I'm worried that I can't avoid Jin's accusation. Now you say that Jin will have civil unrest. Is this divination or speculation?"

古文：对曰： 吾非瞽、史，焉知天道？
现代文：单襄公答道： 我不是盲乐师和太史，怎么知道是不是天意呢？
English: Shan Xianggong replied: I am not a blind musician or a historian, how can I know if it is God's will?

古文：吾见晋君之容而听三郤之语矣，殆必祸者也。
现代文：我看到晋君的神态，听到三郤的言谈，觉得他们必将惹来灾祸。
English: I saw the expression on Jinjun's face, heard the words of the three magicians, and felt that they would surely bring about disaster.

古文：夫君子目以定体，足以从之，是以观其容而知其心矣。
现代文：君子以目光确定行动的方向，脚步随之配合，所以观察他的神态就可以知道他的内心。
English: A gentleman's gaze reflects the stability of his body, and his feet follow his gaze. Therefore, observing his facial expression, you can know his mind.

古文：目以处义，足以步目，今晋侯视远而足高，目不在体而足不步目，其心必异矣。
现代文：用目光来观察怎样行动合适，以脚步与之配合，如今晋侯眼望远处而脚步抬得很高，目光不支配自己的行动而脚步又不与之配合，他内心一定是在想其他的事情。
English: He used his eyes to observe how to act appropriately, and his steps to match them. Now Jin Hou's eyes are far away and his steps are raised high. His eyes do not control his actions, and his steps do not match them. He must be thinking about other things.

古文：目体不相从，何以能久？
现代文：目光和举止不相配合，怎么能长久呢？
English: If the eyes and the manners do not match, how can it last?

古文：夫合诸侯，民之大事也，于是乎观存亡。
现代文：与诸侯会盟，是国家的大事情，由此可以观察兴亡。
English: Furthermore, the gathering of the lords is an important matter concerning the people, and from this we can observe the rise and fall of the opportunity or hint of survival.

古文：故国将无咎，其君在会，步言视听，必皆无谪，则可以知德矣。
现代文：所以，国家没有灾祸，它的国君在盟会上的一举一动必定都无可指责，由此可以知道他的德行。
English: Therefore, there is no calamity in the country, and every move of its sovereign at the league meeting must be beyond reproach, from which we can know his virtue.

古文：视远，日绝其义；足高，日弃其德；言爽，日反其信，听淫，日离其名。
现代文：眼望远处，常常看不到合适的地方；脚步抬高，常常会失去应有的德行；言谈反覆常常会丧失信用；胡乱纳言，常常会削弱自己的名声。
English: An eye for an eye often misses the mark; a foot in the air often misses the virtue; a tongue in the mouth often misses the credit; and a tongue in the mouth often misses the fame.

古文：夫目以处义，足以践德，口以庇信，耳以听名者也，故不可不慎也。
现代文：眼光用来关注礼仪，行为用来履行道德，言谈用来恪守信用，耳朵用来明辨是非，所以不能不小心啊。
English: Eyes are used to pay attention to etiquette, behavior is used to fulfill morality, speech is used to abide by trust, ears are used to distinguish right from wrong, so you can't be careless.

古文：偏丧有咎，既丧则国从之。
现代文：这四者疏忽了一个就会带来灾祸，国家也跟着遭殃。
English: If any one of these four is negligent, a calamity will ensue, and the country will suffer.

古文：晋侯爽二，吾是以云。
现代文：晋侯疏失了两个方面，所以我说他将有祸。
English: Jinhou has now lost two of these aspects, which is why I have made this judgment.

古文： 夫郤氏，晋之宠人也，三卿而五大夫，可以戎惧矣。
现代文： 郤氏是晋国的宠臣，有三人为卿、五人为大夫，应该自我警惕了。
English: Mr. Zou is a favorite of the Jin Dynasty, with three titles of nobility and five titles of doctor. He should be wary of himself.

古文：高位实疾颠，厚味实腊毒。
现代文：地位高容易垮台，享禄重容易遭祸。
English: High status has the danger of downfall and subversion, and heavy taste has extreme poison.

古文：今郤伯之语犯，叔迂、季伐。
现代文：如今郤锜言语冒犯，郤犨言谈不直率而郑至则自我吹嘘。
English: Nowadays, Zheng Yi's words offend, Zheng Yi's words are not straightforward, and Zheng Yi is self-aggrandizing.

古文：犯则陵人，迂则诬人，伐则掩人，有是宠也而益之以三怨，其谁能忍之！
现代文：言语冒犯会伤害别人，谈吐绕弯子会诬妄别人，自我吹嘘则会掠人之美，郤氏有如此的宠信而加上这三者结怨于人，还有谁能容忍他们呢？
English: Offensive speech can hurt others, careless talk can mislead others, and self-aggrandizement can rob people of their beauty. With such favoritism for Mr. Xing, and with all three of them harboring grudges against others, who else can tolerate them?

古文：虽齐国子亦将与焉。
现代文：即使是齐国的国佐也将受到牵累。
English: Even the vice-governor of Qi will be involved.

古文：立于淫乱之国，而好尽言，以招人过，怨之本也。
现代文：他处在淫乱的国家，却喜欢毫无顾忌地言谈，指出他人的过失，这是引来怨恨的根源。
English: He is in an adulterous country, but he likes to talk freely, pointing out the faults of others, which is the source of resentment.

古文：唯善人能受尽言，齐其有乎？
现代文：只有善良的人才能接受别人的随意指责，齐国有这种人吗？
English: There are no good and honest people to listen to the outspoken words, is there such a person in Qi State?

古文：吾闻之，国德而邻于不修，必受其福。
现代文：我听说，修德的国家和无德的国家为邻，一定能得到好处。
English: I have heard that a country that cultivates virtue and a country that is devoid of virtue can certainly benefit from being neighbors.

古文：今君逼于晋而邻于齐，齐、晋有祸，可以取伯，无德之患，何忧于晋？
现代文：现在你的国家迫近晋国而与齐国为邻，齐、晋一旦有难，你就可以称霸了，问题在于有无德行，对于晋国有什么好担心的呢？
English: Now that your country is close to Jin Province and is a neighbor of Qi Province, once there is a difficulty in Qi and Jin, you will be able to dominate. The question is whether you are virtuous or not. What is there to worry about Jin Province?

古文：且夫长翟之人利而不义，其利淫矣，流之若何？ 
现代文：叔孙侨如好利而不施仁义，喜好骄奢淫逸，将他放逐如何？ 
English: If an uncle or a grandchild of overseas Chinese is greedy and does not practice benevolence and righteousness, and likes luxury and luxury, how about expelling him?

古文：鲁侯归，乃逐叔孙侨如。
现代文：鲁成公回国以后，就放逐了叔孙侨如。
English: After Lu Chengguo returned to China, he exiled his uncles and grandchildren.

古文：简王十一年，诸侯会于柯陵。
现代文：周简王十一年，诸侯在柯陵会盟。
English: In the eleventh year of King Zhou Jian, the princes formed an alliance in Ke Ling.

古文：十二年，晋杀三郤。
现代文：十二年，晋厉公杀了三郤。
English: In the twelfth year, Jin Li Gong killed San Xuan.

古文：十三年，晋侯弑，于翼东门葬，以车一乘。
现代文：十三年，晋厉公被栾书等人所杀，葬于翼城东门，葬礼只用一车四马。
English: In the thirteenth year, Jin Liguo was killed by Xun Shu and others, and was buried at the east gate of Yingcheng. The funeral only used one carriage and four horses.

古文：齐人杀国武子。
现代文：同年，齐灵公杀了国佐。
English: In the same year, Qi Ling Gong killed Guo Zuo.

