古文：此卷宋版原缺，予考家藏诸书得十一人补之，其余缺文尚俟他日，十山谈恺志。
现代文：此卷宋版原缺，予考家藏诸书得十一人补之，其余缺文尚俟他日，十山谈恺志。
English: This volume of the Song version was originally missing, and eleven people had to supplement it with books from the examiner's family collection. The remaining missing texts were found the next day, and the ten mountains were discussed.

古文：冼氏卫敬瑜妻周迪妻邹待征妻窦烈女郑神佐女卢夫人符凤妻吕荣封景文高彦昭女李诞女
现代文：洗氏卫敬瑜妻周迪妻邹待征妻窦烈女郑神佐女卢夫人符凤妻吕荣封景文高彦昭女李诞女
English: Ching's wife Wei Jingyu's wife Zhou Di's wife Zhou Xiao's wife Dou Rong's wife Zheng Shenza's wife Lu Lady Fu Feng's wife Lu Rongfeng's wife Jing Wen's wife Gao Yan's wife Zhou Di's wife

古文：义成妻魏知古妻侯四娘郑路女邹仆妻歌者妇
现代文：义成妻魏知古妻侯四娘郑路女邹仆妻歌者妇
English: Yicheng wife Wei Zhi ancient wife Hou four daughters Zheng Road maid servant wife singer wife

古文：冼氏
现代文：洗氏
English: Mr. Sae

古文：冼氏。高凉人。世为南越首领，部落十余万。
现代文：洗氏，高凉人，世代为南粤首领，部落有十余万人。
English: The Ching clan, Gaoliang people, have been the leaders of Southern Guangdong for generations. The tribe has more than 100,000 people.

古文：幼贤明，在父母家，能抚循部众，压服诸越。
现代文：洗氏自幼就贤惠聪明，未出嫁时，就能安抚部落中的民众，压服各方粤人。
English: Since childhood, Ching Shih has been virtuous and clever. When he is not married, he can appease the people in the tribe and win over the Cantonese from all sides.

古文：高凉太守冯宝闻其志行，娉为妻。
现代文：高凉太守冯宝听说了她的志向和操守，娶她为妻子。
English: Feng Bao, the governor of Gaoliang, heard of her ambition and integrity and married her.

古文：每与夫宝，参决词讼，政令有序。
现代文：她常常与丈夫冯宝一起，参与决策诉讼，使这里的行政措施和法令井然有序。
English: Together with her husband, Feng Bao, she often participates in decision-making proceedings to ensure that administrative measures and laws are in order.

古文：侯景反，都督萧勃征兵入援，遗刺史李迁仁召宝。宝欲往，氏疑其反，止之。后果反。
现代文：侯景反叛，都督萧勃调集军队支援，并派遣刺史李迁仕去召见冯宝，冯宝想要前往，洗氏怀疑他也要反叛，就阻拦了他，后来果然反叛。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, the governor Xiao Bo rallied the army to support him and sent his secretary Li Qian to summon Feng Bao. Feng Bao wanted to go, but Mr. Sae suspected that he also wanted to rebel, so he stopped him, and later he did indeed rebel.

古文：宝卒，岭表大乱，氏怀集之，百越晏然。
现代文：冯宝死后，岭南大乱，洗氏又使人们归顺于她，百粤之地平静下来。
English: After the death of Feng Bao, Lingnan was in turmoil. Ms. Saizhi made people submit to her, and the land of Guangdong became calm.

古文：子仆尚幼，以氏功封信都侯，诏册氏为高凉郡太夫人，赉繍幰油络驷马安车，鼓吹麾幢旌节，如刺史之仪。
现代文：当时洗氏的儿子冯仆还小，但由于洗氏的功劳封他为信都侯，皇帝下诏书册封洗氏为高凉郡太夫人，赏赐一驾挂着刺绣帷幔悬垂着丝质网绳套着四匹马的安车，鼓乐喧天，仪仗旗帜飘拂，并持有旌节，如迎接刺史一级官员的仪式。
English: At that time, Mr. Zai's son Fengpu was still young, but because of Mr. Zai's merits, he was named the prince of the capital. The emperor issued an edict to appoint Mr. Zai as the grand duchess of Gaoliang County. He was awarded a four-horse carriage with embroidered drapery hanging from a silk net rope. The drum music was loud, the ceremonial flags were flying, and there was a festival, such as the ceremony of welcoming a first-class official.

古文：仆卒。百越号夫人为圣母。
现代文：儿子冯仆死后，百粤人称夫人为圣母。
English: After the death of Feng Fu's son, hundreds of Cantonese people called his wife the Virgin Mary.

古文：王仲宣反，夫人帅师败之。亲披甲乘马，巡抚诸州，岭南悉定。封谯国夫人。
现代文：王仲宣反叛，夫人率师平乱，并披甲骑马，亲自到各州去安抚，岭南一带全部安定，又被册封方谯国夫人。
English: Wang Zhongxuan rebelled, his wife led the division to quell the turmoil, and put on armor and rode a horse, personally went to the states to appease, all the areas around Lingnan were stable, and she was awarded the title of Lady of Fangye Province.

古文：幕府署长史，官属给印章，便宜行事。
现代文：幕府中的长史，及所属官吏都授给印章，遇事不必先上奏，可以自行决断处置。
English: The long history of the shogunate, and the officials who belonged to it, were all awarded seals. In the event of an emergency, there was no need to report first, and they could make their own decisions.

古文：皇后赐以首饰及宴服一袭。
现代文：皇后还赐予她各种首饰及一套宴礼服。
English: The Queen also gave her a number of pieces of jewellery and a party dress.

古文：时番州总管赵纳贪虐，黎獠多亡叛。夫人上封事论之，敕夫人招慰。
现代文：当时番州总管赵讷十分贪婪残暴，当地土著人纷纷逃亡或反叛，夫人上了一份密封章奏要求给他论罪，皇帝下诏让夫人对当地的民众进行安抚并招之归顺。
English: At that time, the head of Fanzhou, Zhao Ne, was very greedy and cruel. Local aborigines fled or rebelled one after another. His wife put up a sealed petition demanding that he be condemned. The emperor ordered his wife to appease the local people and win their submission.

古文：夫人亲载诏书。自称使者，历十余州，宣述德意，所过皆降。
现代文：夫人亲自带着诏书，自称是朝廷的使者，经历了十几个州，宣扬讲述皇帝的恩惠，凡是她所经过的地方全都归顺。
English: The empress personally carried the imperial rescript, claiming to be an emissary of the imperial court, and traveled through more than a dozen states, preaching and recounting the emperor's favors, and all the places she passed through were submissive.

古文：文帝赐夫人临振县汤沐邑。
现代文：文帝赐给夫人临振县汤沐邑。
English: Emperor Wen gave Tang Muyi, Linzhen County, to his wife.

古文：卒谥诚敬。
现代文：死后谥号为城敬。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Cheng Jing.

古文：又冼氏高州保宁人也。
现代文：又洗氏是高州保宁人。
English: Matasai is a native of Boryeong, Goseong.

古文：身长七尺，多智谋，有三人之力，两乳长二尺余。或冒热远行，两乳搭在肩上。
现代文：身高七尺，很有智谋，有三个人的力气，两只乳房长二尺多，有时冒着酷暑远行，便把两只乳房搭在肩上。
English: He was seven feet tall, very resourceful, had the strength of three men, and his two breasts were more than two feet long. Sometimes, when he had to travel far in the sweltering heat, he would put his two breasts on his shoulders.

古文：秦末五岭丧乱，冼氏点集军丁，固护乡里，蛮夷酋长不敢侵轶。
现代文：秦朝末期五岭之地起祸乱，洗氏招集选派兵丁，固守家乡，使得许多少数民族的部落酋长不敢侵袭。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, a calamity occurred in the Wuling area. The Sais summoned and selected soldiers to defend their hometown, which made many ethnic minority tribal chiefs afraid to invade.

古文：及赵陀称王，遍霸岭表，冼氏乃赍军装物用二百担入觐。赵陀大慰悦。
现代文：等到赵陀称王，占据整个岭南地区时，洗氏便带上要赠送的二百担军装和物资去拜见，赵陀极为喜悦。
English: When Zhao Tuo proclaimed himself king and occupied the entire Lingnan region, Saizhi took the gift of two hundred cords of military uniforms and materials to visit him. Zhao Tuo was very pleased.

古文：与之言时政及论兵法，智辩纵横，陀竟不能折。
现代文：洗氏与他谈时政论兵法，智谋和辩才都纵横自如，赵陀竟辩驳不倒她，委托她治理高凉之地。
English: When Ching talked with him about politics, military tactics, strategy and debate, Zhao Duo could not refute her and entrusted her to govern the high and cold land.

古文：扙委其治高梁，恩威振物。邻郡赖之。
现代文：她的恩威震动了远近的民众，相邻的州郡都依附于她。
English: People from near and far have been moved by her generosity, and neighboring counties and states have come to rely on her.

古文：今南道多洗姓，多其枝流也。
现代文：如今岭南多有洗姓，那大多数都是她家族的后代。
English: Today, Lingnan has many surnames, most of which are descendants of her family.

古文：卫敬瑜妻
现代文：卫敬瑜妻
English: Wei Jingyu's wife

古文：卫敬瑜妻，年十六而夫亡。
现代文：卫敬瑜的妻子，十六岁时就死了丈夫。
English: Wei Jingyu's wife, her husband died when she was sixteen.

古文：父母舅姑欲嫁之，乃截耳为誓，不许。
现代文：父母及舅舅姑姑都打算让她改嫁，她割掉耳朵立誓，决不改嫁。
English: Her parents and aunts and uncles all wanted her to remarry, so she cut off her ear and vowed never to remarry.

古文：户有巢燕，常双飞，后忽孤飞，女感其偏栖，乃以缕系脚为誌。
现代文：她家住着一窝燕子，经常是双双伴飞，后来忽然变成了单飞燕，此女有感于它的孤处，便用一根丝线系在它的脚上作记号。
English: She had a family of swallows that often flew in pairs, and then suddenly became solitary. Sensing its isolation, the woman tied a piece of silk thread to mark its feet.

古文：后岁，此燕果复来，犹带前缕。妻为诗曰：昔年无偶去，今春又独归。
现代文：第二年，这只燕子果然又飞回来，还带着以前的丝线，她写诗道：昔年无偶去，今春又独归。
English: The following year, the swallow did indeed fly back, still carrying the old silk thread. She wrote a poem: Once upon a time, no one went, but this spring, everyone came back.

古文：故人恩义重，不忍更双飞。
现代文：故人恩义重，不忍更双飞。
English: The deceased was so grateful for their kindness that he couldn't bear to let them go.

古文：周迪妻
现代文：周迪妻
English: Zhou Di's wife

古文：周迪妻某氏。
现代文：周迪的妻子某氏。
English: Zhou Di's wife surnamed.

古文：迪善贾，往来广陵，会毕师铎乱，人相略卖以食。迪饥将绝，妻曰：今欲归，不两全。
现代文：周迪很善于做买卖，往来于广陵，正好遇上毕师铎叛乱，人们都互相抢掠出卖而赚钱吃饭，周迪已经饿得快要死去了，妻子道：如今想要回去，就不能两全了。
English: Zhou Di was very good at doing business. He went back and forth to Guangling. It just so happened that there was a rebellion by Bi Shizhen. People were robbing and betraying each other to make money to eat. Zhou Di was already starving to death. His wife said, "If you want to go back now, you can't have it both ways."

古文：君亲在，不可并死。愿见卖以济君行。
现代文：你有老人在世，我们二人不能一块死，只希望把我卖掉以便救济你返回去。
English: You have an old man alive, and we two cannot die together, and I only hope to sell myself in order to help you return.

古文：迪不忍，妻固与诣肆，售得数千钱以奉迪。
现代文：周迪不忍心，妻子决然地来到贩卖人口的店铺，卖钱数千都送予周迪。
English: Zhou Di could not bear it, so his wife resolutely went to the human trafficking shop and sold thousands of dollars to Zhou Di.

古文：至城门，守者谁何，疑其诒，与迪至肆问状，见妻首已在于枅突。
现代文：走到城门的时候，守门人盘查审问，怀疑他们是在欺骗，便要与周迪去店铺核实，此时见妻子的头已经置于她依靠的横梁木上。
English: When they got to the city gate, the gatekeeper interrogated them and suspected that they were cheating, so he had to check with Zhou Di in the store. At this time, he saw that his wife's head had been placed on the beam she was leaning on.

古文：迪裹余体归葬之。
现代文：周迪包裹起剩余的尸骨归来后把她埋葬。
English: Zhou Di wrapped up the remaining bones and returned to bury her.

古文：邹待征妻
现代文：邹待征妻
English: waiting for wife recruitment

古文：邹待征妻薄者，武康尉自牧之女也。
现代文：邹待征的妻子名字叫薄，是武康县尉自牧的女儿。
English: His wife's name was Bo, and she was the daughter of Wu Kang County's Lieutenant Zimu.

古文：从待征官江阴。
现代文：待征到江阴做官，薄也跟随而去。
English: Waiting to be drafted to Jiangyin to become an official, Bo also followed suit.

古文：袁晁乱，待征解印窜匿，薄为贼所掠，将污之，不从。语家媪，使报待征曰：我义不辱。
现代文：袁晁叛乱，待征扔掉官印逃跑躲避，薄被敌人抢走，想要污辱她，薄不依从，告诉她家的一个老女仆，并让她告诉待征说：我的义节不能玷污，我宁可投江而死。
English: Yuan Xuan rebelled, waited for conscription, threw away the official seal and ran away to avoid it, Bo was snatched by the enemy, who wanted to humiliate her, but she did not obey, told an old maid in her family, and asked her to tell the waiting for conscription that: My festival cannot be tarnished, I would rather die in the river.

古文：即死于水。贼去，得其尸，义声动江南。
现代文：敌人退走后，得到了她的尸体，她的声誉传遍了江南。
English: After the enemy retreated, they got her body, and her reputation spread throughout the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：闻人李华作《哀节妇赋》曰：昔岁群盗并起，横行海浙。
现代文：听说此事的人有个叫李华的写了一篇《哀节妇赋》：去年群盗并起，横行于沿海江浙一带。
English: A person named Li Hua, who heard about the incident, wrote an article entitled "Lamentation of the Women's Day": Last year, a group of thieves got together and rampaged along the coast of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：江阴万户，化为凝血。
现代文：江阴的千家万户，都化为一片片凝血。
English: Thousands of households in Jiangyin have all turned into blood clots.

古文：无石不焚，无玉不折。
现代文：他们无石不烧，无玉不断。
English: They have no stone, no fire, and no bead.

古文：峨峨薄媛，炯然名节。自牧之子，邹征之妻。玉德兰姿，女之英兮。
现代文：巍巍薄女，名节光耀，自牧之女，邹郎之妻，洁白的品德，芬芳的姿质，是女中的英豪。
English: The thin woman, the glory of the festival, the daughter of the herdsman, the wife of the herdsman, the white character, the fragrant posture, is the hero among women.

古文：邹也避祸，伏于榛莽。婉如之宾，执为囚虏。
现代文：邹待征避祸，藏于丛生的草木之中，她仿佛被抛弃了一样，被捕捉而成为囚徒。
English: Waiting for her prey, hiding in the thick vegetation, it was as if she had been abandoned, captured and imprisoned.

古文：匍匐泥沙，极望无睹。
现代文：当时是在泥沙中尽力爬行，极力盼望也看不到自己的亲人，而被投降的官吏告密。
English: At that time, he was crawling as hard as he could in the mud and sand, desperately hoping that he would not be able to see his relatives, but he was denounced by the surrendering officials.

古文：出授官之告，托垂白之姥。姥感夫人，爰达邹君。
现代文：夫人托一个白发老妇给带话，老妇被夫人所感动，于是把夫人的话转达给邹待征。
English: The lady asked a white-haired old woman to give a speech. The old woman was moved by the lady, so she conveyed the lady's words to the conscript.

古文：兵解求尸，在于江滨。
现代文：兵乱解除后去寻找尸体，发现于江畔。
English: After the mutiny was over, they went to look for the bodies and found them on the riverbank.

古文：哀风起为连波，痛气结为孤云。
现代文：哀风为她荡起水波，云气为她结成孤云。
English: For her, the wind of sorrow is like a wave of water, and the wind of clouds is like a solitary cloud.

古文：凫雁为之哀鸣，日月为之蒙昏。
现代文：凫雁为她哀鸣。日月为她蒙辉。
English: The wild geese wail for her, the sun and moon shine for her.

古文：端标移景而恒直，劲芳贯霜而犹存。
现代文：端标移景而恒直，盛开的香花即使遭了严霜而香气依然存在。
English: The end of the scale shifts and remains straight, and the fragrance of the blooming fragrant flowers still exists even if it is frosted.

古文：知子莫如父，诚哉长者之言。
现代文：知道孩子的谁也不如自己的父亲，最可信的是长辈的话。
English: No one knows a child better than his or her own father, and the words of elders are the most trustworthy.

古文：窦烈女
现代文：窦烈女
English: Dou Rongya

古文：奉天县窦氏二女伯娘、仲娘，虽长于村野，而幼有志操。
现代文：奉天县有两个姓窦的女子叫伯娘、仲娘，虽然生长在乡村荒野，但自幼便有志向和节操。
English: There are two women surnamed Dou in Bongtian County who are called Auntie and Middle Daughter. Although they grew up in the rural wilderness, they have had aspirations and discipline since childhood.

古文：住与邠州接界。
现代文：她们居住在与邠州相邻界的地方。
English: They live in a place adjacent to Zhangzhou.

古文：永泰中，草贼数千人持兵刃，入其村落，行剽劫。
现代文：唐朝永泰年间，有草贼数千人手持兵器，进入她们的村落，进行抢劫。
English: During the Yongtai era of the Tang Dynasty, thousands of armed grass thieves entered their villages and carried out robberies.

古文：闻二女有容色。
现代文：他们听说这两个女子很有姿色。
English: They had heard that the two women were good-looking.

古文：姊年十九，妹年十六，藏于岩窟间。贼徒拟为逼辱，乃先曳伯娘出，行数十步，又曳仲娘出，贼相顾自慰。
现代文：当时姐姐十九岁，妹妹十六岁，他们正藏在岩洞里，贼徒们想要对她们强行污辱，于是先从洞中拽出伯娘，走了数十步，又拽出了仲娘，贼徒们相互望了望，心中都很满意。
English: At that time, the sister was nineteen years old and the sister was sixteen years old. They were hiding in a cave. The thieves wanted to forcefully insult them, so they first pulled out the aunt from the cave, walked dozens of steps, and pulled out the middle daughter. The thieves looked at each other and were very satisfied.

古文：行临深谷，伯娘曰：我岂受贼污辱。
现代文：等走到深谷边上，伯娘说了声：我怎能受你们这些强盗的污辱！
English: When she came to the edge of a deep ravine, she said, "How can I bear the insults of you robbers!"

古文：乃投之于谷。
现代文：便跳下深谷去。
English: So he jumped down into the deep ravine.

古文：贼方惊骇，仲娘又投于谷。
现代文：强盗们还在惊惧中，仲娘也跳下去。
English: The robbers were still in shock, and the middle daughter also jumped down.

古文：谷深数百尺，姊寻卒，仲娘脚拆面破，血流被体，气绝良久而苏。贼义之而去。
现代文：谷深有数百尺，姐姐很快就死去了，仲娘摔得脚断脸破，遍身流血，断气很久又曾苏醒过，强盗这才作罢而去。
English: The valley is hundreds of feet deep, the sister died soon after, the middle daughter fell and broke her leg, her face was broken, and she bled all over her body. She had been unconscious for a long time and had woken up again, and the robber had just left.

古文：京兆尹第五琦感其贞烈，奏之，诏旌表门闾，长免丁役，二女葬事官给。
现代文：京兆尹第五琦感叹二女的贞烈，便奏于皇帝，皇帝下诏表彰了她们的世家，并永久免除她们的丁役，二女的葬事花费全部由官家付给。
English: Jing Zhaoyun lamented the two women's chastity on the 5th day of the 7th month, and then appealed to the emperor. The emperor issued an edict to commend their family, and permanently exempted them from the dingyuan. The funeral expenses of the two women were all paid by the government.

古文：京兆尹曹陆海，首赋以美之。
现代文：京兆尹曹陆海，头一个写赋赞美她们。
English: Jing Zhaoyin Cao Lu Hai was the first to praise them.

古文：烈女姓窦氏，小字桂娘。
现代文：烈女姓窦，字桂娘。
English: The heroine's surname is Dou, and the character Katsura is her daughter.

古文：父良，建中初为汴州户曹掾。
现代文：父名良，唐朝建中初为汴州户曹。
English: His father, Ming Liang, was a household serf in Zhangzhou at the beginning of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：桂娘美颜色，读书甚有文。
现代文：桂娘生得很美，从小读书，很有文采。
English: Gui Niang was born very beautiful. She has been reading since childhood and is very literate.

古文：李希烈破汴州，使甲士至良门取桂娘去。将出门，顾其父曰：慎无戚戚，必能灭贼，使大人取富贵于天子。
现代文：李希烈攻破汴州，派兵到窦家把桂娘抢走，快要走出门的时候，回头对她的父亲说：多加慎重不要悲伤，我一定能灭掉这些贼寇，让大人在天子那里取得富贵。
English: Li Xili broke through Zhangzhou, sent soldiers to Dou's house to snatch Gui Niang away, and when he was about to walk out the door, he turned back to her father and said: "Be more careful and don't be sad, I will definitely be able to eliminate these thieves and let the adults get rich and noble from the heavenly son."

古文：桂娘既以才色在希烈侧，复能巧曲取信。
现代文：桂娘是因为有才能和姿色，李希烈才让她伴随于自己身边的，因此她很快就巧妙地取得了李希烈的信任。
English: Gui Niang was only allowed to accompany Li Xilai because of her talent and appearance, so she quickly and skillfully gained Li Xilai's trust.

古文：凡希烈之密，虽妻子不知者，悉皆得闻。
现代文：凡是李希烈的机密，连他的妻子都不知道的，桂娘全都能够听到。
English: Gui Niang can hear all of Li Xilai's secrets that even his wife doesn't know.

古文：希烈归蔡州，桂娘谓希烈曰：忠而勇，一军莫如陈仙奇。
现代文：李希烈要回蔡州时，桂娘曾对他说：要论忠诚和勇敢，全军谁也不如陈仙奇。
English: When Li Xilai wanted to return to Caizhou, Gui Niang once said to him: In terms of loyalty and bravery, no one in the whole army is better than Chen Xianqi.

古文：其妻窦氏，仙奇宠且信之。愿得相往来，以姊妹叙齿，因徐说之，以坚仙奇之心。
现代文：他的妻子窦氏，陈仙奇是极宠爱信任的，我希望能与她互相往来，以姊妹相论，好对她慢慢劝说，以便使陈仙奇的心更坚定。
English: His wife Dou, Chen Xianqi is extremely fond of and trusts, I hope to be able to interact with her, talk to her as a sister, so as to persuade her slowly, so as to make Chen Xianqi's heart more firm.

古文：希烈然之。
现代文：李希烈答应了她。
English: Li Xirei agreed to go with her.

古文：因以姊事仙奇妻。
现代文：于是桂娘把陈仙奇的妻子当做姐姐来事奉。
English: As a result, Gui Niang treated Chen Xianqi's wife as if she were her sister.

古文：尝间谓曰：贼凶残不道，迟晚必败，姊因早图遗种之地。
现代文：桂娘曾为离间李、陈之间的关系而对她说：李贼凶残无道，早晚会失败，姐姐应该及早谋划投奔的地方。
English: Gui Niang once said to her because of the estrangement between Li and Chen: Li Qiye is ruthless and will fail sooner or later, and her sister should plan a place to flee to as early as possible.

古文：仙奇妻然之。
现代文：仙奇的妻子同意这样做。
English: Senchi's wife agreed to do so.

古文：兴元元年四月，希烈暴死。其子不发丧，欲尽诛老将校，俾少者代之。
现代文：兴元元年，李希烈暴死，他的儿子迟迟不公布，他打算全部杀掉那些老将校，让少壮派取代。
English: In the first year of Xingyuan, Li Xili died suddenly, and his son delayed to announce that he planned to kill all those old officers and let the younger generation take their place.

古文：计未决，有献含桃者。桂娘曰：希烈子谓分遗仙奇妻。
现代文：计谋尚未决定时，来了一个进献樱桃的人，桂娘说：希烈的儿子请你分出一些赠送给仙奇的妻子。
English: When the plan was still undecided, a man came to offer cherries. Guilin said, "Hirye's son asked you to allocate some to give to Xianqi's wife.

古文：且以示无事于外。
现代文：并以此来表现出自己对外面没有任何不正常的事。
English: And in this way to show themselves to the outside world that there is nothing abnormal.

古文：因为蜡帛书曰：前日已死，殡在后堂。
现代文：于是她在一片蜡帛上写道：李希烈前日已死，灵柩停放在后堂。
English: So she wrote on a piece of wax: "Li Xili died the day before yesterday. The coffin is in the back hall."

古文：欲诛大臣。须自为计。
现代文：其子打算诛杀各大臣，你们自己要想好计谋。
English: His son is planning to kill all the ministers. You have to come up with a good plan.

古文：次朱染帛丸如含桃。
现代文：接着用红色把帛丸染得如樱桃一样。
English: Next, the testicles are dyed red to look like cherries.

古文：仙奇发丸见之，言于薛育曰：两日称疾，但怪乐曲杂发，尽夜不绝，此乃有谋未定，示暇于外，事不疑矣。
现代文：仙奇发现了帛丸看到字后，告诉薛育说：两天来一直对外称病，只是演奏一些杂怪乐曲，彻夜不停，看来是有计谋没有定下来。其实这是想对外表示出空闲无事，好不让人们生疑。
English: After Xianqi discovered that Zhaomaru had seen the letter, he told Xue Yu: "For the past two days, Zhaomaru has been calling in sick, but he has only been playing some odd music, non-stop all night. It seems that there is a plan that has not been settled. In fact, this is to show the outside world that there is nothing to do, so as not to make people suspicious.

古文：明日，仙奇薛育各以所部兵噪于衙门，请见希烈。
现代文：第二天，仙奇、薛育各自派兵到衙门喧哗，请求见希烈。
English: The next day, Xianqi and Xue Yu each sent soldiers to the gate to make noise and ask to see her.

古文：烈子迫出拜，愿去伪号，一如李纳。
现代文：希烈的儿子被迫出来拜见，并愿意去掉伪号，仍如过去一样称李纳。
English: Hillel's son was forced to come out to meet him, and he was willing to remove his pseudonym and still be called Liner, as he had been in the past.

古文：仙奇曰：尔悖逆，天子有命。
现代文：陈仙奇道：你等叛逆，天子有令！
English: Chen Xianqi: Wait for the rebellion, God willing!

古文：因斩希烈妻及子函七首以献，陈尸于市。
现代文：于是斩了希烈的妻子儿子等七人的头献给朝廷，并把他们的尸体陈于大街上示众。
English: He then beheaded seven people, including Hilaire's wife and son, and presented their heads to the imperial court, and displayed their bodies in the streets.

古文：后两月，吴少诚杀仙奇，知桂娘谋，因亦杀之。
现代文：两个月后，吴少诚杀了陈仙奇，他知道前事出于桂娘的谋划，于是也杀了桂娘。
English: Two months later, Wu Shao Cheng killed Chen Xianqi. He knew that the previous incident was planned by Gui Niang, so he also killed Gui Niang.

古文：郑神佐女
现代文：郑神佐女
English: Zheng Shensa's daughter

古文：大中五年，兖州瑕丘县人郑神佐女，年二十四，先许适驰雄牙官李玄庆。
现代文：唐朝大中五年，兖州瑕丘县郑神佐的女儿，二十四岁，已答应嫁给驰雄牙官李玄庆。
English: In the fifth year of high school in the Tang Dynasty, the twenty-four-year-old daughter of Zheng Shenzao, Keqiu County, Zhangzhou, has agreed to marry the dental officer Li Xuanqing.

古文：神佐亦为官健，戍庆州。
现代文：郑神佐也是个当兵的，戍守于庆州。
English: Zheng Shenzao was also a soldier and stayed in Gyeongju.

古文：时党项叛，神佐战死，其母先亡，无子。
现代文：当时党项叛乱，郑神佐战死。郑女的母亲先已死去，他们没有男儿。
English: At the time of the party's rebellion, Zheng Shenza was killed in battle. Zheng's mother had already died, and they had no son.

古文：女以父战殁边城，无由得还，乃剪发坏形，自往庆州，护父丧还。
现代文：郑女因为父亲战死在边城，再也无法回来，便剪去头毁掉女子的相貌，独自一人前往庆州，护送父亲的遗体回来。
English: Because Zheng's father died in battle in the border city, she could no longer return, so she cut off her head to destroy the woman's appearance and went to Gyeongju alone to escort her father's body back.

古文：至瑕丘县进贤乡马青村，与母合葬。便庐于坟所，手植松桧，誓不适人。
现代文：将遗体运送到瑕丘县进贤乡马青村，与母亲合葬，便住在坟地的房子里，并亲手栽种了松柏，发誓永不嫁人。
English: He transported the remains to Maqing Village, Jinxian Township, Kejiu County, and buried them together with his mother. He then lived in a house in the cemetery, and personally planted conifers, vowing never to marry.

古文：节度使萧俶以状奏之曰：伏以闾里之中，罕知礼教。女子之性，尤昧义方。
现代文：节度使萧俶将此事写成文状奏予皇帝说：在乡里之中，很少懂得礼教，而乡村女子的本性，尤其不明白做人的正道。
English: Modesty prompted Xiao Yao to write a letter to the emperor, saying: In the countryside, people rarely understand etiquette, and the nature of rural women, in particular, does not understand the right way to be a person.

古文：郑氏女痛结穷泉，哀深陟岵。投身沙碛。归父遗骸。
现代文：但是郑氏女子把悲痛完全凝结在坟墓中，以深深的悲哀怀念父亲，她投身于沙漠，收回了父亲的遗骨。
English: But Zheng's wife completely congealed her grief in the grave, remembering her father with deep sorrow. She threw herself into the desert and retrieved her father's remains.

古文：远自边陲，得还闾里。感蓼莪以积恨，守丘墓以誓心。克彰孝理之仁，足励贞方之节。
现代文：从遥远边陲，能回到她故乡，并由悼念亡亲的悲郁之情而聚结为对敌人的仇恨，决心守护坟墓而发誓不再嫁人，应该表彰这种孝道精神，鼓励这种忠贞的节操。
English: To be able to return to her hometown from a faraway land, and from the sadness of mourning the death of a relative to unite in hatred of the enemy, determined to guard the grave and vow not to marry, should commend this kind of filial spirit and encourage this kind of loyalty.

古文：诏旌表门闾。
现代文：皇帝下诏表彰了她的家庭。
English: The emperor honored her family with an imperial edict.

古文：□赞曰：政教隆平，男忠女贞。礼以自防，义不苟生。
现代文：并赞扬道：由于赏罚和教化使天下太平，男人忠诚女人坚贞，讲礼仪而能自我防范，讲正义而不苟且偷生。
English: He also praised: because of reward and punishment and enlightenment, the world is peaceful, men are loyal and women are steadfast, they are able to protect themselves by talking about etiquette, and they are not scrupulous when talking about justice.

古文：彤管有炜，兰闺振声。关睢合雅，始号文明。
现代文：大笔生辉，闺房的名声大振，《关睢》符合雅的教化，这是第一个被称为文明的。
English: With a large amount of brilliance, the reputation of the boudoir is strong, and "Guan Xuan" is in line with the enlightenment of elegance. It is the first to be called a civilization.

古文：卢夫人
现代文：卢夫人
English: Mrs. Lu

古文：卢夫人，房玄龄妻也。
现代文：卢夫人，房玄龄的妻子。
English: Lady Lu, the wife of Fang Xuanling.

古文：玄龄微时，病且死，诿曰：吾病革，君年少，不可寡居，善事后人。
现代文：还是在房玄龄地位卑微时，有一次他病得将要死了，于是对她托言道：我病得快要死了，你还年轻，不可守寡，你要善于侍奉那个后来人。
English: When he was still in a lowly position in his twilight years, he was once so ill that he was on the verge of death, so he told her, "I am so ill that I am on the verge of death. You are still young, you should not be a widow. You should be good at serving those who come after you."

古文：卢泣入帷中，剔一目示玄龄，明无他。
现代文：卢夫人哭着进入帷帐中，剜出一只眼珠示于房玄龄，以证明自己决不会有二心。
English: Crying, Mrs. Lu went into the curtain and pecked out one of her eyes to show it to Fang Xuanling, to prove that she would never have a double heart.

古文：会玄龄良愈，礼之终身。
现代文：恰巧房玄龄的病康复了，房玄龄对她终身都很敬重。
English: It just so happens that Fong Xuanling has recovered from her illness. Fong Xuanling has always respected her.

古文：□按《妒妇记》。亦有夫人，何贤于微时而妒于荣显邪？
现代文：可是考察一下《妒妇记》，那里面也有卢夫人，为什么在房玄龄卑微的时候她很贤惠，而到他地位显赫时她便有了妒忌之心呢？
English: But if you look at "The Tale of the Jealous Wife," which also features Lady Lu, why is it that she was very virtuous when Fang Xuan was humble, but when he was prominent, she became jealous?

古文：予于是而有感。
现代文：我于是很有些感慨。
English: So I'm a little emotional.

古文：符凤妻
现代文：符凤妻
English: Fu Feng's Wife

古文：玉英，唐时符凤妻也，尤姝美。
现代文：玉英，唐朝时符凤的妻子，生得十分美丽。
English: Jade Ying, the wife of Fu Feng during the Tang Dynasty, was born very beautiful.

古文：凤以罪徙儋州，至南海，为獠贼所杀，胁玉英私之。
现代文：符凤因获罪而被流放于儋州，走到广州时，被当地的土著人杀死，并威胁玉英供他们奸淫。
English: As a result of her crime, Fu Feng was exiled to Ganzhou. When she went to Guangzhou, she was killed by local aborigines, who threatened to force her to have sex with them.

古文：对曰：一妇人不足以事众男子，请推一长者。
现代文：玉英道：我只一个女人，哪里能侍奉这么多男子？请推举出一个年长的人来。
English: Yu Ying said: I am only one woman, how can I serve so many men? Please nominate an older person.

古文：贼然之，乃请更衣。
现代文：强盗们答应了她，便请她去换衣服。
English: The robbers agreed to let her go and asked her to change her clothes.

古文：有顷，盛服立于舟上，骂曰：受贼辱，不如死。
现代文：过了一会儿，玉英身着盛服站在船上，骂道：受贼人的污辱，不如一死！
English: After a while, Yu Ying stood on the boat in her ceremonial dress and cursed, "It's better to die than to be insulted by a thief!"

古文：遂自沉于海。
现代文：于是跳入海中。
English: So he jumped into the sea.

古文：吕荣
现代文：吕荣
English: Lv Rong

古文：许升妻吕氏字荣。
现代文：许升的妻子吕氏字荣。
English: Xu Sheng's wife, Lv Shiji Rong.

古文：升少为博徒，不理操行。
现代文：许升年轻时是个赌徒，不修养自己的品行。
English: When he was young, Xu Sheng was a gambler and did not cultivate his character.

古文：荣尝躬勤家业，以奉养其姑，数劝升修学。
现代文：吕荣曾经亲自去操持家里的产业，以便奉养她的婆母。并多次劝他钻研学业。
English: Lu Rong used to personally manage the family's property in order to support her mother-in-law, and repeatedly advised him to study hard.

古文：每有不善，辄流涕进规。
现代文：许升每次有不良行为，她就流着眼泪对他进言规劝。
English: Every time Xu Sheng misbehaved, she would tearfully urge him on.

古文：荣父积忿疾升。乃呼荣，欲改嫁之。
现代文：吕荣的父亲长期积蓄的愤恨终于暴发出来，于是要叫回吕荣打算让她改嫁。
English: Lv Rong's father's long-simmering resentment finally erupted, and he called Lv Rong back, intending to remarry her.

古文：荣叹曰：命之所遭，义无离贰。
现代文：吕荣叹息道：这个命中应有的遭遇，在道义上也是不该离异再嫁的。
English: Lu Rong sighed and said, "This fate should have happened to me. Morally, I should not have divorced and remarried."

古文：终不肯归。
现代文：始终不肯回去。
English: He always refused to go back.

古文：升感激自励，乃寻师远学，遂以成名。
现代文：许升因此受到感动而自勉自励，于是到外地去求师学习，终于取得功名。
English: As a result, Xu Sheng was moved and encouraged himself, so he went to a foreign country to learn from a teacher, and finally achieved fame.

古文：寻被本州辟命，行至寿春，为盗所杀。
现代文：不久被本州推荐任命为官，走到寿春县时，被强盗杀害。
English: Soon after, he was recommended by Honshu to be appointed as an official. When he went to Shuchun County, he was killed by robbers.

古文：刺史尹耀捕盗得之。荣迎丧于路，闻而诣州，请甘心仇人。
现代文：刺史尹耀捕捉到了那个盗贼，当吕荣去大路迎丧的时候，听说捕到盗贼。
English: When Lv Rong went to the main road to mourn, he heard that the thief had been caught.

古文：耀听之。荣乃手断其头，以祭升灵。
现代文：便来到州府，请求戮杀仇人，尹耀听允了她的要求，吕荣便亲手砍下盗贼的头，用以祭奠亡灵。
English: She came to the state capital and asked for permission to kill the enemy. Yin Yao agreed to her request, and Lv Rong cut off the thief's head with his own hands to pay tribute to the dead.

古文：所郡遭寇贼，贼欲犯之，荣逾垣走。贼拔刀追之，贼曰：从我则生，不从我则死。
现代文：后来郡内遭遇寇贼，强盗们要奸辱她，她越墙而走，强盗持刀将她追获，说：从我则生，不从我则死！
English: Later, there was a robbery in the county. The robbers wanted to rape and humiliate her. She fled over the wall. The robbers chased her with a knife, saying: "From me you live, without me you die!"

古文：荣曰：义不以身受辱。
现代文：吕荣说：为了节操道义，决不让身子受到污辱！
English: Lu Rong said: In order to uphold morality, never let your body be insulted!

古文：寇虏遂杀之。
现代文：强盗于是将她杀死。
English: The robber then killed her.

古文：是日，疾风暴雨。雷电晦冥，贼惶惧，叩头谢罪，乃殡葬之。
现代文：这一天，刮起了大风下起了暴雨，雷击电闪，强盗恐慌了，立即叩头谢罪，并把她埋葬了。
English: On this day, there was a strong wind, torrential rain, lightning and lightning, and the robber panicked, immediately bowed and buried her.

古文：封景文
现代文：封景文
English: 封景文

古文：殷保晦妻，封敖孙也，名绚字景文，能文章草隶。
现代文：殷保晦的妻子，是封敖的孙女，名绚字景文，会写文章，并擅长草书、隶书。
English: The wife of Yin Baoqiao is the granddaughter of Fong Yao. She is famous for her beautiful calligraphy, can write articles, and is good at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：保晦历校书郎，黄巢入长安，共匿兰陵里。
现代文：殷保晦任校书郎时，黄巢进入长安，夫妻一起藏于兰陵。
English: When Yinbao was about to become a school teacher, Huang Chao entered Chang'an, and the couple hid together in Lanling.

古文：明日，保晦逃，贼悦封色，欲取之，固拒。
现代文：第二天，殷保晦逃走，贼人喜欢景文的美色，想要娶她，被她严厉拒绝。
English: The next day, Yinbao fled. The thief liked Jingwen's beauty and wanted to marry her, but she sternly refused.

古文：贼诱悦万词，不答。
现代文：贼人好话说了千千万，封景文仍不答应。
English: The thief said thousands of good words, but Fengjingwen still did not agree.

古文：贼怒勃然曰：从则生，不然，正膏我剑。
现代文：贼人勃然大怒道：从我则生，不然的话，正好用你来润滑一下我的剑！
English: The thief flew into a rage and said, "From me, otherwise, I just used you to grease my sword!"

古文：封骂曰：我公卿子，守正而死。犹生也。
现代文：封景文骂道：我乃是公卿之后，守节而死，虽死犹生！
English: Fu Jingwen scolded, "I am a court noble, and I died keeping the festival, even though I am still alive!

古文：终不从逆贼手，遂遇害。
现代文：一直不肯依从贼人而让他得手，于是被杀害。
English: He had always refused to follow the thief and let him win, so he was killed.

古文：保晦归，左右曰：夫人死矣。
现代文：保晦回来，左右告诉他说：夫人死了！
English: She came back in a daze and told him: "Madame is dead!"

古文：保晦号而绝。
现代文：保晦痛哭而死去。
English: He died crying bitterly.

古文：高彦昭女
现代文：高彦昭女
English: Takahiko Akio

古文：高愍女名妹妹。
现代文：高愍女，原名叫妹妹。
English: A high-ranking woman, her original name was Sister.

古文：父彦昭，事正己，及纳拒命，质其妻子，使守濮阳。
现代文：父亲高彦昭，原来在正己手下做官，等到让他归顺时被他拒绝。于是留下他的妻子儿女为人质，派他去驻守濮阳。
English: His father, Takahiko Akira, used to work as an official under Masaki, but when he was asked to surrender, he refused, so he left his wife and children as hostages and sent him to garrison Fenyang.

古文：建中二年，挈城归河南都统刘玄佐。
现代文：唐朝建中二年，高彦昭带着城池归府河南都统刘玄佐，因而他的家属全被屠杀。
English: In the second year of the middle school of the Tang Dynasty, Takahiko Akira returned to the capital city of Henan with Liu Xuanzu, and his family members were all massacred.

古文：屠其家，时女七岁，母李怜其幼，请免死为婢，许之。女不肯曰：母兄皆不免，何赖而生。
现代文：当时他的女儿才七岁，母亲李氏可怜她还年幼，请求免她一死去做婢女，他们答应了她的要求，可是女儿不肯，道：母亲哥哥都不免死，还依靠谁活着？
English: At that time, his daughter was only seven years old. Her mother, Ms. Li, pitied her because she was still young and asked to be spared from being a maid when she died. They agreed to her request, but her daughter refused, saying, "My mother and brother are not spared from death. Who do I rely on to stay alive?"

古文：母兄将被刑，遍拜四方，女问故，答曰：神可祈也。
现代文：母亲和哥哥将要被执行，于是遍拜四方，女儿问为何要拜，母亲说：这是向神祷告乞求。
English: Her mother and brother were about to be executed, so they bowed in all directions. When her daughter asked why they had to bow, her mother said: "It is a prayer and supplication to God."

古文：女曰：我家以忠义诛，神尚何知而拜之。
现代文：女儿道：我们家是因为忠义而被杀，神怎么不知道而还要去拜它？
English: The daughter said, "Our family was killed because of our loyalty. How could God not know and still want us to worship him?"

古文：问父所在，西向哭，再拜就死。
现代文：她问过父亲在哪里，便面向西方痛哭，再拜而后赴死。
English: After asking where her father was, she wept bitterly facing west, bowed down and died.

古文：德宗骇叹，诏太常谥曰愍，诸儒争为之诔。
现代文：德宗对此女很惊叹，下诏由太常博士为此女立谥号为愍，许多儒士都争相为她写悼念文章。
English: Desong was very surprised by this woman. The next edict was issued by Dr. Taejong, and many Confucians rushed to write mourning articles for her.

古文：彦昭从玄佐救宁陵，复汴州，授颖州刺史，朝廷录其忠。
现代文：后来高彦昭随刘玄佐援救宁陵，收复汴州，被授予颖州刺史，朝廷记载了他的忠君事迹。
English: Later, Gao Yan Zhao followed Liu Xuan Zuo to rescue Ningling and recover Luzhou, and was awarded the Yingzhou History Prize. The imperial court recorded his deeds of loyalty.

古文：居州二十年不徙，卒赠陕州都督。
现代文：他在颖州任职二十年而未迁调，死后追赠为隘州都督。
English: He served in Yingzhou for twenty years without being transferred. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of governor of Yingzhou.

古文：李诞女
现代文：李诞女
English: Li Zhouzhen

古文：东越闽中有庸岭，高数十里。
现代文：东越的闽中县有一座庸岭，从下面到岭顶要走数十里路。
English: There is a yongling ridge in Bozhong County, East Vietnam. It takes dozens of miles to walk from the bottom to the top of the ridge.

古文：其下北隰中，有大蛇，长七八丈，围一丈。土俗常惧。
现代文：在岭北坡的阴湿地带，有一条大蛇，长有七八丈，身围有一丈，当地的土著人对它常常感到恐慌。
English: In the damp area of the northern slope of the ridge, there is a big snake that is seven or eight feet long and has a circumference of one foot, and the local indigenous people often panic about it.

古文：东治都尉及属城长吏多有死者。祭以牛羊。故不得福。或与人梦，或喻巫祝，欲得啖童女年十二三者。
现代文：东治的都尉以及所属县邑的长吏们多有被蛇咬死的，于是使用牛羊祭祀，可是仍然不太平，或者给人托梦，或者告诉巫师，说想要吃十二三岁的童女。
English: The captains of Tōji and the governors of the counties and townships to which they belong have often been bitten to death by snakes, so they use cow and sheep sacrifices, but it is still not peaceful, or they tell people about their dreams, or they tell wizards that they want to eat twelve- or thirteen-year-old girls.

古文：都尉、令长患之。共求人家生婢子兼有罪家女养之。至八月朝。祭送蛇穴口。蛇辄夜出吞啮之。
现代文：都尉令长们都很担忧害怕，就一起去寻找那些婢奴生的或罪犯家的小姑娘先领来养着，到了八月初，便祭送到蛇洞口，蛇到晚上就出来将她吞食了。
English: The captains were very worried and afraid, so they went together to find the little girls born to slaves or criminals to raise. At the beginning of August, they took the offering to the mouth of the snake cave, and the snake came out in the evening to devour her.

古文：累年如此。前后已用九女。
现代文：年年如此，前后已送去了九个童女。
English: Year after year, nine girls have been sent away.

古文：一岁将祀之，募索未得。
现代文：有一年，快要到祭礼的日期了，可是没有招募童女。
English: One year, nearing the date of the festival, there was no call for virgins.

古文：将乐县李诞家有六女无男，其小女名寄，应募欲行。父母不听。寄曰：父母无相留。今惟生六女，无有一男。虽有如无。
现代文：将乐县李诞家有六个女儿没有一个男儿，他的小女儿名叫李寄，应招要去，父母不让，李寄道：父母不要相留，如今只生了我们六个女儿，没有一个男儿，你们虽有孩子也像没有一样。
English: The Li Xing family in Le County has six daughters and no son. His youngest daughter, Li Ying, is applying for a job, but her parents won't let her go. Li Ying said, "Parents, don't stay together. Today, we only have six daughters and no son. Even if you have children, it's like you don't have any."

古文：女无缇萦济父母之功，既不能供养，徒费衣食。生无所益，不如早死。
现代文：我活着不会有缇萦拯救父母那样的功劳，不能供养老人，白白地浪费衣服粮食，活着也对家庭无益，不如早点死了。
English: If I live, I won't have the merit of saving my parents, I won't be able to provide for the elderly, I'll waste clothes and food in vain, and it won't be good for my family if I live. I'd rather die early.

古文：卖寄之身，可得少钱以供父母，岂不善耶？
现代文：把我卖了，还可以少得一点钱用来供养父母，这不是一件好事吗？
English: Isn't it a good thing to sell me so that I can have a little less money to support my parents?

古文：父母慈怜不听去。终不可禁止。
现代文：父母仍然疼爱她不让她去，然而终于没能禁止，李寄还是去了。
English: Her parents still loved her and didn't let her go, but eventually they couldn't forbid it, and Li Ying still went.

古文：寄乃行，请好剑及咋蛇犬。至八月朝，便诣庙中坐。怀剑将犬。
现代文：她去求要到一把好剑和一条咬蛇犬，到了八月初，便到庙中来坐，怀中藏着剑并领着狗。
English: She went to ask for a good sword and a snake-biting dog, and at the beginning of August she came to sit in the temple, with a sword hidden in her bosom and a dog.

古文：先作数石米糍蜜麸以置穴口。蛇夜便出，头大如囷，目如二尺镜。闻糍香气，先啖食之。
现代文：她先把几石用蜂蜜炒的糍粑放在洞口，到了晚上蛇便出来了，那蛇头大如谷仓，眼睛如二尺镜，闻到糍粑的香味，先去吞食。
English: She first put a few stones of honey-roasted toad in the mouth of the cave, and in the evening the snake came out. The snake's head was as big as a barn, and its eyes were like two-foot mirrors. It smelled the toad's scent and went to devour it first.

古文：寄便放犬，犬就啮咋。寄从后斫。
现代文：这时李寄放出狗，那狗扑上去便咬，李寄随后冲上去用剑砍杀。
English: At this time, Li Ying let out a dog, the dog jumped up and bit, Li Ying then rushed up and slashed with a sword.

古文：蛇因踊出，至庭而死。
现代文：那蛇于是窜出洞来，到了庙的庭院便死了。
English: The snake then crawled out of the cave and died in the courtyard of the temple.

古文：寄入视穴，得其九女髑髅。悉举出。咤言曰：汝曹怯弱，为蛇所食，甚可哀愍！
现代文：李寄到洞中去察看，得到那九个童女的头骨，全举在手中走出来，悲痛地说：你们太怯弱了，全都被蛇吃掉，实在太可怜了！
English: Li sent a crane into the cave to investigate, and when he obtained the skulls of the nine maidens, he came out holding them up in his hands and said sadly, "You are too timid. All of you have been eaten by snakes. How pitiful!"

古文：于是寄女缓步而归。
现代文：于是李寄缓步而归。
English: So Li Ying slowly walked back.

古文：越王闻之，聘寄为后，拜其父为将乐令，母及姊皆有赐赏。
现代文：越王听说此事后，娶李寄为王后，授予她父亲将乐县令，母亲及姐姐们也都有赏赐。
English: When King Yue heard of this, he married Li Ying as his queen and granted her father the title of General of Le County. Her mother and sisters were also rewarded.

古文：自是东治无复妖邪之法。其歌谣至今存焉。
现代文：从此东治之地再也没有妖邪作乱，那赞颂李寄的歌谣至今还在流传。
English: Since then, there have been no more evil spirits in the land of Tōji, and the songs praising Li Yingwu are still being circulated.

古文：义成妻
现代文：义成妻
English: The Self-Made Woman

古文：汉源县人义成妻，壮年无子。
现代文：汉源县人义成的妻子，到了壮年也没生儿子。
English: The wife of Yicheng, a native of Hanyuan County, did not give birth to a son in her prime.

古文：夫死将葬，及先殡时，含毒药酒，至未入墓时，抚棺吞之而死。
现代文：丈夫死了将要埋葬，在没有下葬之前，她先含上一口毒药酒，等到就要入墓时，她抚着棺材吞酒而死。
English: When her husband died and was about to be buried, she took a sip of poisoned wine before he was buried, and when she was about to enter the grave, she stroked the coffin and swallowed the wine and died.

古文：乃为合葬焉。
现代文：于是把他们一起合葬。
English: So they were buried together.

古文：时以状闻，有诏赐帛。
现代文：当时皇帝从上奏的文书中知道了这件事，下诏书给予表彰并赐予布帛。
English: At that time, the emperor knew about this matter from the above-mentioned document, and the following edict gave commendation and bestowed cloth coats.

古文：事见常琥《国志》。
现代文：此事见于常琥国志。
English: This event is recorded in the History of Chang'an.

古文：魏知古妻
现代文：魏知古妻
English: Wei Zhiguo's wife

古文：唐工部尚书魏知古，性雅正，善属文。
现代文：唐朝时，工部尚书魏知古，性格文雅正直，善于写文章。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Gongbu Shangshu Wei Zhi Guo was an elegant and honest person who was good at writing articles.

古文：年七十，卒于位。
现代文：七十岁时，死于任上。
English: He died in office at the age of seventy.

古文：妻苏氏不哭。比至，香水洗浴，含袭讫，举声一恸而绝。与尚书同日合丧。
现代文：他的妻子苏氏开始并未哭，等她来到之后，先是用香水为他擦洗身子，再给他口中含上玉换好衣裳之后，一声痛哭而死去，与尚书同日合葬。
English: His wife, Su, did not cry at first. When she arrived, she first scrubbed his body with perfume, and then changed his clothes with a jewel in her mouth. She died with a cry of pain and was buried with him on the same day.

古文：时奇其节，以为前代未之有。
现代文：当时人们十分惊奇她的节操，认为这是从前没有过的。
English: At the time, people were amazed at her restraint, saying it was unprecedented.

古文：侯四娘
现代文：侯四娘
English: The fourth daughter of the family

古文：至德元年，史思明未平，卫州有妇人侯四娘等三人，刺血谒于军前，愿入义营讨贼。
现代文：唐朝至德元年，史思明叛乱尚未平息，卫州曾有侯四娘等三名妇女，刺血为誓拜于军前，要求加入正义之师去讨贼。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the first year of the German era, the Shishiming Rebellion had not yet subsided. In Weizhou, there were three women, including the four daughters of the Hou family, who pricked their blood to swear allegiance to the army and asked to join the Justice Division to hunt down thieves.

古文：郑路女
现代文：郑路女
English: Zheng Lu Zhen

古文：郑路昆仲有为江外官者，维舟江渚。群偷奄至，即以所有金帛罗列岸上，而恣贼运取。
现代文：郑路兄弟有到江南去做官的，他们把船停泊在江中的小岛旁，突然来了一群强盗，他们就把所有的金帛等贵重物品都陈放在岸上，任贼人随便拿取。
English: The Zhenglu brothers went to the south of the Yangtze River to work as officials. They moored their boat next to a small island in the river. Suddenly, a group of robbers came. They put all the gold and other valuables on the shore and let the thieves take them at will.

古文：贼一不犯，曰：但得侍御小娘子足矣。
现代文：可是贼人却一件不要，说：只要得到侍御史的小娘子就满足了。
English: But the thief did not want a single thing, and said: "As long as I get the little maid of history, I will be satisfied."

古文：其女则美色，贼潜知之矣。
现代文：郑路的女儿是个美人，贼人是在暗中知道的。
English: Zheng Lu's daughter is a beauty, and the thief secretly knows it.

古文：骨肉相顾，不知所以答。女欣然请行。
现代文：骨肉亲人面面相顾，不知该如何回答为妥，而郑女却欣然同意随他而去。
English: The flesh-and-blood relatives looked at each other, not knowing how to answer, but Zheng agreed to go with him.

古文：其贼即具小舟，载之而去。
现代文：那贼也有小船，便载她而去。
English: The thief also had a boat, and he took her away.

古文：谓贼曰：君虽为偷，得无所居与亲属焉？
现代文：郑女对那贼人道：你虽然以偷盗为生，可是能没有家和亲属吧？
English: Zheng Niang said to the thief: Although you steal for a living, can you not have a home and relatives?

古文：然吾家衣冠族也。
现代文：然而我家是士大夫家族。
English: However, I come from a family of doctors.

古文：既为汝妻，岂以无礼见逼。
现代文：如今既然要做你的妻子了，怎么能对我无礼相逼呢？
English: Now that I'm going to be your wife, how can you push me so rudely?

古文：若达所止，一会亲族，以托好仇足矣。贼曰：诺。
现代文：要是到达你所去的地方，见到你的亲属，能把你的妻子安顿托附好我就满足了。那贼人说：行。
English: If I can get to where you're going, meet your relatives, and get your wife settled and attached, I'll be satisfied.

古文：又指所偕来二婢曰：公既以偷为名，此婢不当有，为公计，不若归吾家。
现代文：郑女又指着带来的两个婢女道：你既然以偷为名，就不该有这些婢女，为你打算，不如把她们送回我家好。
English: Zheng Niang also pointed to the two maids she had brought with her and said, "Since you have stolen as your name, you shouldn't have these maids. As far as you are concerned, it's better to send them back to my home."

古文：贼以貌美，其言且顺，顾已无不可者，即自鼓其棹，载二婢而去。
现代文：那贼人因为她貌美，她说什么他都顺从，因此让他做什么他就做什么，他便亲自划桨，载着二个婢女走了。
English: The thief, because she was beautiful, obeyed everything she said, and therefore did whatever she told him to do. He paddled himself and took the two maids with him.

古文：女于是赴江而死。
现代文：郑女于是跳江而死。
English: Zheng then jumped into the river and died.

古文：邹仆妻
现代文：邹仆妻
English: housemaid

古文：梁末龙德壬午岁，襄州都军务邹景温移职于徐，亦绾都军之务。
现代文：后梁朝末期龙德壬午年，襄州都军务邹景温调任去徐州，仍然掌管都军之务。
English: After the end of the Liang Dynasty, in the year of Long De Ren Wu, the military affairs of the capital of Xiangzhou were transferred to Xuzhou, and he was still in charge of the affairs of the capital.

古文：有劲仆，自恃拳勇，独与妻策驴以路。
现代文：他有一个很强健的仆人，仗着自己有武功而勇猛有力，便独自与妻子骑驴上路。
English: He had a very strong servant, who rode on a donkey with his wife.

古文：至宋州东芒砀泽，素多贼盗，行旅或孤，则鲜有获免者。其日与妻偕憩于坡之半双柳树下，大咤曰：闻此素多豪客，岂无一人与吾曹决胜负乎！
现代文：走到宋州东芒县的砀泽，这里平素多有强盗，路经这里的人凡有孤单的，很少能免除被抢劫杀害的，这天他便与妻子在这里的坡旁双柳树下歇息，他大声讲道：听说此地平素多有豪客，怎么没一个敢来与我决一胜负啊！
English: When he went to Heze in Songzhou's Dongmang County, there were usually robbers here, and anyone who passed through here who was alone could rarely avoid being robbed and killed. On this day, he and his wife rested under the double willow trees next to the slope, and he preached loudly: I heard that there are many high-rollers in this plain, how come no one dares to fight me!

古文：言粗毕，有五六盗自丛薄间跃出，一夫自后双手交抱，搏而仆之，其徒遽扼其喉，抽短刃以断之。
现代文：话音刚落，便有五六个强盗从树丛中跳出来，一人从后边双手将他抱住，与他拼搏并把他扑倒，那贼手下的众徒便立即按住他的脖子，抽短刀将其斩断。
English: As soon as the words were uttered, five or six robbers jumped out of the bushes. One of them held him in his arms from behind, wrestled with him and threw him down. The thief's henchmen immediately held him by the neck and drew their knives to cut him.

古文：斯仆随身兵刃。略无所施，盖掩其不备也。
现代文：这个仆人随身携带的武器，丝毫没有用上，是乘其不备而袭击的。
English: The servant's weapon, which he carried with him, was completely useless, and he was attacked because he was unprepared.

古文：唯妻在侧，殊无惶骇，但矫而大呼曰：快哉！
现代文：他的妻子在旁边，没有表现出一点惊慌，只是假装地大喊道：痛快！
English: His wife, who was by his side, showed no sign of alarm, but gave a mock cry of "Hurrah!"

古文：今日方雪吾之耻也。
现代文：今天才洗刷掉我的耻辱。
English: Today is the day I wash away my shame.

古文：吾比良家之子，遭其俘掠，以致于此。孰谓无神明也！
现代文：我本是良家之女，遭到他的抢掠，才到了这里，谁说没有神明啊！
English: I am the daughter of a good family, I was robbed by him and only got here. Who says there are no gods?

古文：贼谓诚至而不杀，与行李并二驴驱以南迈。
现代文：强盗们认为她很真诚而没有杀她，带着她和行李并赶着两头驴一起向南走去。
English: Thinking she was sincere, the robbers did not kill her, but took her, her luggage and two donkeys and headed south.

古文：近五六十里，至亳之北界，达孤庄南而息焉。
现代文：走了将近五六十里，到了亳县的北界，在孤庄的南面开始休息。
English: After walking nearly fifty or sixty miles, they reached the northern border of Handan County and began to rest on the south side of the lonely village.

古文：庄之门有器甲，葢近戍辷警之卒也。
现代文：庄子的大门站着带兵器的人，那是在这里警戒和守卫村庄的人。
English: At the gates of Zhuangzi, there are men with weapons standing guard. These are the people who keep watch and guard the village here.

古文：其妇遂径入村人之中堂，盗亦谓其谋食，不疑也。乃泣拜其总首，且告其夫适遭屠戮之状。总首闻之，潜召其徒，俱时执缚，唯一盗得逸。械送亳城，咸弃于市。
现代文：妇人于是哭着去拜见了村中的总首，并且讲述了她的丈夫刚刚遭屠杀的情况。总首听说后，秘密地召集他手下的人，一起把他们拘捕绑上，只有一人逃走。然后给他们戴上刑具押送亳城，他们都被斩首于市并陈尸示众。
English: In tears, the woman went to see the head of the village and described how her husband had just been slaughtered. When the head heard about it, he secretly gathered his men, arrested and tied them together, and only one of them escaped. Then they were put on torture devices and escorted to Shicheng. They were all beheaded in the city and their bodies were displayed to the public.

古文：其妇则返襄阳，还削为尼，誓终焉之志。
现代文：那妇人则返回襄阳，削发为尼，立下终身当尼姑的志向。
English: The woman returned to Xiangyang, cut off her hair and became a nun, setting herself the goal of becoming a nun for life.

古文：歌者妇
现代文：歌者妇
English: The Singer's Wife

古文：南中有大帅，世袭爵位，然颇恣横。
现代文：南中地区有一个大帅，世袭爵位，然而十分放纵蛮横。
English: In the south-central region, there is a grand marshal, with a hereditary title, but he is very self-indulgent.

古文：有善歌者。与其夫自北而至，颇有容色。帅闻而召之。
现代文：有一个善于唱歌的女子，与她的丈夫从北方来，那女子很有姿色，大帅听说后便召见了她。
English: There came from the north a woman with her husband, a singer, and she was very beautiful. When the tribune heard of her, he summoned her.

古文：每入，辄与其夫偕至，更唱迭和，曲有余态。
现代文：每次到大帅的府第，总是与她的丈夫一起来，轮唱和声，歌声回旋缭绕。
English: Every time she comes to Dasha's residence, she always comes with her husband, singing in harmony, and the song swirls around.

古文：帅欲私之，妇拒而不许。
现代文：大帅想要和她做爱，那女子拒而不允。
English: The referee wanted to have sex with her, but the woman refused.

古文：帅密遣人害其夫而置妇于别室，多其珠翠，以悦其意。
现代文：大帅便秘密派人害死她丈夫并把她安置于别室，还为她置办了珍珠翡翠等许多首饰，以取悦于她的心。
English: The grand marshal then secretly sent someone to kill her husband and put her in another room. He also bought her a lot of jewelry such as pearls and emeralds to please her heart.

古文：逾年往诣之，妇亦欣然接待，情甚婉娈。
现代文：过了年后大帅到她那去，那女子也欣然接待，而且情意十分缠绵。
English: Years later, Dashuai went to her, and the woman was also happy to receive him, and the feeling was very lingering.

古文：及就榻。妇忽出白刃于袖中，擒帅而欲刺之。帅掣肘而逸，妇逐之。
现代文：等到上了床，那女子突然从衣袖中拔出一柄雪亮的匕首，按住大帅想要制服他，大帅拉住她的胳膊抽身逃走。
English: When she got into bed, the woman suddenly pulled out a shiny knife from her sleeve, held down the sergeant to subdue him, and the sergeant grabbed her arm and ran away.

古文：适有二奴居前阖其扉，由是获免。
现代文：那女子去追他，正好有两个奴仆在她到来之前抢先关上大门，因此幸免逃脱。
English: The woman ran after him, but two of his servants managed to close the gate before she arrived, allowing her to escape.

古文：旋遣人执之，已自断其颈矣。
现代文：随后便派人捉拿她，那女子已自己砍断脖子。
English: Then they sent someone to catch her, but she had already cut her own neck.

