古文：凡战，所谓奇者，攻其无备，出其不意也。
现代文：大凡战争中所说的用 奇 ，指的是进攻敌人所无防备之处，出击敌人所未意想之时。
English: The use of surprise in a great war refers to attacking the enemy where he is unprepared, and striking when the enemy does not expect it.

古文：交战之际，惊前掩后，冲东击西，使敌莫知所备，如此则胜。
现代文：两军交战之际，要采用惊扰其前而掩袭其后，声冲其东而实击其西的佯动战法，使敌人迷茫失主而不知道怎样进行防备。
English: When the two armies are engaged in battle, they should adopt the method of surprise attack in front and cover attack behind, and the method of sound attack in the east and actual attack in the west, so that the enemy is confused and lost and does not know how to prepare.

古文：法曰： 敌虚，则我必为奇。 
现代文：这样作战就能够胜利。诚如兵法所说： 发现敌人有虚弱之点，我就一定采取出奇制胜战法袭击它。 
English: This is the way to win the war. It is true what the law of war says: If I find a weak point in the enemy, I will definitely attack it with the method of surprising victory.

古文：三国，魏景元四年，诏诸军征蜀，大将军司马宣王指授节度，使邓艾与蜀将姜维相缀连于雍州，刺史诸葛绪邀维，令不得归。
现代文：三国时期，魏元帝景元四年，元帝曹奂下诏命令各路魏军征伐蜀国，大将军司马昭被任命为节度使，他派遣征西将军邓艾率部牵制蜀将姜维；雍州刺史诸葛绪率部截击妻维，使其无法退回蜀国。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, in the fourth year of the Wei-Yuan Emperor Jing-Yuan, the former Emperor Cao Pi issued an edict ordering the various Wei armies to conquer Shu. General Sima Zhao was appointed as the festival envoy. He dispatched the general of the Western Conquest Deng Ai and his troops to subdue the Shu general Jiang Wei; the Yongzhou general Zhishi Zhuge Xi and his troops intercepted Zuma Wei, making it impossible for him to return to Shu.

古文：艾遣天水太守王颀等直攻维营，陇西太守牵弘邀其前，金城太守杨欣诣甘松。
现代文：邓艾则派天水郡太守王颀等将率部直接进攻姜维营垒，陇西郡太守牵弘从正面进行拦截，金城郡太守杨欣率部迂回甘松岭以侧击姜维背后。
English: Deng Ai sent Tianshui County Governor Wang Wei and others to attack Jiang Wei's camp directly, Shaanxi County Governor Yan Hong intercepted from the front, and Jincheng County Governor Yang Xin led the detour around Gansongling to hit Jiang Wei's back.

古文：维闻钟会诸军已入汉中，退还。
现代文：姜维听说魏将钟会所率诸军已经进入关中，便领兵退回。
English: When Jiang Wei heard that the troops led by Wei Zhaojing had entered Guanzhong, he led the troops back.

古文：欣等蹑于强川口，大战，维败走。
现代文：魏将杨欣等率部跟踪追击到强川口，双方展开激战，姜维败退。
English: Wei chased Yang Xin and others to Qiangchuangkou, and the two sides fought fiercely. Jiang Wei was defeated and retreated.

古文：闻雍州已塞道，屯桥头，乃从孔函谷入北道，欲出雍州后。诸葛绪闻之，却还三十里。
现代文：姜维听说雍州刺史诸葛绪所部已经驻屯桥头截断了道路，便从孔函谷进入北道，打算从雍州刺史诸葛绪军背后绕过回蜀。
English: When Jiang Wei heard that the detachment of the Yongzhou Zhugu Army had cut off the road at Qiaotou, he entered the North Road from Konghang Valley, intending to bypass the troops of the Yongzhou Zhugu Army and return to Shu.

古文：维入北道三十里，闻绪军却，还，从桥头欲过，绪趣截维，较一日不及。
现代文：诸葛绪获悉了姜维的行动企图后，马上将军队后撤三十里。姜维率军进入北道三十里时，听说诸葛绪军已经退却，便又引军折回，从桥头通过，诸葛绪也就随即急速返回进行拦截，但迟到一天而未赶上。
English: After Zhugexu learned of Jiang Wei's attempted action, he immediately withdrew his army thirty miles back. When Jiang Wei led his army thirty miles into the North Road, he heard that Zhugexu's army had retreated, so he led his army back and passed through the bridgehead. Zhugexu then quickly returned to intercept, but he was a day late and did not catch up.

古文：维遂东，还守剑阁。钟会攻维，未能克。
现代文：姜维于是引兵向东退却，回到剑阁进行防守；魏将钟会率兵进攻姜维，但是未能攻克。
English: Jiang Wei then withdrew his troops to the east and returned to Jiange for defense; Wei led the soldiers of the Bell Association to attack Jiang Wei, but failed to defeat him.

古文：艾上言： 今贼摧折，宜遂从阴平由邪径出汉中、德阳亭趣涪，去剑阁西百里，去成都三百里，奇兵冲其腹心。
现代文：邓艾这时上书献策说： 如今敌人已遭到挫折，我们应当乘势追击，从阴平小路经过汉时德阳亭直插涪城，也就是从剑阁以西百余里绕道而进，前出至距成都三百里的地方，采用出奇制胜战法直捣敌国腹心地区。
English: At this time, Deng Ai wrote a proposal saying: Now that the enemy has suffered a setback, we should take advantage of the situation to pursue, from Yinping Alley, through Hanshi Deyangting, straight to Shicheng, that is, from Jiange, more than a hundred miles to the west, and go out to a place three hundred miles from Chengdu, and adopt a surprise victory strategy to directly attack the enemy's vassal areas.

古文：剑阁之守必还，赴涪，则会方轨而进；剑阁之军不还，则应涪之兵寡矣。
现代文：那么，防守剑阁的姜维军必定回援涪城，钟会所部就可从大道长驱直进；如果剑阁的姜维军不回援，则接应涪城的援兵就很少了。
English: Then, Jiang Wei's army defending Jiange must return to help Handan City, and the bell club department can drive straight ahead from the avenue. If Jiang Wei's army of Jiange does not return, there will be few reinforcements for Handan City.

古文：《军志》曰：攻其无备，出其不意。
现代文：兵书上说 进攻敌人没有防备的地方，出击敌人所未意想之时 。
English: According to the military manual, attack the enemy in an unprepared place, attack when the enemy is unexpected.

古文：今掩其空虚，破之必矣。 
现代文：现在我们如能奇袭敌人空虚之处，击败蜀军则是必然之势。 
English: If we attack Jiang Wei's empty place now, we will definitely be able to break through.

古文：艾自阴平道行无人之地七百余里，凿山信道，造作桥阁，山高谷深，至为艰难，粮运将匮，频至危殆。
现代文：邓艾率军从阴平道进军通过了七百余里的无人地区，他们凿山开路，架设栈道；由于山高谷深，进军极为艰难，粮运将断，几乎陷入绝境。
English: Deng Ai led the army to march from Yinping Road and passed through more than seven hundred miles of uninhabited areas. They chiseled the mountain to open the road and set up the platform road. Due to the deep mountains and valleys, the advance is extremely difficult, the grain transportation will be cut off, and it is almost in a desperate situation.

古文：艾以毡自裹，推转而下；将士皆攀木缘崖，鱼贯而进，先登至江油，蜀守将马邈降。
现代文：邓艾亲自以毡裹身，从山上翻滚而下；将士们都攀树木爬悬崖，如同水中游鱼一个接一个地前进。邓艾部队先期进至江油城，该地蜀军守将马邈不战而降。
English: Deng Ai himself wrapped himself in a cocoon and rolled down the mountain; his soldiers climbed trees and cliffs, advancing one after another like fish swimming in water. Deng Ai's troops entered Jiangyou City ahead of time, and the Shu army garrison there surrendered without a fight.

古文：蜀卫将军诸葛瞻自涪还绵竹，列阵待艾。
现代文：蜀国卫将军诸葛瞻获此消息后，把部队从涪城撤往绵竹，摆好阵势等待邓艾军。
English: After receiving this news, Zhu Gezhan, the Shu Guowei general, withdrew his troops from Lucheng to Mianzhu and set up a position to wait for Deng Ai's army.

古文：艾遣其子邓忠出其右、司马师綦等出其左。
现代文：邓艾派遣其子邓忠率部进攻蜀军右翼；司马师纂率部进攻蜀军左翼。
English: Deng Ai sent his son Deng Zhong to lead the attack on the right wing of the Shu army; Sima Shizhong led the attack on the left wing of the Shu army.

古文：忠、綦战不利，并退还，曰： 贼未可胜。 
现代文：但邓忠和师纂出战不利，都退了回来，并且说： 敌人不可战胜。 
English: However, Deng Zhong and Shi Zuo, both of whom were unfavorable to go to war, retreated back and said, "The enemy is invincible."

古文：艾怒曰： 存亡之分，在此一举，何不可之有？ 
现代文：邓艾一听大怒，说： 我军生死存亡全在此一举，哪有什么不可战胜之说！ 
English: Deng Ai said angrily, "This is a battle of life and death, what is acceptable and what is not?

古文：乃叱忠、綦等，将斩之。
现代文：于是叱骂邓忠、师綦，并要杀掉他们。
English: So he scolded Deng Zhong and Shifu, and wanted to kill them.

古文：忠、綦驰还更战，大破之，斩瞻，进军成都。
现代文：邓忠、师綦拨转马头重返前线，奋勇再战，大破蜀军，斩杀了诸葛瞻，大军一直攻入成都。
English: Deng Zhong and his disciples returned to the front line, fought bravely again, defeated the Shu army, killed Zhuge Zhan, and the army has been entering Chengdu.

古文：刘禅遣使请降，遂灭蜀。
现代文：在魏军兵临成都的形势下，蜀国后主刘禅被迫派出使者向邓艾请降，魏军于是灭亡了蜀国。
English: Under the situation of the Wei army soldiers approaching Chengdu, Liu Zen, the empress of Shu, was forced to send an envoy to Deng Ai to ask for surrender, and the Wei army then destroyed Shu.

