古文：史姁范明友奴陈焦崔涵柳苌刘凯石函中人杜锡家婢汉宫人李俄
现代文：史姁范明友奴陈焦崔涵柳苌刘凯石函中人杜锡家婢汉宫人李俄
English: Shi Jiao, Fan Mingyu, Chen Jiao, Cui Han, Liu Kailu, Liu Kaishi, Hanzhong, Du Xi, Han maidservant, Li Rui

古文：河间女子徐玄方女蔡支妻陈朗婢于宝家奴韦讽女奴邺中妇人李仲通婢
现代文：河间女子徐玄方女蔡支妻陈朗婢于宝家奴韦讽女奴邺中妇人李仲通婢
English: Kawama woman, Xu Xuan square woman, Cai Zhi wife, Chen Lang slave, Bao family slave, Wei iron slave woman, middle-aged slave woman, Li Zhong Tong slave

古文：崔生妻东莱人女
现代文：崔生妻东莱人女
English: Cui Sheng married a Donglai woman

古文：史姁
现代文：史姁
English: History Channel

古文：汉陈留考城史姁，字威明。
现代文：汉代陈留县考城有个史姁，字威明，年少时曾经患过大病，临死时对母亲说： 我死后会再生的。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a storyteller in Kaocheng, Chenliu County, surnamed Weiming. When he was young, he suffered from a serious illness. When he was about to die, he said to his mother, "I will be reborn after I die."

古文：人不信之。曰： 何有千里暂得归耶？ 
现代文：人们不相信，说：千里之遥，你怎么能说回去就回去呢？
English: People didn't believe it and said, "It's thousands of miles away, how can you just say you're going to go back and go back?"

古文：答曰： 一宿便还。
现代文：他回答说： 我一宿就可以回来。
English: He replied, "I'll be back in one night."

古文：即不相信，作书取报，以为验实。 
现代文：要是不信，你们写信我给捎回去，用它作证。 
English: If you don't believe me, write me a letter and return it to me, and use it as evidence.

古文：一宿便还，果得报。
现代文：果然，他一宿就回来了，而且带来了回信。
English: Sure enough, he came back the next night with a reply.

古文：考城令江夏鄌贾和姊病在乡里，欲急知消息，请往省之。
现代文：考城县令湖北江夏人鄌贾和的姐姐病在老家，贾和想早点知道消息，请求史姁去探望她的病。
English: Kaocheng County, Hubei Province, Jiangxia people, Jiahe's sister is ill at home. Jiahe wanted to know the news earlier and asked Shi Jun to visit her illness.

古文：路遥三千，再宿还报。
现代文：路途有三千里之遥，史姁第二宿就回来向他报了信。
English: The journey was three thousand miles away, and Shi Yan came back the second night to report to him.

古文：范明友奴
现代文：范明友奴
English: Fan Mingyurong

古文：汉末人发范明友冢。家奴死而再活。
现代文：汉朝末年有人挖开范明友家的坟，其家奴死而复生。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, someone dug up the grave of Fan Mingyou's family, and his family slave died and came back to life.

古文：明友是霍光女婿，说光家事，废立之际，多与汉书相应。
现代文：范明友是名将霍光的女婿，这个家奴讲说霍光家的事情，以及当时的一些废之这事，大部分与汉书相符合。
English: Fan Mingyou is the son-in-law of the famous general Huo Guang. This family slave's story about the Huo Guang family, as well as some of the waste at the time, is mostly consistent with Chinese books.

古文：此奴常游走民间，无止住处，竟不如所在。
现代文：这个家奴常常到民间游走，没有一定的住所，后来也不知道他去了什么地方。
English: This family slave often wandered among the common people, had no fixed abode, and later did not know where he had gone.

古文：陈焦
现代文：陈焦
English: Chen Jiao

古文：孙休永安四年，吴民陈焦死，埋之六日更生，穿土而出。
现代文：三国吴景帝永安四年，吴国人陈焦死了，埋葬六天之后起死回生，穿土走了出来。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yongan of the Three Kingdoms of Wu, Chen Jiao, a native of Wu, died. Six days after he was buried, he came back to life and walked out through the soil.

古文：崔涵
现代文：崔涵
English: Cui Han

古文：后魏菩提寺，西域人所立也，在慕义。
现代文：后魏的菩提寺，是西域人修建的，这座寺建在慕义。
English: The family temple of the late Wei Dynasty was built by the Xidi people, and this temple was built in Muyi.

古文：沙门达多，发墓取砖，得一人以送。
现代文：一个叫达多的和尚挖坟取砖，结果挖出一个活人并把他送到上头。
English: A monk by the name of Dado was digging a grave for bricks when he unearthed a living man and brought him to the top.

古文：时太后与孝明帝在华林堂，以为妖异。谓黄门郎徐纥曰： 上古以来，颇有此事不？ 
现代文：当时太后和孝明帝在华林堂，认为这是妖异，对黄门郎官徐纥说： 从上古以来，常有这种事吗？ 
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Cixi and Emperor Xiaoming were in Huarintang, and they thought it was strange. They said to Huangmen Langguan Xu Yao: "Has this kind of thing happened often since ancient times?"

古文：纥曰： 昔魏时发冢，得霍光女婿范明友家奴，说汉朝废立，于史书相符。此不足为异也。 
现代文：徐纥说： 从前魏国时挖坟挖出霍光女婿范明友的一个家奴，他能说出汉朝兴废的历史，所以说此类事不足为奇。 
English: Xu Yao said: A family slave of Fan Mingyou, the son-in-law of Huo Guang, was dug out of a grave in the former Wei Dynasty. He could tell the history of the rise and fall of the Han Dynasty, so such things are not surprising.

古文：后令纥问其姓名，死来几年，何所饮食。答曰： 臣姓崔名涵，字子洪，博陵安平人。
现代文：太后让徐纥问那个人的姓名，死了几年，都吃些什么，那人回答说： 我姓崔名涵，字子洪，博陵安平人氏。
English: The Empress Dowager asked Xu Xi to ask the man's name, how many years he had been dead, and what he had eaten. The man replied, "My surname is Cui Mianhan, my family name is Hong, and I am from Boling Anping.

古文：父名畅，母姓魏。家在城西阜财里。
现代文：父亲名畅，母亲姓魏，家住城西阜财里。
English: His father was well-known, his mother's surname was Wei, and they lived in West Fuchai, Chengdu.

古文：死时年十五。
现代文：我死时十五岁，现在二十七岁。
English: I was fifteen when I died and I'm twenty-seven now.

古文：乃二十七，在地下十二年。常似醉卧，无所食。
现代文：在地下活了十二年，常常象喝碎酒一样躺着，不吃什么食物。
English: He lived underground for twelve years, often lying down as if drinking crushed wine, and not eating any food.

古文：时复游行，或遇饮食，如梦中。不甚辨了。 
现代文：有时还游走，也许能遇到些吃的喝的，但如同梦中，不很明白清楚。 
English: Sometimes I still swim away, maybe I can meet some food and drink, but like in a dream, I don't know it very well.

古文：后即遣门下录事张隽。诣阜财里，访涵父母。果有崔畅，其妻魏。
现代文：后来徐纥就派遣门下录事张俊到阜财里调查，寻找崔涵的父母，果然有个叫崔畅的，他的妻子姓魏。
English: Later, Xu Gan sent his underling Zhang Jun to investigate in Fuchaili, looking for Cui Han's parents. Sure enough, there was a man named Cui Chang, and his wife was surnamed Wei.

古文：隽问畅曰： 卿有儿死不？ 
现代文：张俊问崔畅说： 你有个儿子死了吗？ 
English: Zhang Jun asked Cui Chang: Did you have a son who died?

古文：畅曰： 有息子涵，年十五而亡。 
现代文：崔畅说： 我有个儿子叫崔涵，十五岁那年就死了。 
English: Cui Chang said: I have a son named Cui Han, who died at the age of fifteen.

古文：隽曰： 为人所发，今日苏活。
现代文：张俊说： 他被人挖了出来，已经起死回生了。
English: Zhang Jun said: He was dug out by someone and has been brought back to life.

古文：畅闻涵至，门前起火，手持刀，魏氏把桃杖拒之。
现代文：他现在华林园，主上派我来了解一下。 崔畅闻言十分害怕，说： 我实际上没有这个儿子，刚才是瞎说的。 
English: He is now in Hualin Garden, and the Lord sent me to find out about him.Cui Chang Huanyan was very scared and said, "I don't really have this son, I was just talking nonsense."

古文：曰： 汝不须来，吾非汝父，汝非我子，急速去，可得无殃， 涵遂舍去，游于京师，常宿寺门下。
现代文：张俊把实情告诉了他，后来又把崔涵遣送回家。崔畅听说儿子到了，就在门前点起火，拿着刀，魏氏手持桃木拐杖前来拦阻。崔畅说： 你不要进来，我不是你父亲，你也不是我儿子。快点走吧，免得遭灾！ 崔涵就只好离家而去，到京城漫游，常常睡在寺院的门下。
English: Zhang Jun told him the truth, and later sent Cui Han home. When Cui Chang heard that his son had arrived, he lit a fire in front of the door and held a knife. Mr. Wei came to stop him, holding a peach crutch. Cui Chang said: "Don't come in, I'm not your father, and you're not my son. Hurry up and leave, so as not to suffer a disaster!" Cui Han had no choice but to leave home and roam the capital, often sleeping under the doors of temples.

古文：汝南王赐黄衣一通。
现代文：汝南王得知此事，赏赐给他黄衣一套。
English: When King Junan learned of this, he rewarded him with a set of yellow clothes.

古文：性畏日，不仰视天。又畏水火及兵刃之属。
现代文：崔涵生性怕见太阳，不敢仰视天空，还畏惧水火和刀刃之类。
English: Cui Han is afraid of seeing the sun, dares not look up at the sky, and is afraid of water, fire, and blades.

古文：常走于路，疲则止，不徐行也。
现代文：他经常在路上匆匆行进，累了就休息，不会慢慢地走。
English: He often hurried on the road, rested when he was tired, and would not walk slowly.

古文：时人犹谓是鬼。
现代文：当时人们还说他是鬼。
English: At the time, people said he was a ghost.

古文：洛阳大市北有奉终里，里内之人，多卖送死之具及诸棺椁。
现代文：洛阳大市北边有个奉终里，里弄里的人，不少卖殡葬用品和各类棺椁的。
English: On the north side of Luoyang City, there is a "funeral village" where many people sell funeral supplies and all kinds of coffins.

古文：涵谓曰： 柏棺勿以桑木为榱。 
现代文：崔涵对他们说： 柏木棺材千万不要用桑木做堵头。 
English: Cui Han said to them: Do not use mulberry wood as a plug for a cypress coffin.

古文：人问其故。涵曰： 吾在地下，见发鬼兵。 有一鬼称之柏棺，应免兵。
现代文：人家问其缘故，他说： 我在地下，一次征鬼兵的时候，有个鬼就说睡柏木棺材者可以免征。
English: When asked why, he said: I was underground, and during a conscription of ghost soldiers, a ghost said that those who slept in a cypress coffin could be exempt from conscription.

古文：吏曰： 尔虽柏棺，桑木为榱。 遂不免兵。 
现代文：有位小吏说： 你虽然是柏木棺材，却用桑木做堵头，所以就不能免征 。 
English: A minor official said, "Although your coffin is made of cypress wood, it is blocked with mulberry wood, so you are not exempt from the tax."

古文：京师闻此，柏木涌贵。
现代文：京城里听到这个传说，柏木的价格一下子就提了上去。
English: When the capital heard about this legend, the price of cypress was immediately raised.

古文：人疑卖棺者货涵，故发此言。
现代文：有人怀疑卖棺材的人向崔涵行贿，所以他才说出这种话。
English: Some people suspect that the seller of the coffin paid bribes to Cui Han, which is why he said such a thing.

古文：柳苌
现代文：柳苌
English: Willow Warbler

古文：梁承圣二年二月十日，司徒府主簿柳苌卒，子褒葬于九江。
现代文：梁元帝承圣二年二月十日，司徒府的主簿柳苌死了，儿子柳褒把他埋在九江。
English: On February 10th, the second year of Emperor Liang Yuan's succession to the throne, Liu Xuan, the head of Stowe, died, and his son Liu Biao buried him in Jiujiang.

古文：三年，因大雨冢坏，移葬换棺。见父棺中目开，心有暖气。
现代文：三年以后，大雨冲毁了坟墓，移葬换棺材时，柳褒见父亲在棺中睁开了眼睛，心口窝有热气。
English: Three years later, when heavy rain washed away the grave and the coffin was moved, Liu Bo saw his father open his eyes in the coffin, and his heart was filled with warmth.

古文：良久，乃谓褒曰： 我生已一岁，无因令汝知。
现代文：过了好一会儿，他对儿子说： 我已经活过来一年了，没有机会让你知道。
English: After a while, he said to his son, "I've been alive for a year, and I didn't get a chance to tell you.

古文：九江神知我横死，遣地神以乳饲我，故不死。
现代文：九江神知道我是暴死的，就派土地神用奶喂我，所以又活了过来。
English: Knowing that I had died violently, the god of the Nine Rivers sent the god of the land to feed me with milk, so I came back to life.

古文：今雨坏我冢，亦江神之所为也。 
现代文：现在大雨冲坏我的坟，也是九江神干的。 
English: Now the heavy rain has washed away my grave, which was also caused by the Nine-River God.

古文：扶出，更生三十年卒。
现代文：儿子把他扶了出来，他又活了三十年才死。
English: His son pulled him out, and he lived another thirty years before dying.

古文：刘凯
现代文：刘凯
English: Liu Kai

古文：唐贞观二年，陈留县尉刘全素，家于宋州。
现代文：唐代贞观二年，陈留县尉刘全素，家居住在河南宋州。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan in the Tang Dynasty, Liu Quansu, a lieutenant of Chenliu County, lived in Songzhou, Henan Province.

古文：父凯，曾任卫县令，卒于官，葬于郊三十余年。
现代文：他父亲刘凯，曾任过卫县县令，死在官任上，埋葬在郊野三十多年。
English: His father, Liu Kai, was once the county magistrate of Wei County. He died in office and was buried in the countryside for more than 30 years.

古文：全素丁母忧，护丧归卫，将合葬。
现代文：刘全素又遭逢母亲故去，他护灵柩去卫县，准备将其同父合葬。
English: When Liu Quansu's mother passed away, he went to Wei County as a pallbearer and prepared to be buried with his father.

古文：既至，启发，其尸俨然如生。
现代文：到卫县之后，打开棺材，只见父亲的尸体俨然如生。
English: After arriving in Wei County, he opened the coffin and saw his father's lifeless body.

古文：稍稍而活，其子踊跃举扶。将夕能言曰： 别久佳否？ 
现代文：渐渐活了过来，全素高兴地扶起他，傍晚就能说话了，问道： 久别可好？ 
English: Gradually he came to life, and with pure joy he helped him up, and in the evening he was able to speak, and asked: Is it good to be away for a long time?

古文：全素泣而叙事。乃曰： 勿言，吾尽知之。 
现代文：全素哭着向他叙述这些年的事，可他竟说道： 不要讲了，这些事情我全知道。 
English: I cried my eyes out as I told him all about those years, but he said, "Don't tell me, I know all about it."

古文：速命东流水为汤。
现代文：他让人取东流的江水烧好，沐浴更衣，吃烂粥饭。
English: He had people take the east-flowing river water and boil it, take a bath, change clothes, and eat rotten rice porridge.

古文：既至，沐浴易衣，饮以糜粥，神气属。乃曰： 吾在幽途，蒙署为北酆主者三十年。考治幽滞，以功业得再生。
现代文：待精神恢复后，他才说： 我在阴曹地府，蒙恩被任命为酆都城主三十年，考察治理该城，处理积案，因为功业卓著获得再生。
English: After his spirit was restored, he said: I am from Yin Cao Di Fu, and I have been appointed as the lord of Xindu City for thirty years, inspecting and governing the city, and dealing with the backlog of cases. Because of my outstanding achievements, I have been reborn.

古文：恐汝有疑，故粗言之。 
现代文：恐怕你不相信，所以才把这些事粗略地说说。 
English: I'm afraid you won't believe me, so I'll just say these things in broad terms.

古文：仍戒全素不得泄于人。
现代文：并告诫儿子不能向外人泄露。
English: He also cautioned his son not to reveal it to outsiders.

古文：全素遂呼为季父。
现代文：刘全素于是叫他叔父。
English: So Liu Quansu called him uncle.

古文：后半年，之蜀不还，不知所终。
现代文：半年之后，刘凯去蜀地再没有回来，不知道他最后怎么样。
English: Six months later, Liu Kai went to Shoudi and never came back. I don't know what happened to him.

古文：石函中人
现代文：石函中人
English: People from Ishinomaki

古文：上都务本坊，贞元中，有一人家，因打墙掘地，遇一石函。
现代文：京城长安有个务本坊，唐代贞元年间，有一家因为砌墙挖地基，得到一个石匣子。
English: In the capital city of Chang'an, there is a bookstore. During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, a family received a stone box as a reward for building a wall and digging a foundation.

古文：发之，见物如丝满函，飞出于外。
现代文：打开一看，只见里面装满了丝一样的东西，那东西向外飞。
English: When I opened it, I saw that it was full of something like silk, which flew out.

古文：视之次，忽有一人，起于函中，披发长丈余，振衣而起，出门失所在。
现代文：看着看着，忽然有一个人从匣子里站起来，披散头发有一丈多长。他抖抖衣服就站起来，一出门便不知去向。
English: As I watched, a man suddenly stood up from the box, his hair long and disheveled. He shook his clothes and stood up, and as soon as he went out the door, I had no idea where he was going.

古文：其家亦无他。
现代文：这家倒也没遇到什么灾祸。
English: The family did not encounter any disasters.

古文：前记中多言此事，盖道太阴炼形，日将满，人必露之。
现代文：从前一些书中大多言及此事，都说是月亮在锻炼形体，炼到了规定的日子，就显露出了人形。
English: In the past, most of the books mentioned this matter, saying that the moon was exercising the body, and when it reached the specified date, it revealed the doll.

古文：杜锡家婢
现代文：杜锡家婢
English: Du Xi Jiabi

古文：汉杜锡家葬，而婢误不得出。
现代文：汉代杜锡举行家葬，而他家的婢女因误入坟中没能出来。
English: Han Dynasty Du Xi held a family funeral, but his family's maid failed to come out of the grave by mistake.

古文：后十余年，开冢祔葬，而婢尚生。
现代文：十多年之后，开坟举行合葬的时候，这个婢女还活着。
English: More than ten years later, when the grave was opened and a joint funeral was held, the maid was still alive.

古文：问之，曰： 其始如瞑目，自谓当一再宿耳。 
现代文：人们问她，她说自己开始闭着眼睛，后来就权当睡长觉了。
English: When asked, she said she started out with her eyes closed and eventually fell into a deep sleep.

古文：初婢埋时，年十五六。及开冢后，资质如故。更生十五六年。嫁之有子。
现代文：她刚被埋时才十五六岁，到开坟时姿容如旧，又多活了十五六年，出嫁之后还生了个儿子。
English: She had just been buried at the age of fifteen or sixteen, and when her grave was opened, her appearance was the same as before. She lived for another fifteen or sixteen years, married, and gave birth to a son.

古文：汉宫人
现代文：汉宫人
English: People of the Han Palace

古文：汉末，关中大乱。
现代文：汉代末年，关中时局大乱。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the situation in Guanzhong was chaotic.

古文：有发前汉时宫人冢者，人犹活。
现代文：这时，有人掘开西汉宫女的坟，不料那宫女还活着。
English: At this time, someone was digging up the grave of a Western Han dynasty courtesan, but the courtesan was still alive.

古文：既出，平复如旧。
现代文：出来之后，她恢复得象原来一样。
English: When she came out, she was back to normal.

古文：魏郭后爱念之，录置宫中，常在左右。
现代文：魏国郭太后十分爱念她，将她收录宫中，常常跟随左右。
English: Empress Dowager Guo of Wei loved her very much and included her in the court, often following her around.

古文：问汉时宫内事，说之了了，皆有次叙。
现代文：问西汉时的宫廷之事，她述说得清清楚楚，且都能按时间顺序来。
English: When asked about the court in the Western Han Dynasty, she spoke clearly and in chronological order.

古文：郭崩，哭泣过礼，遂死。
现代文：郭太后去世，这个宫女因悲哭过度而死。
English: The Dowager Empress Guo passed away, and this concubine died from crying too much.

古文：李俄
现代文：李俄
English: Li Rong

古文：汉末，武陵妇人李俄，年六十岁，病卒，埋于城外，已半月。
现代文：汉代末年，武陵有位妇人叫李俄，六十岁那年病死，埋葬在城外已经半个月了。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, there was a woman named Li Ru in Wuling. She died of illness at the age of 60, and had been buried outside the city for half a month.

古文：俄邻舍有蔡仲，闻俄富，乃发冢求金。
现代文：这时，李俄的邻居有个叫蔡仲的，听说她家富足，就去挖墓寻找金银。
English: At this time, Li Ru's neighbor, a woman named Cai Zhong, heard that her family was rich, so she went to dig up graves to look for gold and silver.

古文：以斧剖棺，俄忽棺中呼曰： 蔡仲护我头。 
现代文：他拿斧子劈向棺材，忽然听见李俄在棺材中喊道： 蔡仲，当心砍了我的头！ 
English: He took an axe to the coffin and suddenly heard Li Ru shout from inside the coffin: "Cai Zhong, be careful before you cut off my head!"

古文：仲惊走，为县吏所收，当弃市。
现代文：蔡仲吓得转身就跑。后来，他被县里的捕吏抓了去，应当判死刑。
English: Cai Zhong was so scared that he turned around and ran away. Later, he was caught by the county's arresting officers and should have been sentenced to death.

古文：俄儿闻母活，来迎出之。
现代文：李俄的儿子听说母亲活了，把她接回家。
English: When Li Yao's son heard that his mother was alive, he took her home.

古文：太守召俄问状，俄对曰： 误为司命所召，到时得遣。
现代文：太守召来李俄询问情况，李俄对答说： 我错误地被阴曹司命官召去，后来得以遣返。
English: The daimyō summoned Li Ru to inquire about the situation. Li Ru replied: I was mistakenly summoned by the shady magistrate, and was later able to be repatriated.

古文：出门外，见内兄刘文伯，惊相对泣。
现代文：刚出大门，就看见了内兄刘文伯，我们惊诧地相对而哭。
English: As soon as we left the gate, we saw Liu Wenbo, my brother-in-law, and we were surprised to see him crying.

古文：俄曰： 我误为所召，今复得归。
现代文：我说： 我是被错召来的，今天可以回去了。
English: I said: I was called by mistake, I can go back today.

古文：既不知道，又不能独行，为我求一伴。
现代文：可我既不认路，又不能独行，为我找个伴吧！
English: But I neither know the way, nor can I walk alone. Find me a companion!

古文：我在此已十余日，已为家人所葬，那得自归也。 
现代文：我在这里十多天了，已经被家人埋葬了，哪能自己回去呢？ 
English: I have been here for more than ten days and have already been buried by my family. How can I go back on my own?

古文：文伯即遣门卒与户曹相闻。答曰： 今武陵西界。
现代文：刘文伯就派门卒把户曹找来相问，回答说： 现在武陵西界，有个男子叫李黑，也能够复活而还，可以找他作伴。 
English: Liu Wenbo sent his men to find Huzao and asked him about it. He replied, "There is a man in the western region of Wuling, named Li Hei, who can also be resurrected and brought back to life. You can look for him as a companion.

古文：有男子李黑，亦得还，便可为伴，兼敕黑过俄邻舍，令蔡仲发出，于是文伯作书与儿，俄遂与黑同归。 
现代文：又令李黑到我邻舍，并让蔡仲挖坟让我出来。于是刘文伯写信给他儿子，我就跟李黑一块回来了。 
English: He also made Li He to come to my neighbor and asked Cai Zhong to dig a grave to let me out. So Liu Wenbo wrote to his son, and I returned with Li He.

古文：太守闻之，即赦蔡仲。仍遣马吏，于西界推问李黑，如俄所述。
现代文：太守听罢，当即赦免了蔡仲，还派一骑马小吏到西界盘问李黑，结果跟李俄说的一样。
English: Hearing this, the Emperor pardoned Cai Zhong immediately, and also sent a minor official on horseback to the Western Regions to interrogate Li He. The result was the same as what Li Rou said.

古文：文伯所寄书与子，子识其纸，是父亡时所送箱中之书矣。
现代文：刘文伯寄给儿子的信也收到了。他儿子认识那纸，它是父亲殡葬时烧的书呵。
English: The letter sent by Liu Wenbo to his son was also received. His son knew the paper, it was the book burned at his father's funeral.

古文：河间女子
现代文：河间女子
English: Kawama Women's Chorus

古文：晋武帝时，河间有男女相悦，许相配适。
现代文：晋武帝时，河间有一对男女相爱，互许为夫妻。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinwu, there was a couple of men and women in love in Kawama, and they mutually agreed to be husband and wife.

古文：而男从军，积年不归。
现代文：但是男的从军后，很多年没有回来。
English: But the man did not return for many years after joining the army.

古文：女家更以适人。女不愿行，父母逼之而去。
现代文：女的家人又把她嫁给别人，她不愿意去，父母逼其前往。
English: The woman's family wanted her to marry someone else, she did not want to go, and her parents forced her to go.

古文：寻病死。
现代文：结果不久便病死了。
English: As a result, he fell ill and died soon after.

古文：其夫戍还，问女所在。其家具说之。
现代文：她的丈夫戌边归来，问那女的现在何处，她的家人便全讲了。
English: When her husband came home, he asked where the woman was, and her whole family told him.

古文：乃至冢，欲哭之叙哀，而不胜情。
现代文：男的就来到坟前，想大哭一场，以诉哀痛，但又怕感情上承受不了。
English: The man came to the grave, wanted to cry, to complain of grief, but was afraid he would not be able to bear it emotionally.

古文：遂发冢开棺，女即苏活。
现代文：于是他便挖坟开棺，那女的当即就复活了。
English: So he dug up the grave and opened the coffin, and immediately the woman came to life.

古文：因负还家，将养平复。
现代文：他将她背回家中，将养恢复。
English: He carried her home and nursed her back to health.

古文：后夫闻，乃诣官争之。
现代文：她的后夫听说此事，就到官府起诉，与前夫争妻。
English: When her husband-to-be heard about this, he went to the government to file a lawsuit, arguing with his ex-husband.

古文：郡县不能决，以谳廷尉。
现代文：郡县不能决断，把它报给廷尉判决。
English: If the county can't make a decision, it will be reported to the court for adjudication.

古文：奏以精诚之至，感于天地，故死而更生。是非常事，不得以常理断，请还开棺者。
现代文：奏本上说，因为精诚之至，使天地感动，因此才死而复生；这是件不寻常的事，不能用常理来判决，因此请将她还给开棺的前夫。
English: The report said that she died and came back to life because she was so sincere that she moved heaven and earth; this is an unusual thing that cannot be judged by common sense, so please return her to her ex-husband who opened the coffin.

古文：徐玄方女
现代文：徐玄方女
English: Xu Xuan square woman

古文：晋时东平冯孝将，广州太守，儿名马子，年二十岁余。
现代文：晋代东平的冯孝将，任广州太守。他的儿子名叫马子，二十多岁。
English: Feng Xiaojing of the Jin Dynasty Dongping served as the governor of Guangzhou. His son, named Ma Zi, was in his twenties.

古文：独卧厩中，夜梦见女子，年十八九。
现代文：一天，他独自卧在马棚中睡着了，晚上梦见一个女子，十八九岁。
English: One day he lay alone in the stable and fell asleep. At night he dreamed of a woman, eighteen or nineteen years old.

古文：言我是太守北海徐玄方女，不幸早亡。亡来出入四年，为鬼所枉杀。
现代文：说我是北海太守徐玄方的女儿，不幸夭亡，已死四年，现又被鬼所枉杀。
English: Say that I am the daughter of the North Sea governor Xu Xuanfang, who died young, has been dead for four years, and has now been killed by a ghost.

古文：听我更生。要当有依凭，乃得活，又应为君妻。
现代文：根据生死簿上的记录，我应该活到八十多岁。
English: According to the record in the book of life and death, I should live to be over eighty years old.

古文：能从所委见救活不？ 
现代文：允许我复活，但应当有依凭才行。我应当做你的妻子，你能听从我的委托救活我吗？
English: Permit me to be brought back to life, but it must be on my own terms. I am to be your wife. Will you obey my commission to bring me back to life?

古文：马子答曰： 可尔。 
现代文：马子回答说： 可以。 
English: Ma Zi replied: Yes.

古文：与马子克期当出。
现代文：那女子和马子约定好了日期见面。
English: The woman and Ma agreed on a date to meet.

古文：至期日，床前有头发，正与地平。
现代文：到了这一天，马子的床前有头发，正与地面齐平。
English: To this day, there is hair in front of Ma Zi's bed, which is level with the ground.

古文：令人扫去，愈分明。
现代文：马子让人扫去，结果却愈加多起来。
English: Horses are swept away, but the result is more and more cranes.

古文：始悟所梦者，遂屏左右。
现代文：这时，马子才明白正是梦中之事，于是喝退左右的仆从。
English: At this time, Ma Zi understood that it was just a dream, so he drove away all the servants.

古文：便渐额面出，次头形体顿出。
现代文：那女子的颜面渐显，接着整个头和身体也露了出来。
English: The woman's face is revealed, then her entire head and body.

古文：马子便令坐对榻上，陈说语言，奇妙非常。遂与马子寝息。
现代文：马子就让她坐在对面床上，她所讲的话，非常奇妙，当晚就和马子睡在了一起。
English: Ma Zi let her sit on the opposite side of the bed, and what she said was so strange that she slept with Ma Zi that night.

古文：每戒云： 我尚虚。 
现代文：她总是告诫马子： 我的身体还虚弱。 
English: She always warned Ma Zi: My body is still weak.

古文：借问何时得出，答曰： 出当待，本生生日，尚未至。 
现代文：问她什么时候可以从坟中出来时，她回答说： 要等到我原来的生日那天，现在时候还没到。 
English: Asked when she would be able to come out of the grave, she replied: "I have to wait until my original birthday, it's not time yet."

古文：遂往厩中。言语声音，人皆闻之。
现代文：说完她就进了马棚，她说的话，人们都能够听见。
English: When she had said this, she went into the stable, and what she said could be heard by all.

古文：女计生至，具教马子出己养之方法，语毕拜去。
现代文：这女子计算生日到了，就告诉马子救出自己的方法，说完一拜而去。
English: When the woman's birthday came, she told Ma Zi how to save herself, bowed and left.

古文：马子从其言，至日，以丹雄鸡一只，黍饭一盘，清酒一升，醊其丧前，去厩十余步。
现代文：马子听从她的话，到了那一天，用红公鸡一只，黄米饭一盘，清酒一升，摆祭在她的丧灵前面，离马棚只有十多步远。
English: According to the woman's account, on the day of the woman's birthday, Ma Zi sacrificed a red rooster, a plate of yellow glutinous millet rice, and a liter of sake in front of the grave where she was buried, which was about ten steps from the stable.

古文：祭讫，掘棺出。开视，女身体完全如故。
现代文：祭灵完毕，打开棺材一看，那女子身体完全跟活人一样。
English: When the ritual was over and the coffin was opened, the woman's body was completely lifelike.

古文：徐徐抱出，着毡帐中，唯心下微暖，口有气。
现代文：马子将她慢慢抱出，放入毡帐中。她只是心口有点温热，嘴有气。
English: Ma Zi slowly took her out and put her in a basket. Her heart was just a little warm and her mouth was full of air.

古文：令婢四守养护之。常以青羊乳汁沥其两眼。
现代文：马子命四个婢女护理她，不断用黑羊乳汁沥滴她的两眼。
English: Ma Zi ordered four maids to take care of her, constantly dripping her eyes with black sheep's milk.

古文：始开口，能咽粥，积渐能语，二百日持杖起行。
现代文：慢慢地，她开始张开嘴，能咽粥，并开始讲话了。二百天之后可以拄杖行走。
English: Slowly, she began to open her mouth, could swallow porridge, and began to speak. Two hundred days later, she could walk with a cane.

古文：一期之后，颜色肌肤气力悉复常。
现代文：一年之后脸色肌肤气力完全恢复了正常。
English: A year later, her face, skin and strength had completely returned to normal.

古文：乃遣报徐氏，上下尽来，选吉日下礼，聘为夫妇。生二男，长男字元庆，永嘉初，为秘书郎；小男敬度，作太傅掾。
现代文：马家于是派人向徐家报告了，徐家上上下下都来了。他们选择吉日下彩礼，结为夫妻，后来生了二个男儿，长子字元庆，永嘉初年任秘书郎；小儿叫敬度，作了太傅掾官。
English: The Ma family then sent someone to report to the Xu family, and the Xu family came from all over. They chose the auspicious day and the next day's bride price, married, and later gave birth to two boys, the eldest son, Zi Yuanqing, Yongjia's first-year secretary; the child was called Jingdu, and became a taifu eunuch.

古文：女适济南刘子彦，征士延世之孙。
现代文：他们还有个女儿嫁给了济南刘子彦，这刘子彦是不受朝廷聘任的隐士刘延世的孙子。
English: They also had a daughter who married Jinan Liu Zihang, the grandson of Liu Yanshi, a hermit who was not appointed by the imperial court.

古文：蔡支妻
现代文：蔡支妻
English: Cai Zhizhe

古文：临淄蔡支者，为县吏。
现代文：临淄有个蔡支，是县吏。
English: There is a Cai branch in Linyi, which is a county official.

古文：曾奉书谒太守。
现代文：一次，他带着书信去拜谒太守。
English: On one occasion, he went to pay homage to the Empress Dowager Shun with a letter.

古文：忽迷路，至岱宗山下，见如城郭，遂入致书。
现代文：忽然就迷了路，他来到泰山脚下，看见一座城郭，就进去送信。
English: Suddenly he lost his way. He came to the foot of Mount Tai, saw a city wall, and went inside to send a message.

古文：见一官，仪卫甚严，具如太守。
现代文：他见到一个官，仪仗侍卫很严整，颇象太守，就把书信呈上。
English: When he saw an official, the guard of honour was very strict, rather like a daimyō, so he presented the letter.

古文：乃盛设酒肴，毕付一书。谓曰： 掾为我致此书与外孙也。 吏答曰： 明府外孙为谁？ 
现代文：于是，那官便设宴款待他。宴后，那官交给蔡支一封信，说： 请你把它交给我的外孙。 蔡支问： 你的外孙是谁？ 
English: After the banquet, the official handed Cai Zhi a letter, saying, "Please give it to my grandchild." Cai Zhi asked, "Who is your grandchild?"

古文：答曰： 吾太山神也，外孙天帝也。 
现代文：那官回答说： 我是泰山神呵，我的外孙就是天帝。 
English: The official replied, "I am the God of Mount Tai, and my grandson is the Emperor of Heaven.

古文：吏方惊，乃知所至非人间耳。
现代文：蔡支大吃一惊，才知道这地方不是人间。
English: Cai Zhi was taken aback and knew that this place was not human.

古文：掾出门，乘马所之。有顷，忽达天帝座太微宫殿。
现代文：他出了门，骑马而去，一会儿就到了天帝座的太微宫。
English: He went out the door, rode away, and in a moment arrived at the Taigu Palace of the Celestial Empire.

古文：左右侍臣，具如天子。
现代文：这里左右侍臣俱全，俨如天子的仪仗。
English: Here, all the courtiers are here, and it's like a son of heaven's battle.

古文：支致书讫，帝命坐，赐酒食。仍劳问之曰： 掾家属几人。 
现代文：蔡支呈上书函，天帝让他坐下，并赐予酒食，还慰劳般地问他： 你家里几个人？ 
English: Cai Zhi submitted a letter, and Heavenly Father sat him down, gave him food and drink, and comfortingly asked him: How many people are in your family?

古文：对父母妻皆已物故，尚未再娶。
现代文：回答说父母妻子全死了，还未再娶。
English: He replied that his parents and wife had all died and he had not remarried.

古文：帝曰： 君妻卒经几年矣？ 
现代文：天帝又问： 你妻子死几年了？ 
English: Heavenly Emperor asked again: How many years has it been since your wife died?

古文：吏曰： 三年。 
现代文：蔡支说三年。
English: Cai Zhi said three years.

古文：帝曰： 君欲见之否？ 
现代文：天帝说： 你想见见她吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Do you want to see her?"

古文：支曰： 恩唯天帝。 
现代文：蔡支说请天帝施恩。
English: Cai Zhi said, "Please ask Heavenly Father for mercy."

古文：帝即命户曹尚书，敕司命辍蔡支妇籍于生录中，遂命与支相随而去。
现代文：天帝当即命户曹尚书，敕令司命把蔡支妻的户籍放到生录中，然后让蔡支跟随而去。
English: The heavenly emperor immediately ordered the household of Cao Shangshu, and ordered the magistrate to put the household registration of Cai Zhi's wife in the biography, and then let Cai Zhi follow.

古文：乃苏归家，因发妻冢，视其形骸，果有生验，须臾起坐，语遂如旧。
现代文：蔡支苏醒后回到家中，就挖开妻子的坟，看她的样子，果然已经活了过来。她一会儿起身坐下，说起话来还跟过去一样。
English: When Cai Zhi woke up and returned home, he dug up his wife's grave and saw that she had indeed come back to life. After a while, she got up, sat down, and spoke the same way as before.

古文：陈朗婢
现代文：陈朗婢
English: Chen Langhi

古文：义熙四年，琅邪人陈朗婢死，已葬。
现代文：东晋义熙四年，山东琅琊人陈朗的婢女死了，已经埋葬了。
English: In the fourth year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the servant girl of Chen Lang, a man from Shandong Province, died and was buried.

古文：府史夏假归，行冢前，闻土中有人声，怪视之。
现代文：有位府史休夏假回来，走到坟前，听到土中有人的说话声，便惊异地看去。
English: A prefectural historian came back from summer vacation, walked to the grave, heard someone talking in the soil, and looked at it in amazement.

古文：婢曰： 我今更活，为我报家。 
现代文：那位婢女说： 我现在又活了，替我报告给家人吧。 
English: And the maid said, Now that I am alive, tell my father and my mother.

古文：其日已暮，旦方开土取之，强健如常。
现代文：那天已经晚了，第二天早晨才把她挖出来，其身体强健如常。
English: It was late in the day, and she was dug out the next morning, her body as strong as ever.

古文：于宝家奴
现代文：于宝家奴
English: Yu Baojia Rong

古文：于宝字令升，父莹，为丹阳丞。
现代文：于宝字令升，父亲名莹，任丹阳县丞。
English: Yu Baozhiringsheng, the father of Ming Ying, was the county magistrate of Danyang County.

古文：有宠婢，母甚妒之。
现代文：他有个宠爱的婢女，于宝之母很嫉妒她。
English: He had a favourite maid, and Yu Bao's mother was very jealous of her.

古文：及莹亡，葬之，遂生推婢于墓。
现代文：于莹死后下葬时，就把婢女活着推进坟中。
English: When Yu Ying was buried after her death, he pushed her into the grave alive.

古文：于宝兄弟尚幼，不之审也。
现代文：当时于宝和弟弟尚幼，不明白这是怎么回事。
English: At that time, Yu Bao and his younger brother were still young and did not understand what was going on.

古文：后十余年，母丧开墓，而婢伏棺如生。载还，经日乃苏。
现代文：十多年之后，母亲死了挖开那座坟，而那个婢女趴伏在棺材上象活的一样，用车将她拉回来，一天之后才苏醒。
English: More than ten years later, when her mother died, they dug up the grave, and the maid lay down on the coffin as if she were still alive. They pulled her back with a cart, and she woke up a day later.

古文：言其父恩情如旧，地中亦不觉为恶。
现代文：她说于宝的父亲对她恩爱如旧，在阴间也不觉得不舒服。
English: She said that Yu Bao's father still loves her as much as ever, and she does not feel uncomfortable in the underworld.

古文：既而嫁之，生子。
现代文：不久她便嫁了人，生了儿子。
English: She soon married and had a son.

古文：韦讽女奴
现代文：韦讽女奴
English: Way to go, bitch.

古文：唐韦讽家于汝颖，常虚默，不务交朋。
现代文：唐代韦讽家住在汝颖，经常独自沉默，不善交朋友。
English: Wei Lin's family lived in Yuying during the Tang Dynasty. They were often silent and not good at making friends.

古文：诵习时暇，缉园林，亲稼植。
现代文：吟诵诗文的闲暇，便整修园林，亲自种庄稼栽树木。
English: In his spare time, when he was chanting poetry, he would renovate gardens and personally plant crops and trees.

古文：小童薙草锄地，见人发，锄渐深，渐多而不乱，若新梳理之状。
现代文：一天，小书童割草锄地时发现了人的头发，锄头渐渐深挖下去，那头发也渐渐多起来且不散乱，如新梳理的一样。
English: One day, when a little schoolboy was cutting grass and ploughing, he found human hair. The ploughshare gradually dug deeper, and the hair gradually increased and did not scatter, as if newly combed.

古文：讽异之，即掘深尺余。见妇人头，其肌肤容色，俨然如生。
现代文：韦讽认为这事很奇异，就又挖下一尺多深，看见一颗妇人头，其肌肉面色，很象活的一样。
English: Wei Yan thought that this was very strange, so he dug down more than a foot deep and saw a woman's head with a muscular appearance, very much like a living one.

古文：更加锹锸，连身背全，唯衣服随手如粉。
现代文：再用锹往深里挖，那妇人连身带背全露了出来，只是衣服随手一摸就粉碎了。
English: Digging deeper with a pickaxe, the woman emerged with her entire body and back exposed, but her clothes had shattered at the touch of a hand.

古文：其形气渐盛，顷能起，便前再拜。言是郎君祖之女奴也，名丽容，初有过，娘子多妒。
现代文：她渐渐恢复原气，很快就能够站起来，上前向韦讽一拜再拜，说自己是他祖上的女奴，名叫丽容，开始有点小过错，遭娘子嫉妒。
English: She gradually regained her strength and was soon able to stand up. She came forward and bowed to Wei Lirong, saying that she was his ancestor's slave girl, named Lirong, and that she was jealous of her daughter because of a small mistake.

古文：郎不在，便生埋于园中。托以他事亡去，更无外人知。某初死，被二黑衣人引去。至一处，太阙广殿。贲勇甚严。
现代文：趁郎君不在时，娘子就派人把她活埋在这园林中，并假托因为别的事情逃跑，反正又无外人知道。 我刚死的时候，被两个黑衣人引去，走到一个地方，这里有高大的门楼广阔的殿堂，虎贲勇士十分威严。
English: When I was dying, I was led by two men in black to a place where there was a tall gatehouse, a vast hall, and the warriors of the vise were very majestic.

古文：拜其王，略问事故。
现代文：我参拜了这里的大王，大王向我粗略地问问情况。
English: I paid homage to the great king here, and the great king asked me a few questions about the situation.

古文：黑衣人具述端倪，某亦不敢诉娘子。
现代文：黑衣人也述说了事情的原委经过。我由于害怕，也没敢控告娘子。
English: The man in black also described the original commission of the matter. Due to my fear, I did not dare to sue my daughter.

古文：须臾，引至一曹司。见文案积屋，吏人或二或五，检寻甚闹。
现代文：一会儿，他们引我来到一阴曹司衙，只见这里的文书案卷堆到了屋顶，小吏们三五成群，正在检验寻找案卷，很喧闹。
English: After a while, they led me to Yixin Cao Siyuan. I saw that the paperwork files here were piled up to the roof, and the petty officials were in groups of three or five, inspecting and looking for the files. It was very noisy.

古文：某初一吏执案而问，检案，言某命未合死，以娘子因妒，非理强杀。其断减娘子十一年禄以与某。
现代文：我开始被一个拿着案卷的官吏查问，查完案卷，他说我命不该死，而娘子因嫉妒而生杀人之心，故判减其十一年寿禄给我。
English: I was first questioned by an official with a case file. After checking the case file, he said that I did not deserve to die, and that my daughter was jealous and had a murderous heart, so he reduced her eleven-year pension to me.

古文：又经一判官按问。其事亦明。
现代文：又经一判官审案，这事也就明确了。
English: After another judge tried the case, the matter became clear.

古文：判官寻别有故，被罚去职，某案便被寝绝。
现代文：不料，判官不久因为别的原因遭到处罚，被免除了职务，我的案子也就搁下了，到现在九十多年了。
English: Unexpectedly, the judge was soon punished for other reasons, removed from his post, and my case was shelved, now more than ninety years old.

古文：九十余年矣，彼此散行。
现代文：如今彼此离散，各走各的道。
English: Now they are separated from each other, each going their own way.

古文：昨忽有天官来搜求幽系冥司积滞者，皆决遣，某方得处分。
现代文：昨天，忽然有个天官来处理阴曹的积案，都判决遣返，我的事情才得到解决。
English: Yesterday, all of a sudden, a magistrate came to deal with the backlog of cases, and all of them were ordered to be repatriated. Only then was my case resolved.

古文：如某之流，亦甚多数，盖以下贱之人，冥官不急故也，天官一如今之道士，绛服朱冠。羽骑随从。
现代文：象我这一类的，为数不少，大概是因为地位低下，阴曹的官吏也不急于给办吧？那天官好象现在的道士，绛红色的衣服，红色的帽子，羽裳马骑随从齐备。
English: There were quite a few people like me, probably because of the low status, and the sinister officials were not eager to do anything, right? The officials of that day were like the Taoists of today, with scarlet clothes, red hats, feathered cloaks and horses ready to follow.

古文：方决幽滞。令某重生，亦不失十一年禄。
现代文：刚处理完积案，就让我复活，这样就不会减少原判给我的十一年寿禄了。 
English: As soon as the backlog was dealt with, they brought me back to life, so as not to reduce the eleven years of longevity originally awarded to me.

古文：讽问曰： 魂既有所诣。形何不坏？ 
现代文：韦讽问道： 魂魄既然到了另外一个地方，那形体为什么不毁坏呢？ 
English: Wei Lin asked: Since the soul has gone to another place, why doesn't the body get destroyed?

古文：答曰： 凡事未了之人，皆地界主者以药傅之，遂不至坏。 
现代文：她回答说： 凡是案子未了之人，都由阴间的地方长官用药敷其身上，因此不至于腐烂。 
English: She replied, "The magistrates of the netherworld apply medicine to the bodies of those whose cases are pending, so that they do not rot.

古文：讽惊异之，乃为沐浴易衣，貌如二十许来。
现代文：韦讽认为这事奇怪，就让她沐浴更衣。看容貌她好象二十岁左右的样子。
English: Wei Yan thought it was strange, so he let her take a bath and change her clothes. She looked like she was about 20 years old.

古文：其后潜道幽冥中事，无所不至，讽亦洞晓之。
现代文：这以后，她便暗中讲些幽冥之事，什么都说了，连韦讽也全知晓了。
English: After that, she began to whisper dark things, and said everything, even knowing all the satires.

古文：常曰： 修身累德，无报以福。
现代文：他常常说： 修养自身积累公德，上天就会赐福于你。
English: He often said: Cultivate yourself and accumulate public virtue, and heaven will bless you.

古文：神仙之道，宜勤求之。 
现代文：神仙们的养生之道，我们应该不辞辛苦地去寻求。 
English: We should spare no effort to seek the health regimen of the gods.

古文：数年后，失讽及婢所在，亲族与其家得遗文，记再生之事。
现代文：几年之后，不知道韦讽和婢女到哪里去了，亲族们在他们家找到了遗留下来的文字，上面记的全是再生之事。
English: Years later, not knowing where Wei Lin and her maid had gone, relatives found a handwritten message left behind at their home, which was all about rebirth.

古文：时武德二年八月也。
现代文：当时是唐代武德二年八月。
English: At that time, it was August of the second year of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：邺中妇人
现代文：邺中妇人
English: The middle-aged woman sings

古文：窦建德，常发邺中一墓，无他物。
现代文：窦建德曾经挖开邺中的一座坟，没有得到别的东西。
English: Dou Jiande once dug up a grave in Handan and got nothing else.

古文：开棺，见妇人，颜色如生，姿容绝丽，可年二十余。
现代文：开棺后看见一个妇人，面色象活的一样，姿容美丽绝伦，年约二十多岁。
English: After opening the coffin, he saw a woman, looking as if she were alive, with a stunningly beautiful figure, about twenty years old.

古文：衣物形制，非近世者。
现代文：看其衣物和殉葬品等，不是近代的。
English: Judging by their clothes and funerary objects, they are not modern.

古文：候之，似有气息。
现代文：等了一会儿，她好象有了气息，于是就带回军中养起来。
English: After waiting for a while, she seemed to have breath, so she was brought back to the army to be raised.

古文：乃收还军养之，三日而生，能言。云： 我魏文帝宫人，随甄皇后在邺，死葬于此。
现代文：三天之后她就活了，能够言语。她说： 我是魏文帝的宫女，随甄皇后在邺城，死后葬在这里。
English: Three days later, she was alive and able to speak. She said, "I am Weiwen Emperor's concubine. I followed Empress Zhen in Shicheng and was buried here after my death."

古文：命当更生，而我无家属可以申诉，遂至幽隔。
现代文：我命该当复活，但无家人进行申诉，就被冥府耽隔了。
English: My life should be resurrected, but without my family to appeal, I was kept away by Hades.

古文：不知今乃何时也。 
现代文：不知道现在是什么年代？ 
English: I don't know, what decade is it?

古文：说甄后见害，了了分明。
现代文：说起甄皇后遇害一事，她清清楚楚的。
English: When she spoke about the murder of Queen Zhen, she was very clear.

古文：建德甚宠爱之。
现代文：窦建德很宠爱她。
English: Dou Jiande is very fond of her.

古文：其后建德为太宗所灭，帝将纳之。乃具以事白，且辞曰： 妾幽闭黄壤，已三百年，非窦公何以得见今日，死乃妾之分也。 
现代文：后来窦被唐太宗所灭，皇帝要招纳她进宫，她就把当时的事都禀白了，而且一口回绝地说： 我在幽冥之中封闭在黄土之下，已经三百多年，没有窦公哪能见到今日？为他而死乃是我的本分呵。 
English: Later, Dou was killed by Emperor Taizong of Tang. When the emperor wanted to invite her to the palace, she whitewashed the events of that time and flatly refused, saying, "I have been sealed in the dark under the loess for more than three hundred years. How can I see today without Dou? It is my duty to die for him."

古文：遂饮恨而卒，帝甚伤之。
现代文：于是，她便饮恨而死，太宗皇帝十分悲伤。
English: As a result, she drank herself to death, and Emperor Taizong was very sad.

古文：李仲通婢
现代文：李仲通婢
English: Li Zhongtongyi

古文：开元中，李仲通者，任鄢陵县令。
现代文：唐代开元年间，李仲通任鄢陵县令。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Li Zhongtong served as the governor of Fuling County.

古文：婢死，埋于鄢陵。
现代文：他的婢女死了，就埋在了鄢陵。
English: When his maidservant died, she was buried in his mausoleum.

古文：经三年，迁蜀郫县宰。
现代文：三年之后，他调任到四川郫县当县宰。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of county magistrate of Shu County, Sichuan Province.

古文：家人扫地，见发出土中，频扫不去，因以手拔之。
现代文：一天，家人扫地时发现有头发从土中露出，怎么扫也扫不掉。
English: One day, when the family was sweeping the floor, they found a hair sticking out of the soil. No amount of sweeping could remove it.

古文：鄢陵婢随手而出，昏昏如醉。
现代文：于是就用手拨它，不料那位埋在鄢陵的婢女顺着手就钻了出来。她昏昏沉沉象喝醉酒一样。
English: So he plucked it with his hand, and behold, the maidservant who was buried in the tomb came out of the tomb with him, dazed as if she had been drunk.

古文：家人问婢何以至此。
现代文：家人问她怎么到了这里？
English: Did the family ask how she got here?

古文：乃曰： 适如睡觉。 
现代文：她就说： 刚才象睡觉似的。 
English: She said: "It was like I was sleeping.

古文：仲通以为鬼，乃以桃汤灌洗，书符御之，婢殊不惧，喜笑如故。
现代文：仲通认为她是鬼，就用桃木汤浇她，写咒符防她。可她并不害怕，嘻戏如常。
English: Zhongtong thought she was a ghost, so he doused her with peach soup and wrote spells to ward her off. However, she was not afraid, and continued to play.

古文：乃闭于别室，以饼哺之，餐啖如常。
现代文：于是就把她关进别的房间，拿饼喂她，她吃起来跟从前一样。
English: So he shut her in another room, brought her bread and fed her, and she ate as before.

古文：经月余出之。驱使如旧。
现代文：一个多月后将其放出，驱遣使用如旧。
English: More than a month later, it was released and used as before.

古文：便配与奴妻，生一男二女，更十七年而卒。
现代文：后来就把她配给一男仆为妻，生一男二女，又活了十七年才死。
English: Later, she was given in marriage to a servant boy and had a son and two daughters. She lived for another seventeen years before she died.

古文：崔生妻
现代文：崔生妻
English: Cui Sheng's wife

古文：元和间，有崔生者，前婚萧氏，育一儿卒，后婚郑氏。
现代文：唐代元和年间，有位姓崔的青年，前妻萧氏生下一个儿子就死了，后妻姓郑。
English: In the Yuan and He years of the Tang Dynasty, there was a young man surnamed Cui. His first wife, Xiao, died after giving birth to a son, and his second wife was surnamed Zheng.

古文：萧卒十二年，托梦于子曰： 吾已得却生于阳间，为吾告汝母，能发吾丘乎？ 
现代文：萧氏死十二年后，托梦给儿子说： 我已经能够复活到阳间，替我告知你母亲，能挖开我的坟丘吗？ 
English: Twelve years after Mr. Xiao's death, he said to his son through a dream: I have been able to resurrect to the sun, tell your mother for me, can you dig my grave mound?

古文：子虽梦，不能言。
现代文：儿子虽然做了这样的梦，但没有说。
English: Although my son had such a dream, he didn't tell me.

古文：后三日，又梦如此，子终不能言。
现代文：以后一连三日，天天做这个梦，但他始终没有讲。
English: For the next three days, he had this dream every day, but he never told anyone about it.

古文：郑氏有贤德，萧乃下语于老家人云： 为吾报郑夫人，速出吾，更两日，即不及矣。 
现代文：郑氏是位贤德之人，萧氏就告诉老家人说： 替我报告郑夫人，快点让我出去吧，再过二天就来不及了。 
English: Mr. Zheng was a virtuous man, and Mr. Xiao told the old family members: "Report to Mrs. Zheng for me, let me go out quickly, it will be too late in two days."

古文：老人家叫曰： 娘子却活也。 
现代文：老家人叫喊着： 萧娘子要活了！ 
English: The old family member shouted: Xiao Niangzi is going to live!

古文：夫人卜之曰： 无生象。 
现代文：郑夫人去占卜，答说： 没有活象。 
English: Mrs. Zheng went to divination and answered: There is no live elephant.

古文：即罢。
现代文：只有作罢。
English: You just have to let it go.

古文：来日家人又曰： 娘子却活也。 
现代文：第二天老家人又喊： 萧夫人要活了！ 
English: The next day, the old family members shouted again: Mrs. Xiao is going to live!

古文：郑夫人再占，卜人曰： 有生象。 
现代文：郑夫人再去占卜，卜卦人说： 有活象。 
English: Mrs. Zheng then went to divination, and the soothsayer said: There is a live elephant.

古文：即开坟，果活动矣。
现代文：就挖开坟墓，那萧夫人果然活动了。
English: They dug up the grave, and Mrs. Shaw was indeed moved.

古文：舁归，郑夫人以粥饮之，气通能言。
现代文：家人把她抬回来，郑夫人亲自用粥喂她。气通之后，她就能讲话了。
English: Her family carried her back, and Mrs. Zheng herself fed her with porridge. After she regained her strength, she was able to speak.

古文：则知前卜无生象者，龟止环饶而已；后云有生象者，是龟咬足指也。
现代文：她说阴间也知道抚育乃贤德之恩，又说： 开始有一只龟，围着我的尸体绕了一圈就离开了；不几天它又爬了回来，咬我的脚趾头。 这才知道前一卦没有生象，因为龟只是环绕而已。后卦说有活象，这是龟在咬脚趾头。
English: She said that the underworld also knows that nurturing is a virtue, and added: At first, there was a turtle that circled around my corpse and left; a few days later, it crawled back and bit my toe. It was only then that I knew that there was no living elephant in the first story, because the turtle was only circling. The second story said that there was a living elephant, which was a turtle biting my toe.

古文：萧氏与郑氏为姊妹共居，情若骨肉。
现代文：萧氏和郑氏象姐妹那样住在一起，感情象亲骨肉。
English: Ms. Xiao and Ms. Zheng live together like sisters, and their feelings are like flesh and blood.

古文：得十年而终。
现代文：萧氏又活了十年才死。
English: Mr. Xiao lived for another ten years before he died.

古文：东莱人女
现代文：东莱人女
English: Women from Donglai

古文：东莱人有女死，已葬。
现代文：东莱有一家死了个女儿，已经埋葬。
English: In Donglai, a family lost a daughter, who has since been buried.

古文：女至冥司，以枉见捕得还，乃敕两吏送之。
现代文：姑娘到阴曹后，因为受冤枉被捕又被放回，还派了两个官吏送她。
English: After the girl arrived in Yin Cao, because she was wrongfully arrested and released, two officials were sent to escort her.

古文：鬼送墓中，虽活而无从出。
现代文：鬼把她送到坟中，虽然活了却无法出去。
English: The ghost sent her to the grave, and although she survived, she couldn't get out.

古文：鬼亦患之，乃问女曰： 家中父母之外，谁最念汝？ 
现代文：鬼也挺焦虑，就问她说： 你家中除父母之外，谁最爱念你？ 
English: The ghost was also quite anxious, so he asked her: Who in your family, besides your parents, misses you the most?

古文：女曰： 独季父耳。 
现代文：姑娘说： 只有老叔。 
English: The girl said, "Only my uncle."

古文：一鬼曰： 吾能使来劫墓，季父见汝活，则遂生也。 
现代文：一个鬼说： 我能让他来盗坟，叔父见到你活了，你也就死而复生了。 
English: One ghost said, "I can get him to rob graves. When my uncle saw you alive, you came back to life."

古文：女曰： 季父仁恻，未尝有过，岂能发吾冢耶？ 鬼曰： 吾易其心也。 
现代文：姑娘说： 老叔仁义且有恻隐之心，不曾有过错，怎么会挖我的坟呢？ 鬼说： 我换他的心。 
English: The girl said, "Old Uncle is kind and compassionate. He has never done anything wrong. How could he dig my grave?" The ghost said, "I can change his heart."

古文：留鬼守之，一鬼去。
现代文：一鬼留下看守，另一鬼便去了。
English: One ghost left the guards, the other ghost went away.

古文：俄而季父与诸劫贼，发意开棺，女忽从棺中起，季父惊问之，具以前白季父。
现代文：有顷，她老叔和盗墓贼们终于来了，他们用力开棺，这时，姑娘忽然从棺材中坐了起来。老叔惊异地问她，她把从前的事对老叔说了。
English: One day, her uncle and the grave robbers finally arrived and forced open the coffin, when the girl suddenly sat up from the coffin. The uncle asked her in surprise what she had told him about the past.

古文：季父大加惭恨，诸贼欲遂杀之。而季父号泣哀求得免，负之而归。
现代文：老叔非常悔恨和惭愧，盗墓贼们想立即杀死那个姑娘，老叔为她含泪哀求，才得以幸免，老叔背起她就回家了。
English: The old man was very remorseful and ashamed. The grave robbers wanted to kill the girl immediately. The old man pleaded for her with tears and was spared. The old man picked her up and went home.

