古文：传曰： 周宣王杀其臣杜伯而不辜，宣王将田於囿，杜伯起於道左，执彤弓而射宣王，宣王伏而死。
现代文：传上说：周宣王无辜杀害了他的大臣杜伯，宣王将要去野外打猎，杜伯出现在道路的左边，用红色的弓箭射宣王，宣王伏在弓袋上被射死了。
English: Legend has it that: Zhou Xuan Wang innocently killed his minister, Du Bo; Xuan Wang was about to go hunting in the field; Du Bo appeared on the left side of the road and shot Xuan Wang with a red bow and arrow; Xuan Wang was shot dead while crouching on his bow bag.

古文：赵简公杀其臣庄子义而不辜，简公将入於桓门，庄子义起於道左，执彤杖而捶之，毙於车下。 
现代文：燕简公无辜杀害了他的大臣庄子义，简公将要进入军营的门，庄子义出现在道路的左边，用红色的兵器打击简公，简公被打死于车子下。
English: Yan Jian Gong innocently killed his minister Zhuo Ziyi. When Jian Gong was about to enter the gate of the military camp, Zhuo Ziyi appeared on the left side of the road and struck Jian Gong with a red weapon. Jian Gong was beaten to death under the car.

古文：二者，死人为鬼之验；鬼之有知，能害人之效也。
现代文：这两件事，都是死人变鬼的证明，是鬼有知觉，能害人的证明。
English: Both of these things are proof that the dead have become ghosts, proof that ghosts are sentient and can harm people.

古文：无之，奈何？曰：人生万物之中，物死不能为鬼，人死何故独能为鬼？
现代文：说死人不变鬼，无知，不能害人，对这两件事又怎么解释呢？回答说：人生活于万物之中，物死不能变成鬼，人死为什么唯独能变成鬼呢？
English: To say that the dead do not change into ghosts, and that ignorance cannot harm people, how are these two things to be explained? Answer: Man lives in the midst of all things. Material death cannot become a ghost. Why is it that only human death can become a ghost?

古文：如以人贵能为鬼，则死者皆当为鬼。杜伯、庄子义何独为鬼也？
现代文：如果认为人高贵能变成鬼，那么死人都应当变成鬼，为什么唯独杜伯、庄子义变成鬼呢？
English: If it is believed that noble people can turn into ghosts, then all dead people should turn into ghosts. Why did only Du Bo and Zhuo Ziyi turn into ghosts?

古文：如以被非辜者能为鬼，世间臣子被非辜者多矣，比干、子胥之辈不为鬼。
现代文：如果认为无辜被害的人能变成鬼，世间被无辜杀害的臣子多得很，比干、子胥这类人却并没有变成鬼。
English: If you think that innocent victims can turn into ghosts, there are a lot of innocent courtiers killed in the world, but people like Bi Gan and Zi Yao did not turn into ghosts.

古文：夫杜伯、庄子义无道忿恨，报杀其君。
现代文：杜伯、庄子义无道，由于忿恨而仇杀了他们的君王，罪恶没有比弑君更大的了。
English: Du Bo and Zhuang Zi had no sense of justice. They killed their kings out of anger. There is no greater sin than being a traitor.

古文：罪莫大於弑君，则夫死为鬼之尊者当复诛之，非杜伯、庄子义所敢为也。
现代文：那么死后作为官长的那些鬼就会再一次杀死他们，这不是杜伯、庄子义所敢于做的事。
English: Then, after death, those ghosts who are the governors will kill them again, which is not something that Du Bo and Zhuang Ziyi dare to do.

古文：凡人相伤，憎其生，恶见其身，故杀而亡之。
现代文：凡是人要互相伤害，就憎恨对方活着，厌恶他的身体存在，所以把他杀死让他不存在于世间。
English: When people want to hurt each other, they hate the other person being alive, they hate his physical existence, so they kill him so that he does not exist in the world.

古文：见杀之家，诣吏讼其仇，仇人亦恶见之。
现代文：被害人的家属到官吏那儿告他的仇人，仇人也厌恶见到被害人的家属。
English: The victim's family members went to officials to sue his enemies, who were also disgusted to see the victim's family members.

古文：生死异路，人鬼殊处。
现代文：生死不同路，人鬼不相处。
English: Life and death are different paths, and people and ghosts do not get along.

古文：如杜伯、庄子义怨宣王、简公，不宜杀也，当复为鬼，与己合会。
现代文：如果杜伯、庄子义怨恨宣王、简公，就不应该杀死他们，因为他们被杀死后也会变成鬼，同自己相会在一起。
English: If Du Bo and Zhuang Ziyi hold a grudge against Xuan Wang and Jian Gong, they should not be killed, because after they are killed, they will turn into ghosts and meet themselves.

古文：人君之威，固严人臣，营卫卒使固多众，两臣杀二君，二君之死，亦当报之，非有知之深计，憎恶之所为也。
现代文：再加上君王的威仪本来就超过了臣下，他的卫士差役本来就众多，两个臣下变成鬼杀死两个君王，两个君王死后，变成鬼也一定会报复。这不是有智慧的鬼的深谋远虑，憎恨并厌恶见到仇人的鬼应有的作为。
English: Moreover, the majesty of the king was originally greater than that of his vassals, and his bodyguards were originally numerous. Two vassals turned into ghosts and killed two kings, and after the death of the two kings, the ghosts would certainly take revenge. This is not the forethought of a wise ghost, and it is not the act of a ghost that hates and abhors the sight of an enemy.

古文：如两臣神，宜知二君死当报己；如不知也，则亦不神。
现代文：如果两位臣子死后真的神灵的话，应当知道两位君王死后变成鬼一定会报复自己，如果他们不知道这一点，那么他们也就不神灵了。
English: If the two courtiers who died were really gods, they should have known that the two kings who died and became ghosts would certainly take revenge on themselves. If they did not know this, then they were not gods.

古文：不神胡能害人？
现代文：不神灵，怎么能害人呢？
English: If they are not gods, how can they harm people?

古文：世多似是而非，虚伪类真，故杜伯、庄子义之语，往往而存。
现代文：世间上多有似是而非，虚伪得像真实的一样的事情，所以杜伯、庄子义这一类传说，往往会留存下来。
English: There are a lot of things in the world that seem to be true but are not, things that are so false that they seem to be true. That's why legends like Dubo and Zhuang Ziyi tend to survive.

古文：晋惠公改葬太子申生。
现代文：晋惠公重新安葬太子申生。
English: Jin Huigong reburied Prince Shen Sheng.

古文：秋，其仆狐突适下国，遇太子。太子趋登仆车而告之曰： 夷吾无礼，余得请於帝矣，将以晋畀秦，秦将祀余。 
现代文：秋天，申生的仆人狐突到曲沃去，路上遇到太子申生，太子申生快步登上狐突的车并告诉他说： 夷吾改葬我不符合礼的规定，我惩罚夷吾的请求已得到上天的许可了，准备把晋国送给秦国，秦国将会祭祀我。 
English: In autumn, Shensheng's servant Foxtuck went to Quwo. On the way, he met Prince Shensheng. Prince Shensheng quickly boarded Foxtuck's car and told him: "It is not in accordance with the rules of etiquette to bury me. My request to punish Foxtuck has been approved by heaven. I am ready to give Jin Province to Qin Province. Qin Province will sacrifice me."

古文：狐突对曰： 臣闻之，神不歆非类，民不祀非族，君祀无乃殄乎！
现代文：狐突对太子申生说： 臣下听说神灵不享受他族的供物，百姓不祭祀他族的人，对您的祭祀不是要断绝了吗？
English: Foxtrot said to Prince Shinsho, "Your subjects have heard that the gods do not enjoy the offerings of other tribes, and that the people do not worship those of other tribes. Shouldn't your worship be discontinued?

古文：且民何罪，失刑乏祀，君其图之！ 
现代文：况且晋国的百姓有什么罪呢？刑罚不当，国亡无人祭祀，您要好好考虑一下这件事啊！ 
English: Moreover, what is the sin of the people of Jin? The punishment is inappropriate, there is no one to sacrifice for the death of the country, you should think about this matter!

古文：太子曰： 诺，吾将复请。
现代文：太子说： 好吧，我将再向上天请示。
English: The prince said, "All right, I'll ask God again."

古文：七日，新城西偏，将有巫者，而见我焉。 
现代文：七天以后，在曲沃新城的西边将会有一位巫者，你会在那里见到我。 
English: Seven days from now, there will be a sorcerer on the western edge of the new city of Cuwo, and you will meet me there.

古文：许之，遂不见。
现代文：狐突答应了申生，于是申生就不见了。
English: Foxtrot consented to Shen Sheng, and Shen Sheng disappeared.

古文：及期，狐突之新城西偏巫者之舍，复与申生相见。
现代文：到了约定的日期，狐突到曲沃新城西边巫者的住处，又和申生相见。
English: On the agreed date, the fox bursts into the sorcerer's residence on the western edge of the new city of Quwo, and meets Shen Sheng again.

古文：申生告之曰： 帝许罚有罪矣，毙之於韩。 
现代文：申生告诉他说： 上天准许惩罚有罪的人了，他将会在韩原失败。 
English: Shen Sheng told him, "Heaven has permitted the punishment of the guilty, and he will fail in Hanwon."

古文：其後四年，惠公与秦穆公战於韩地，为穆公所获，竟如其言。
现代文：这以后四年，惠公与秦穆公在韩原交战，被穆公俘虏，竟然如申生所说的一样。
English: Four years later, Hui Gong and Qin Mu Gong fought in Han Yuan and were captured by Mu Gong, just as Shen Sheng said.

古文：非神而何？
现代文：这不算神又该算什么呢？
English: If this is not God, then what is?

古文：曰：此亦杜伯、庄子义之类。
现代文：回答说：这也是杜伯、庄子义变鬼一类的事情。
English: He replied, "This is also a case of Du Bo and Zhuo Ziyi turning into ghosts."

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫改葬，私怨也；上帝，公神也。
现代文：改葬，是私怨；上帝，是公神。
English: The reburial is a personal grudge; God is a public deity.

古文：以私怨争於公神，何肯听之？
现代文：以私怨在公神面前争论，公神怎么肯听这些事呢？
English: Arguing about personal grudges in front of the gods, how could the gods listen to such things?

古文：帝许以晋畀秦，狐突以为不可，申生从狐突之言，是则上帝许申生非也。
现代文：上帝准许把晋国送给秦国，狐突认为这样做不行，申生就听从了狐突的话，这就是说，上帝原来答应申生的要求是不对的。
English: God allowed Jin to be given to Qin, but Foxtrot thought that this was not possible, so Shen Shen listened to Foxtrot's words. That is to say, God's original promise to Shen Shen's request was wrong.

古文：神为上帝，不若狐突，必非上帝，明矣。
现代文：作为公神的上帝，还不如一个狐突，必然就不是上帝，这是很明白的道理。
English: As the god of the gods, he is not as good as a fox, and he is not necessarily a god. This is a very clear truth.

古文：且臣不敢求私於君者，君尊臣卑，不敢以非干也。
现代文：况且臣子不敢以私事请求于君王，是由于君尊臣卑，臣子敢以私怨冒犯君王的缘故。
English: Moreover, the reason why a vassal dares not make a private request to the sovereign is that the sovereign is superior to the vassal, and the vassal dares to offend the sovereign with a private grudge.

古文：申生比於上帝，岂徒臣之与君哉！
现代文：申生和上帝比起来，岂只是臣子与君王之别呢？
English: Comparing Shinsho to God, is it just the difference between a vassal and a king?

古文：恨惠公之改葬，干上帝之尊命，非所得为也。
现代文：申生由于怨恨惠公的改葬，不惜冒犯上的尊命，这不是申生所应该做的事情。
English: This is not what Shen Sheng should have done, because he resented Huigong's reburial and did not hesitate to offend his honor.

古文：骊姬谮杀其身，惠公改葬其尸。
现代文：骊姬诬陷杀害申生的身体，惠公改葬申生的尸体。
English: Hao Ji framed Shen Sheng's body for murder, and Hui Gong changed the burial of Shen Sheng's body.

古文：改葬之恶，微於杀人；惠公之罪，轻於骊姬。
现代文：改葬的罪恶，小于杀人；惠公的罪，比骊姬的轻。
English: The crime of changing the funeral is less than the crime of killing; the crime of Huigong is lighter than that of Zou Ji.

古文：请罚惠公，不请杀骊姬，是则申生憎改葬，不怨见杀也。
现代文：申生请求上天惩罚惠公，不请求杀掉骊姬，那么这是申生憎恨改葬，不怨恨被人杀害了。
English: If Shen Sheng asked the heavens to punish Huigong, but did not ask for the death of Yan Ji, then it was because Shen Sheng hated the reburial, and did not resent being killed.

古文：秦始皇用李斯之议，燔烧诗书，後又坑儒。
现代文：秦始皇采纳李斯的建议，焚烧儒家的《诗》、《书》等经书，随后又坑杀儒生。
English: The First Emperor of Qin adopted Li Si's suggestion and burned the Confucian "Poetry," "Book" and other scriptures, and then killed Confucianism.

古文：博士之怨，不下申生；坑儒之恶，痛於改葬。
现代文：博士官的怨恨，不下于申生；坑杀儒生的罪恶，比改葬更可恨。
English: The resentment of the doctoral officer is no less than that of Shen Sheng; the crime of killing Confucianism is more hateful than the reburial.

古文：然则秦之死儒，不请於帝，见形为鬼，会告以始皇无道，李斯无状。
现代文：然而秦朝被坑杀的儒生，不向上天请求惩罚秦始皇，也不现形为鬼，召集并告诉活着的儒生说秦始皇无道，李斯不贤。
English: However, the Confucian scholars who were killed by the pit during the Qin Dynasty did not ask heaven to punish Qin Shihuang, nor did they appear as ghosts. They gathered and told the living Confucian scholars that Qin Shihuang had no virtue and was not virtuous.

古文：周武王有疾不豫，周公请命，设三坛同一墠，植璧秉圭，乃告於太王、王季、文王。
现代文：周武王生病身体不安，周公请求天命愿代武王去死，在同一地设三个坛，摆设璧玉手拿圭玉，这才向太王、王季、文王祷告。
English: King Zhou Wu fell ill and was worried about his health. Zhou Gong asked Heaven to let him die in King Wu's place. He set up three altars in the same place and arranged the gems to be held in the right hands. This is when he prayed to King Taowang, King Ji and King Wen.

古文：史乃策祝，辞曰： 予仁若考，多才多艺，能事鬼神。
现代文：史官就宣读祷辞为武王祈祷，祷辞说： 我柔顺而巧能，多才多艺，能侍奉鬼神。
English: The historian then read out a prayer for King Wu. The prayer said: I am flexible and skillful, versatile and able to serve ghosts and gods.

古文：乃元孙某，不若旦多才多艺，不能事鬼神。 
现代文：你们的长孙某某不如我姬旦多才多艺，不能侍奉鬼神。 
English: Your eldest grandson, so-and-so, is not as versatile as I am, and cannot serve the gods.

古文：鬼神者，谓三王也。
现代文：鬼神，说的是太王、王季、文王。
English: Ghosts and gods refer to King Tai, King Ji, and King Wen.

古文：即死人无知，不能为鬼神。
现代文：如果死人没有知觉，不能变成鬼神，周公是圣人，圣人说的话真实可信，那么就反映了阴间的实情。
English: If the dead have no consciousness and cannot turn into ghosts and gods, and Zhou Gong is a saint, and the words of the saint are true and credible, then it reflects the reality of the underworld.

古文：周公，圣人也，圣人之言审，则得幽冥之实；得幽冥之实，则三王为鬼神，明矣。
现代文：反映了阴间的实情，那么三王为鬼神，就很明白了。回答说：实际上圣人能有这样的神通吗？
English: Reflecting the reality of the underworld, it is very clear that the three kings are ghosts and gods. He replied: In fact, can a saint have such magical powers?

古文：曰：实人能神乎？
现代文：不能有这样的神通。
English: You can't have magic like that.

古文：不能神也？如神，宜知三王之心，不宜徒审其为鬼也。
现代文：如果有这样的神通，应当事先知道三王的心意，不应当只明白三王变成了鬼。
English: If there is such a supernatural power, it should know in advance the mind of the three kings, and should not only understand that the three kings have become ghosts.

古文：周公请命，史策告祝，祝毕辞已，不知三王所以与不，乃卜三龟，三龟皆吉，然後乃喜。
现代文：周公请求天命，史官宣读祷辞，祷告完毕祷辞念完，还不知道三王答不答应自己的请求，于是用三个龟甲进行占卜，三次龟卜都吉利，这才感到高兴。
English: Zhou Gong asked for the fate of heaven, the historian read out the prayer, and after the prayer, the prayer was read out. He did not know that the three kings would not agree to his request, so he used three tortoises to make divination, and the three tortoises were lucky. This made him happy.

古文：能知三王有知为鬼，不能知三王许己与不，须卜三龟，乃知其实。
现代文：能够知道三王有知觉变成了鬼，不能够知道三王答不答应自己的要求，必须用三个龟甲占卜，才能知道实情。
English: To be able to know that the Three Wise Men have become ghosts, and not to be able to know that the Three Wise Men will not agree to their demands, you must use the three tortoiseshells to tell fortunes in order to know the truth.

古文：定其为鬼，须有所问，然後知之。死人有知无知，与其许人不许人，一实也。
现代文：肯定三王是鬼，必须通过卜问，然后才知道他们的心意，死人有知无知，和他们答不答应人的要求，实际上是一回事。
English: It is one thing to affirm that the Three Wise Men are ghosts, and to know their thoughts through divination. It is another thing for the dead to know or not know, and another thing for them to agree or not to agree to people's demands.

古文：能知三王之必许己，则其谓三王为鬼，可信也；如不能知，谓三王为鬼，犹世俗人也；与世俗同知，则死人之实未可定也。
现代文：能够知道三王必定答应自己的请求，那么他说三王是鬼，可以相信；如果不能知道，说三王是鬼，就和世俗之人一样了。与世俗之人的见解相同，那么死人的实情就不可肯定了。
English: If you can know that the Three Kings will definitely agree to your request, then you can believe that the Three Kings are ghosts; if you cannot know that the Three Kings are ghosts, then you are the same as worldly people. If you have the same opinion as worldly people, then you cannot be sure of the truth of the dead.

古文：且周公之请命，用何得之，以至诚得之乎？
现代文：况且周公的请求天命，靠什么达到目的的呢？
English: Moreover, Zhou Gong's request for the fate of the world, by what means did he achieve his goal?

古文：以辞正得之也？
现代文：是靠最大的诚意达到的呢？还是靠祷辞的正确达到的呢？
English: Is it achieved by the greatest sincerity? Or is it achieved by the correctness of the prayer?

古文：如以至诚，则其请之说，精诚致鬼，不顾辞之是非也。
现代文：如果是靠最大的诚意达到的，那么他请求天命的祷辞，是向三王变的鬼表达了他最大的诚意，就不问祷辞的正确错误了。
English: If it is achieved by the greatest sincerity, then his prayer to ask for the heavenly destiny is an expression of his greatest sincerity to the three kings-turned-ghosts, and there is no question about the rightness or wrongness of the prayer.

古文：董仲舒请雨之法，设土龙以感气。夫土龙非实，不能致雨，仲舒用之致精诚，不顾物之伪真也。
现代文：董仲舒祈求下雨的方法，是设置土龙用以感动云雨之气，土龙不是真实的龙，不能招来降雨，董仲舒用它来表达自己最大的诚意，就不问土龙的真假了。
English: Dong Zhongshu's method of praying for rain is to set up a clay dragon to move the clouds and rain. The clay dragon is not a real dragon and cannot bring rain. Dong Zhongshu uses it to express his utmost sincerity, and does not ask whether the clay dragon is real or not.

古文：然则周公之请命，犹仲舒之请雨也；三王之非鬼，犹聚土之非龙也。
现代文：如此说来，那么周公的请求天命，如同董仲舒祈求下雨一样，三王不是鬼，如同堆的土龙不是龙一样了。
English: In this way, Zhou Gong's request for the fate of heaven is like Dong Zhongshu's prayer for rain. The three kings are not ghosts, just as the earth dragon in the heap is not a dragon.

古文：晋荀偃伐齐，不卒事，而还。
现代文：晋国的荀偃进攻齐国，没有结束战事就回来了。
English: Jin's Zou attacked Qi, but Zou returned before the war was over.

古文：瘅疽生，疡於头，及著雍之地，病，目出，卒而视，不可唅。
现代文：因劳致病生了毒疮，头上溃烂，到达著雍地方时，病很重，眼珠突出，死后眼睛还睁着，嘴紧闭塞不进东西。
English: When he arrived in Yong, he was very ill and his eyes were protruding. After his death, his eyes were still open and his mouth was tightly closed so that he couldn't eat anything.

古文：范宣子浣而抚之，曰： 事吴敢不如事主。 
现代文：范宣子洗了手安慰荀偃说： 我侍奉您的儿子吴，敢不像侍奉您一样。 
English: Fan Xuan Zi washed his hands and comforted Zou, saying, "I serve your son Wu, I dare not serve you in the same way.

古文：犹视。
现代文：荀偃的眼睛还是睁着。
English: The baboon's corpse still did not close its eyes.

古文：宣子睹其不瞑，以为恨其子吴也。人情所恨，莫不恨子，故言吴以抚之，犹视者，不得所恨也。
现代文：范宣子看见他不闭上眼睛，认为他惦念他的儿子荀吴，人情所惦念的，没有谁不惦念儿子的，所以就提到他的儿子吴来安慰他。
English: When Fan Xuan Zi saw that he did not close his eyes, he thought that he was thinking about his son, Zou Wu. No one can think about his son without thinking about him, so he mentioned his son, Wu, to comfort him.

古文：栾怀子曰： 其为未卒事於齐故也乎？ 
现代文：仍然睁着眼睛，是因为没有说中荀偃所惦念的事情。栾怀子说： 大概是没有完成伐齐的缘故吧！ 
English: His eyes were still open because he didn't say what he was thinking about. Hao Huai Zi said, "It's probably because he didn't complete the campaign!"

古文：乃复抚之，曰： 主苟死，所不嗣事於齐者，有如河。 
现代文：于是又安慰他说： 如果您死后，有谁不继续讨伐齐国这件事，有黄河可以作证。 
English: So he consoled him: "If there is anyone who will not continue the crusade against Qi after your death, the Yellow River can testify to it."

古文：乃瞑受唅。
现代文：荀偃才闭上眼睛含进东西。
English: The maggot just closes its eyes and swallows.

古文：伐齐不卒，苟偃所恨也，怀子得之，故目瞑受含，宣子失之，目张口噤。
现代文：讨代齐国的事没有完成，是荀偃所遗憾的，栾怀子知道了他的心意，所以他闭上眼睛含进东西，范宣子判断错了，所以他的眼睛睁开嘴巴紧闭。
English: Fan Xuan Zi's judgment was wrong, so he opened his eyes and closed his mouth tightly.

古文：曰：荀偃之病卒，苦目出。目出则口噤，口噤则不可含。
现代文：回答说：荀偃病死，害的是眼珠突出的病，眼珠突出则口紧闭，口紧闭则不能含东西。
English: He replied, "The death of a baboon is caused by the protrusion of the eyeballs. If the eyeballs protrude, the mouth is tightly closed. If the mouth is tightly closed, it cannot contain anything.

古文：新死气盛，本病苦目出，宣子抚之早，故目不瞑，口不阆。
现代文：刚死的时候体内还充满着气，原本病患的就是眼珠突出，范宣子安慰他过早，所以眼睛不闭，口不张开。
English: When he had just died, his body was still full of energy. Originally, the patient's eyes were protruding. Fan Xuan Zi comforted him prematurely, so his eyes did not close and his mouth did not open.

古文：少久气衰，怀子抚之，故目瞑口受唅。
现代文：过了一会，体内的气减弱了，栾怀子安慰他，所以眼睛闭上口就含进了东西。
English: After a while, the breath in his body weakened, and his arms comforted him, so he closed his eyes and swallowed something.

古文：此自荀偃之病，非死精神见恨於口目也。
现代文：这原本是荀偃的病造成的，并不是他死后精神通过口目的张闭来表示遗憾的心情。
English: This was originally caused by Lou's illness, not by his spirit expressing regret after his death through the opening and closing of his mouth.

古文：凡人之死，皆有所恨。
现代文：凡是人死去，都有遗憾的事情。
English: When a person dies, there is always something to regret.

古文：志士则恨义事未立，学士则恨问多不及，农夫则恨耕未畜谷，商人则恨货财未殖，仕者则恨官位未极，勇者则恨材未优。
现代文：志士遗憾正义的事业没有成功，学士遗憾学问上很多方面造诣不高，农夫遗憾种了地没有积储粮食，商人遗憾货物钱财没有增值，当官的人遗憾官位没能达到顶点，勇武的人遗憾武艺没有达到最高水平。
English: The aspirant regretted that his just cause did not succeed, the bachelor regretted that he was not highly accomplished in many aspects of learning, the farmer regretted that he had not planted and stored grain, the merchant regretted that his goods and money had not increased in value, the official regretted that his official rank had not reached the top, and the brave regretted that his martial arts had not reached the highest level.

古文：天下各有所欲乎，然而各有所恨，必目不瞑者为有所恨，夫天下之人，死皆不瞑也。
现代文：天下的人各有各的欲望，然而也各有各自遗憾的事情，如果一定要说死人眼睛不闭是因为有什么遗憾的话，那么天下的人死后都不会闭上眼睛了。
English: People all over the world have their own desires, but they also have their own regrets. If it must be said that the dead do not close their eyes because of any regrets, then people all over the world will not close their eyes after death.

古文：且死者精魂消索，不复闻人之言。
现代文：况且死去的人精神消失，不能再听见人说话。
English: Moreover, the spirit of the dead is taken away, and they can no longer hear.

古文：不能闻人之言，是谓死也。
现代文：不能听见人说话，这就是死了。
English: If you can't hear people talking, you're dead.

古文：离形更自为鬼，立於人傍，虽人之言，已与形绝，安能复入身中，瞑目阆口乎？
现代文：假使精神离开形体另外变成了鬼，站立在人的旁边，即使听见人说话，精神已经与形体隔绝，怎么能够又进入身体中去闭眼开口呢？
English: If the spirit leaves the body and becomes a ghost, standing next to the person, even if it hears the person speak, the spirit has been cut off from the body, how can it enter the body again to close its eyes and open its mouth?

古文：能入身中以尸示恨，则能不，与形相守。
现代文：精神如果能够再进入身体中通过尸体来表示遗恨，那么也就能够根本不离开身体，永远和身体相守在一起了。
English: If the spirit can re-enter the body to express its hatred through the corpse, then it can not leave the body at all and stay with the body forever.

古文：案世人论死，谓其精神有若，能更以精魂立形见面，使尸若生人者，误矣。
现代文：考察世人议论死亡，说死人的精神自己如此，能够重新用灵魂立形见面，使尸体像活人一样，这就错了。
English: It is a mistake to say that the spirits of the dead are themselves dead, and that they can meet again with their souls in a vertical position, making the corpse look like a living person.

古文：楚成王废太子商臣，欲立王子职。
现代文：楚成王废掉太子商臣，想立王子职继位。
English: King Chu Cheng abolished the position of prince and merchant and wanted to establish the position of prince and successor.

古文：商臣闻之，以宫甲围王。
现代文：商臣听说了此事，派宫里的卫士包围了楚成王。
English: When the chamberlain heard about this, he sent guards from the palace to surround King Chu Cheng.

古文：王请食熊蹯而死，弗听。
现代文：楚成王请求吃了熊掌再让他死，商臣不同意。
English: King Chu Cheng requested to eat the bear's paw and then let him die, but the merchant did not agree.

古文：王缢而死。
现代文：楚成王上吊而死。
English: Chu Cheng Wang hanged himself and died.

古文：谥之曰 灵 ，不瞑；曰 成 ，乃瞑。
现代文：给楚成王的谥号叫 灵 ，楚成王不闭眼；改谥号叫 成 ，他才闭上眼睛。
English: Chu Cheng Wang's nickname was Ling, and he did not close his eyes; when his nickname was changed to Cheng, he closed his eyes.

古文：夫为 灵 不瞑；为 成 乃瞑，成王有知之效也。
现代文：谥号为 灵 不闭眼，为 成 才闭眼，这是楚成王死而有知的证明。
English: The nickname is "Ling" which means "Do not close your eyes, but close your eyes for success." This is a proof that King Chu Cheng died knowingly.

古文：谥之曰 灵 ，心恨，故目不瞑；更谥曰 成 ，心喜乃瞑。
现代文：给他的谥号叫 灵 ，他心里不满意所以不闭眼；改谥号为 成 ，他心里高兴才闭眼。
English: He was given the nickname "Ling," but he was not satisfied with it, so he did not close his eyes; he changed his nickname to Cheng, and only closed his eyes when he was happy.

古文：精神闻人之议，见人变易其谥，故喜目瞑。
现代文：死人的精神听见人们的议论，见到人们改变了他的谥号，所以心里高兴眼睛就闭上了。
English: The dead man's spirit closed his eyes in delight as he listened to the discussion and saw that his nickname had been changed.

古文：本不病目，人不抚慰，目自翕张，非神而何？
现代文：本来眼睛没有病，也没有人抚慰他，他死后眼睛能张能闭，这不是神灵又是什么呢？
English: Originally, his eyes were not diseased, and no one consoled him. After his death, his eyes could be opened and closed. Was this not a divine spirit, and what was it?

古文：曰：此复荀偃类也。
现代文：回答说：这也是重复荀偃同类的事情。
English: "It's also a matter of repetition," he said.

古文：虽不病目，亦不空张。
现代文：即使眼睛没有病，也不会凭空张开。
English: Even if the eyes are not diseased, they will not open out of thin air.

古文：成王於时缢死，气尚盛，新绝，目尚开，因谥曰 灵 。
现代文：楚成王刚吊死的时候，身体内的气尚旺盛，刚断气，眼睛还在睁开，接着就给他的谥号叫 灵 。
English: When Chu Cheng Wang had just hanged himself, the qi in his body was still strong. When he had just passed out, his eyes were still open. He was then given the nickname "Ling."

古文：少久气衰，目适欲瞑，连更曰 成 。
现代文：一会儿体内的气衰弱了，眼睛刚巧要闭上，接着就改谥号叫 成 。
English: After a while, the qi in his body weakened, his eyes just happened to close, and then he changed his call sign to Cheng.

古文：目之视瞑，与谥之为 灵 ，偶应也。
现代文：眼睛的开闭，与给他的谥号叫 灵 、 成 ，是一种巧合。
English: The opening and closing of his eyes is a coincidence with the nickname given to him, Ling, Cheng.

古文：时人见其应 成 乃瞑，则谓成王之魂有所知。
现代文：当时的人看见他应和了谥号 成 才闭眼，就说楚成王的魂有所知觉。
English: When people at the time saw that he only closed his eyes when he heard the call of the dragon, they said that King Chu Cheng's soul was conscious.

古文：则宜终不瞑也。
现代文：有所知觉，就应当始终不闭上眼睛。
English: If you are aware, you should always keep your eyes open.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：太子杀己，大恶也；加谥为 灵 ，小过也。
现代文：太子杀死了自己，这是极大的罪恶；加给谥号叫 灵 ，这是小过错。
English: The crown prince killed himself, which is a great sin; it is a small mistake to give him the nickname "Ling."

古文：不为大恶怀忿，反为小过有恨，非有神之效，见示告人之验也。
现代文：不为极大的罪恶忿怒，反而为小过错怀有遗憾，不是魂有神灵的证明，也不是魂能显示告知人的证明。
English: Not to be angry at great wrongs, but to be sorry for small faults, is no proof that the soul has a spirit, nor that the soul can show or tell.

古文：夫恶谥非 灵 则 厉 也，纪於竹帛，为 灵 、 厉 者多矣，其尸未敛之时，未皆不暝也。
现代文：坏的谥号不是 灵 就是 厉 之类，记载在史书上谥号称为 灵 、 厉 的人是很多的，他们的尸体没有装殓之时，并非都不闭眼睛啊！
English: A bad nickname is either "Ling" or "Li." There are many people recorded in history books whose nicknames are "Ling" and "Li." When their bodies are not decorated, they do not all close their eyes!

古文：岂世之死君不恶，而独成王憎之哉？
现代文：难道世间上死后得坏谥号的君王都不厌恶坏谥号，而唯独楚成王憎恶坏谥号吗？
English: Don't all the kings in the world who died with bad names detest bad names, but only Chu Cheng Wang detests bad names?

古文：何其为 灵 者众，不瞑者寡也？
现代文：为什么被谥为 灵的君王那么多，而不瞑目的却这样少呢？
English: Why are there so many kings who have been deified and so few who have not?

古文：郑伯有贪愎而多欲，子皙好在人上，二子不相得。
现代文：郑国的伯有任性而又贪得无厌，子晳喜欢比别人优越，两个人很合不来。
English: Zhengzhou's Bo is headstrong and insatiably greedy. Zi Yao likes to be superior to others. The two cannot get along.

古文：子皙攻伯有，伯有出奔，驷带率国人以伐之，伯有死。
现代文：子晳率兵攻打伯有，伯有逃跑出去了。驷带率领国人讨伐伯有，伯有被杀死了。
English: Zixuan led the troops to fight against Bo You, and Bo You ran away. Zibo led the compatriots to fight against Bo You, and Bo You was killed.

古文：其後九年，郑人相惊以伯有，曰： 伯有至矣。 则皆走，不知所往。
现代文：事后九年，郑国人用伯有的名字互相惊吓，一说： 伯有来了 ，就都逃跑，不知道往哪里跑才好。
English: Nine years after the incident, the people of Zheng were using Bo's name to scare each other. As soon as they said, "Bo has come," they all ran away, not knowing where to go.

古文：後岁，人或梦见伯有介而行，曰： 壬子，余将杀带也。
现代文：又过了一年，有人梦见伯有穿着盔甲走来，说： 壬子日，我将要杀掉驷带。
English: After another year, someone had a dream that Bo You came in armor and said, "On the Day of the Dragon, I will kill the umbilical cord."

古文：明年壬寅，余又将杀段也。 
现代文：明年壬寅日，我又将要杀掉公孙段。 
English: On the 27th day of the first month of next year, I'm going to kill Deng again.

古文：及壬子之日，驷带卒，国人益惧。
现代文：到了壬子日那天，驷带死了，国人更加惧怕。
English: On the day of Mizi Day, the dragonfly died, and the Chinese people were even more afraid of the dragonfly.

古文：後至壬寅日，公孙段又卒，国人愈惧。
现代文：后来到了壬寅日，公孙段又死了，国人更是恐惧。
English: Later, on Ren Yin Day, Gong Sun Duan died again, and the Chinese people were even more afraid.

古文：子产为之立後以抚之，乃止矣。
现代文：子产以任命伯有的后代为官来安慰伯有变成的鬼，伯有就不再作怪了。
English: The progeny appointed Bo Ye's descendants as officials to comfort the ghost that Bo Ye had become, and Bo Ye no longer acted strange.

古文：其後子产适晋，赵景子问曰： 伯有犹能为鬼乎？ 
现代文：事后子产到晋国去，赵景子问他： 伯有还能变成鬼吗？ 
English: After the incident, Zhao Jingzi went to Jin Province, and Zhao Jingzi asked him: Can Bo still turn into a ghost?

古文：子产曰： 能。
现代文：子产说： 能。
English: The child said, "Yes."

古文：人生始化曰魄，既生魄，阳曰魂。
现代文：人生下来开始形成的叫 魄 。既然产生了 魄 ，阳气构成的就叫 魂 。
English: A person who has just died is called a ghost, has become a ghost, and the yang is called the soul.

古文：用物精多，则魂魄强，是以有精爽至於神明。
现代文：享用物的精华多魂魄就强健，所以就有从精爽发展到神明。
English: The essence of enjoyment is more than the soul is strong, so there is a development from the exquisite to the divine.

古文：匹夫匹妇强死，其魂魄犹能凭依人以为淫厉。况伯有，我先君穆公之胄，子良子孙，子耳之子，弊邑之卿，从政三世矣。
现代文：普通老百姓无病而死，他们的魂魄仍然能凭借活人的形体来作恶，何况伯有是我的先君穆公的后代，子良的孙子，子耳的儿子，本国的卿，当权三代了。
English: Ordinary people die without illness, and their souls can still use the form of a living person to do evil. What's more, the descendants of my ancestor Mu Gong, the grandson of Tzu Liang, the son of Tzu Er, the lord of the country, have been in power for three generations.

古文：郑虽无腆，抑谚曰： 蕞尔小国，而三世执其政柄，其用物弘矣，取精多矣。
现代文：郑国即使不富足，抑或如俗话说的小小的国家，可是，三代掌握国家政权，他们的魂魄享用物够多了。所取的精华也够多的了。
English: Even if Zheng Guo is not rich, or, as the saying goes, a small country, the three generations who have held state power have had enough enjoyment for their souls. They have also drawn enough essence.

古文：其族又大，所凭厚矣。
现代文：他的宗族又强大，他所依靠的相当厚实了。
English: His clan is powerful, and those he relies on are quite substantial.

古文：而强死，能为鬼，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：而伯有命不该绝却被人杀死，能变成鬼，不也是应该的吗？ 
English: But shouldn't Bo, who has life, be killed by someone, and can turn into a ghost? Isn't that also right?

古文：伯有杀驷带、公孙段不失日期，神审之验也。
现代文：伯有杀驷带、公孙段，不错过定下的日期，这就是神的确存在的证明。
English: This is the proof that God really exists, as evidenced by the fact that Bo has killed his son-in-law and grandson-in-law without missing the set date.

古文：子产立其後而止，知鬼神之操也。
现代文：子产任命伯有的后代为官伯有就不再作怪，可知鬼神的品德了。
English: If a progeny appoints a lineal descendant of a lineal descendant as an official lineal descendant, it will no longer be strange, but the character of ghosts and gods will be known.

古文：知其操，则知其实矣。
现代文：知道鬼神的品德，那么就知道真的有鬼了。
English: If you know the character of ghosts and gods, then you know that there really are ghosts.

古文：实有不空，故对问不疑。
现代文：确实有鬼神而凭空捏造，所以在问答中没有怀疑。
English: There are indeed ghosts and gods, but they are fabricated out of thin air, so there is no doubt in the Q&A.

古文：子产，智人也，知物审矣。
现代文：子产，是有智慧的人，了解物性是很明确的。
English: A child is a person who has wisdom and understands the nature of things very clearly.

古文：如死者无知，何以能杀带与段？
现代文：如果死者无知，为什么能杀掉驷带与公孙段呢？
English: If the deceased was ignorant, why was it possible to kill the umbilical cord and the great-grandson?

古文：如不能为鬼，子产何以不疑？
现代文：如果不能变成鬼，为什么子产不怀疑呢？
English: If you can't turn into a ghost, why doesn't the child suspect it?

古文：曰：与伯有为怨者，子皙也。
现代文：回答说：与伯有结怨仇的人是子晳。
English: He answered, "The one who has a grudge against Boaz is his son."

古文：子皙攻之，伯有奔，驷带乃率国人遂伐伯有。
现代文：子晳攻打伯有，伯有逃跑，驷带才率领国人就此去讨伐伯有。
English: Zixu attacked Bo You, Bo You fled, and it was then that Xiang Cao led the Chinese people to fight against Bo You.

古文：公孙段随驷带，不造本，其恶微小。
现代文：公孙段跟随驷带去讨伐，他不是主犯，他的罪恶微小。
English: Gongsun Duan followed the umbilical cord to the crusade, he is not the main criminal, his crime is small.

古文：杀驷带不报子皙，公孙段恶微，与带俱死。是则伯有之魂无知，为鬼报仇，轻重失宜也。
现代文：伯有杀驷带不报复子晳，公孙段罪小，却与驷带同死，这就是说伯有的魂无知，变成鬼来报仇，对罪的轻重处理得不适当。
English: For example, Bo killed his son-in-law and did not take revenge on his son-in-law, and his son-in-law committed a minor crime but died together with his son-in-law. This means that Bo's soul was ignorant, and he became a ghost to take revenge, and he handled the seriousness of the crime inappropriately.

古文：且子产言曰： 强死者能为鬼。 
现代文：况且子产说： 强死的人能变成鬼。 
English: Moreover, the progeny said: Those who die by force can turn into ghosts.

古文：何谓强死？
现代文：什么叫强死呢？
English: What do you call a violent death?

古文：谓伯有命未当死而人杀之邪？
现代文：是说伯有命不当死而别人杀死了他呢？
English: Was Bo's death a wrongful death and someone else killed him?

古文：将谓伯有无罪而人冤之也？
现代文：还是说伯有没有罪而别人冤枉了他呢？
English: Or is Bo innocent and others have wronged him?

古文：如谓命未当死而人杀之，未当死而死者多。
现代文：如果是说命中不应当死而别人杀了他的话，不应当死而死掉的人太多了。
English: If we are talking about someone who should not have died and someone else killed him, there are too many people who should not have died and died.

古文：如谓无罪人冤之，被冤者亦非一。
现代文：如果是说没有罪而别人冤枉了他的话，被冤枉的人也并非只有他一人。
English: If he is innocent and has been wronged, he is not the only one who has been wronged.

古文：伯有强死能为鬼，比干、子胥不为鬼。
现代文：伯有命不当绝而被杀死能变成鬼，比干、子胥却不变成鬼？
English: Can a pangolin turn into a ghost when it is killed, but a pheasant and a pheasant do not turn into a ghost?

古文：春秋之时，弑君三十六。
现代文：春秋时期，被臣下杀死的君王有三十六个。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, thirty-six emperors were killed by their subjects.

古文：君为所弑，可谓强死矣。
现代文：君王被臣下杀死，可以说是命不当绝而被杀死的了。
English: The king was killed by his vassals. It can be said that he was killed because his life was not worth living.

古文：典长一国，用物之精可谓多矣。
现代文：主管统治一个国家，享受的物的精华可以说是很多的了。
English: When a competent person governs a country, the essence of things to enjoy can be said to be many.

古文：继体有土，非直三世也。
现代文：继承帝位拥有国土，不仅仅是传三代。
English: Inheriting the throne and owning the land is not just passed down through three generations.

古文：贵为人君，非与卿位同也。
现代文：尊贵为君王，和卿的地位不同。
English: The honor of being a king is different from the status of being a lord.

古文：始封之祖，必有穆公、子良之类也。
现代文：最早受封的祖先，必然有穆公、子良这类人物。
English: The earliest ancestors to receive the title must have been figures such as Mu Gong and Ziliang.

古文：以至尊之国君，受乱臣之弑祸，其魂魄为鬼，必明於伯有，报仇杀仇，祸繁於带、段。
现代文：作为最高地位的国君，遭受不忠的臣下杀死的灾祸，他的魂魄变成鬼，一定比伯有更神灵。报复仇人杀死仇人，造成的祸乱，要比伯有杀死驷带、公孙段更多。
English: As the highest-ranking sovereign, if he suffers the calamity of being killed by a disloyal vassal, his soul will turn into a ghost, and he will certainly be more godlike than Bo Xilai. If he avenges the death of an enemy by killing an enemy, he will cause more calamity than if Bo Xilai killed the umbilical cord and grandson.

古文：三十六君无为鬼者，三十六臣无见报者。
现代文：三十六个君王没有变成鬼的，三十六位臣子没有被报复的。
English: Thirty-six emperors did not turn into ghosts, and thirty-six vassals were not avenged.

古文：如以伯有无道，其神有知，世间无道莫如桀、纣，桀、纣诛死，魄不能为鬼。
现代文：如果认为伯有无道，他死后精神有知，世间无道的人没有超过桀、纣的，桀、纣被杀死，魂魄却不能变成鬼。
English: If it is thought that Bo has no way and his spirit is wise after his death, then the people without way in the world are no better than the deaf and dumb. The deaf and dumb are killed, but the soul cannot become a ghost.

古文：然则子产之说，因成事者也。
现代文：既然如此，那么子产的说法，只是沿袭了既成事实。
English: Since this is the case, then the argument of offspring is just following the established facts.

古文：见伯有强死，则谓强死之人能为鬼。
现代文：看见伯有命不当绝而被杀死，就说被杀死的人能变成鬼。
English: Seeing that Bo was killed when his life was in danger, he said that the person who was killed could turn into a ghost.

古文：如有不强死为鬼者，则将云不强死之人能为鬼。
现代文：如果有不是被杀死而变成鬼的人，就将会说不是被杀死的人能变成鬼。
English: If there are people who are not killed and become ghosts, it will be said that people who are not killed can become ghosts.

古文：子皙在郑，与伯有何异？
现代文：子晳在郑国，跟伯有有什么不同呢？
English: Zixuan is in Zhengguo, how is it different from Bo You?

古文：死与伯有何殊？
现代文：子晳的死与伯有有什么不一样呢？
English: How is Zi Yan's death different from Bo You's?

古文：俱以无道为国所杀。伯有能为鬼，子皙不能。强死之说，通於伯有，塞於子皙。
现代文：都是由于无道而被国人所杀，伯有能变鬼，子晳不能变鬼，命不当绝而被杀死变鬼的说法适用于伯有，却不适用于子晳。
English: They were all killed by the local people due to their wickedness. Bo You can turn into a ghost, Zi Yao cannot turn into a ghost, and the saying of being killed and turning into a ghost is applicable to Bo You, but not to Zi Yao.

古文：然则伯有之说，杜伯之语也。杜伯未可然，伯有亦未可是也。
现代文：既然这样，那么伯有死后变鬼的传说，和杜伯死后变鬼的传说，是同样性质的，关于杜伯的传说既然认为不对，那么有关伯有的传说也不能认为是对的。
English: Since this is the case, then the legend of Bo Ying dying and turning into a ghost is of the same nature as the legend of Du Bo dying and turning into a ghost. Since the legend about Du Bo is considered incorrect, then the legend about Bo Ying cannot be considered correct.

古文：秦桓公伐晋，次於辅氏。
现代文：秦桓公讨伐晋国，军队驻扎在辅氏。
English: Qin Huan Gong invaded Jin Province, and the army was stationed in Fu.

古文：晋侯治兵於稷，以略翟土，立黎侯而还。
现代文：晋侯发兵于稷地，以夺取翟人占据的土地，恢复了黎侯的君位而返回。
English: The prince-emperor sent troops to Loudi to seize the land occupied by the Loudi people, restored the prince-emperor's throne, and then returned.

古文：及魏颗败秦师於辅氏，获杜回。
现代文：到达雒地时，魏颗在辅氏打败了秦军，俘虏了秦将杜回。
English: When arriving at Handan, Wei defeated the Qin army at Fu and captured the Qin general Du Hui.

古文：杜回，秦之力人也。
现代文：杜回，是秦国的大力士。
English: Du Hui was a great wrestler of Qin.

古文：初，魏武子有嬖妾无子。
现代文：当初，魏武子有宠妾没有儿子。
English: At first, Wei Wu Zi had a mistress and no son.

古文：武子疾，命颗曰： 必嫁是妾。 
现代文：武子生病，授命魏颗说： 我死后一定要把这个妾嫁出去。 
English: Wu Zi fell ill and gave the order to Wei Yu, saying, "When I die, I must marry off this concubine."

古文：病困，则更曰： 必以是为殉。 
现代文：武子病重时，就改变主意说： 一定要用这个妾为我殉葬。 
English: When Takeshi was seriously ill, he changed his mind and said, "I must use this concubine to bury me."

古文：及武子卒，颗不殉妾。
现代文：到武子死后，魏颗没有用这个妾殉葬。
English: After Takeshi's death, Wei did not use this concubine for his funeral.

古文：人或难之，颗曰： 疾病则乱，吾从其治也。 
现代文：有人责难他，魏颗说： 人有了疾病就胡言乱语，我遵从他的合理的遗嘱。 
English: Someone reproached him, Wei said: "When a person has a disease, he talks nonsense. I followed his reasonable will."

古文：及辅氏之役，魏颗见老人结草以亢杜回，杜回踬而颠，故获之；夜梦见老父曰： 余是所嫁妇人之父也。
现代文：到辅氏之战时，魏颗看见一位老人把草编成结用来阻挡杜回，杜回被绊倒在地，所以魏颗俘获了他。晚上魏颗梦见这位老人对他说： 我，是你嫁出去的那位妇人的父亲。
English: During the Battle of Fu, Wei Jie saw an old man weaving grass into a knot to block Du Wei. Du Wei tripped and fell to the ground, so Wei Jie captured him. In the evening, Wei Jie dreamed that the old man said to him, "I am the father of the woman you married."

古文：尔用先人之治命，是以报汝。 
现代文：你执行你父亲的合理遗嘱，因此我来报答你。 
English: You carried out your father's reasonable will, so I will repay you.

古文：夫嬖妾之父知魏颗之德，故见体为鬼，结草助战，神晓有知之效验也。
现代文：受宠爱的妾的父亲，知道了魏颗的恩德，所以现出形体为鬼，把草编成结助战，这是鬼神聪明有知的证明。
English: The father of the beloved concubine, knowing Wei Wei's benevolence, appeared in the form of a ghost and wove grass into a knot to help in the battle. This is proof that ghosts and gods are clever and knowledgeable.

古文：曰：夫妇人之父能知魏颗之德，为鬼见形以助其战，必能报其生时所善，杀其生时所恶矣。
现代文：回答说：这位妇人的父亲能知道魏颗的恩德，变鬼现形来帮助魂颗作战，必定能够报答他活着时所友善的人，杀死他活着时所憎恶的人。
English: He replied, "This woman's father, if he knew Wei Zhuang's kindness, if he could transform himself into a ghost to help the ghost fight, would certainly be able to repay the people he was friendly with when he was alive, and kill the people he hated when he was alive.

古文：凡人交游必有厚薄，厚薄当报，犹妇人之当谢也。
现代文：凡是人们交朋友，交情一定会有深有浅，无论深浅都应当报答，如同魏武子的嬖妾应当感谢魏颗一样。
English: Whenever people make friends, the friendship will certainly have depth and shallowness, regardless of the depth and shallowness, it should be rewarded, just as Wei Wuzi's concubine should be grateful to Wei Wei.

古文：今不能报其生时所厚，独能报其死後所善，非有知之验，能为鬼之效也。
现代文：现在如果说他不能报答活着时候厚待他的人，唯独能报答他死后所友善的人，这不是死人有知的证明，也不是死人能变鬼的证明。
English: Now if he cannot repay those who were kind to him when he was alive, but can only repay those who were kind to him after his death, this is not proof that the dead have knowledge, nor is it proof that the dead can turn into ghosts.

古文：张良行泗水上，老父授书。光武困厄河北，老人教诲。命贵时吉，当遇福喜之应验也。
现代文：张良行走在泗水河旁，有位老人送给他一部兵书；光武帝在河北处境艰难，有位老人给他指点迷津，命当富贵的人时运吉利，这是应当遇到吉祥事情的证明。
English: Zhang Liang was walking by the Surabaya River, and an old man gave him a military book; Emperor Guangwu was in a difficult situation in Hebei, and an old man gave him some pointers. If you are rich, you will have good luck. This is proof that you should encounter auspicious things.

古文：魏颗当获杜回，战当有功，故老人妖象结草於路者也。
现代文：魏颗命中注定要俘获杜回，战斗中应当立功，所以老人的妖象出现在路上把草编结来帮助他。
English: Wei's destiny was to capture Du Hui, so the old man's elephant appeared on the road to weave grass to help him.

古文：王季葬於滑山之尾，栾水击其墓，见棺之前和。
现代文：王季埋葬在滑山脚，大水冲击他的墓，现出了棺材前端的木板。
English: Wang Ji was buried at the foot of Mount Niu, and the water rushed into his grave, revealing the wooden plank at the front of the coffin.

古文：文王曰： 嘻！
现代文：周文王说： 唉！
English: Zhou Wenwang said: Alas!

古文：先君必欲一见群臣百姓也夫！
现代文：先君一定是想要见一见群臣和老百姓吧！
English: The late emperor must have wanted to meet his ministers and people!

古文：故使栾水见之於是也。 
现代文：所以让大水冲击现出棺材。 
English: So let the rush of water reveal the coffin.

古文：于是也而为之张朝，而百姓皆见之三日而後更葬。
现代文：于是离开宫廷，到棺材旁为王季设朝，老百姓都见到了棺材，三天以后又改葬王季。
English: So he left the court, went to the coffin and laid a wreath for Wang Ji. The people all saw the coffin, and three days later Wang Ji was reburied.

古文：文王，圣人也，知道事之实。
现代文：周文王是位圣人，明白道理和事情的实质。
English: Zhou Wenwang is a sage who understands the truth and the essence of the matter.

古文：见王季棺见，知其精神欲见百姓，故出而见之。
现代文：看到王季的棺材现出来，知道是他的精神想要见到老百姓，所以就离开宫廷而让老百姓都见到棺材。
English: When he saw Wang Ji's coffin emerge, he knew that it was his spirit that wanted to see the common people, so he left the palace and let the common people see the coffin.

古文：曰：古今帝王死，葬诸地中，有以千万数，无欲复出见百姓者，王季何为独然？
现代文：回答说：古今帝王死后，埋葬在地中，成千成万，没有想要再出来见老百姓的，为什么唯独王季是这样呢？
English: He replied, "Thousands of emperors, both ancient and modern, have been buried in the ground after their death, and none of them wanted to come out to see the common people again. Why is it that Wang Ji is the only one like this?

古文：河、泗之滨，立非一，水湍崩壤，棺椁露见，不可胜数，皆欲复见百姓者乎？
现代文：黄河、泗水岸边，坟墓不止一座，河水冲击使土倒塌，棺椁露现出来的，不可胜数，是都想要再见一见老百姓吗？
English: On the banks of the Yellow River and the Surabaya River, there are more than one grave, the soil collapses due to the impact of the river, and there are countless coffins exposed. Do they all want to see the people again?

古文：栾水击滑山之尾，犹河、泗之流湍滨圻也。
现代文：大水冲击滑山脚，如同黄河和泗水的急流冲击河岸一样。
English: The water surged against the foot of the slippery mountain, just as the torrents of the Yellow River and Surabaya surged against the riverbanks.

古文：文王见棺和露，恻然悲恨，当先君欲复出乎，慈孝者之心，幸冀之意，贤圣恻怛，不暇思论。推生况死，故复改葬。
现代文：周文王看到棺材两头的木板露出来，心情悲伤，认为或许是先君想要再出现，这是慈孝人的心思，希望如此的心愿。贤圣心情悲痛，顾不上思索判断，用活人的心理类推死人，所以又改葬王季。
English: When Zhou Wenwang saw the wooden boards at the two ends of the coffin exposed, he felt sad and thought that perhaps the forefather wanted to reappear, this was the thought of the filial piety, and he hoped so. The sage felt sad, could not think about the judgment, and used the psychological analogy of the living to push the dead, so he changed Wang Ji's funeral.

古文：世欲信贤圣之言，则谓王季欲见姓者也。
现代文：世俗之人相信贤圣的话，就说王季想见一见老百姓。
English: Secular people believe in the words of sages, so they say that Wang Ji wants to meet ordinary people.

古文：齐景公将伐宋，师过太山，公梦二丈人立而怒甚盛。
现代文：齐景公将要进攻宋国，军队路过泰山，景公梦见两位老人站在面前对他极为愤怒。
English: King Qi Jing was about to attack Song, and the army was passing by Mount Tai. King Jing dreamed that two old men were standing in front of him, and he was extremely angry.

古文：公告晏子，晏子曰： 是宋之先，汤与伊尹也。 
现代文：景公把这件事告诉了晏子，晏子说： 这是宋国人的祖先，成汤和伊尹。 
English: Jing Gong told this to Zizi, and Zizi said: This is the ancestor of the Song people, Cheng Tang and Yi Yin.

古文：公疑以为泰山神。晏子曰： 公疑之，则婴请言汤、伊尹之状。
现代文：景公怀疑认为他们是泰山神，晏子说： 您怀疑是成汤和伊尹，就请让我说说成汤和伊尹的形象。
English: Jing Gong suspected that they were the gods of Mount Tai. Zongzi said, "If you suspect that they are Cheng Tang and Yi Yin, please let me tell you about the images of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin."

古文：汤晰，以长颐以髯，锐上而丰下，身而扬声。 公曰： 然，是已。 
现代文：成汤皮肤白而身材高，下巴上长满了胡子，面部上尖下阔，昂头挺胸声音洪亮。 景公说： 对，正是这模样。 
English: Cheng Tang, white-skinned and tall, with a beard growing on his chin, a broad face and a high-pitched voice, said, "Yes, that's exactly what he looks like."

古文： 伊尹黑而短，蓬而髯，丰上而锐下，偻身而下声。 
现代文：晏子说： 伊尹皮肤黑而身材矮小，头发蓬乱长着胡子，面部上阔下尖，曲背弯腰样子谦恭。 
English: The cripple said, "Yi Yin is dark-skinned and short in stature, with unkempt hair and a long beard. His face is broad and pointed, and his hunched back is modest.

古文：公曰： 然，是已。
现代文：景公说： 对，正是这模样。
English: Jing Gong said: Yes, that's exactly what it looks like.

古文：今奈何？ 
现代文：现在怎么办呢？ 
English: What to do now?

古文：晏子曰： 夫汤、太甲、武丁、祖己，天下之盛君也，不宜无後。
现代文：晏子说： 成汤、太甲、武丁、祖乙，都是天下有盛名的君王，不应当没有后代。
English: Zizi said: Cheng Tang, Tai Jia, Wu Ding, Zu B, are all famous kings in the world, and they should not have no descendants.

古文：今唯宋耳，而公伐之，故汤、伊尹怒。
现代文：现今商的后代只剩下宋国了，而您进攻他们，所以成汤、伊尹要发怒。
English: The descendants of today's merchants are left only in Song, and you are attacking them, so Cheng Tang and Yi Yin should be angry.

古文：请散师和於宋。 
现代文：请您退兵和宋国讲和。 
English: Please withdraw your troops and make peace with Song.

古文：公不用，终伐宋，军果败。
现代文：景公不采纳，终于进攻宋国，军队果然吃了败仗。
English: Jing Gong did not accept, and finally attacked Song, and the army was defeated.

古文：夫汤、伊尹有知，恶景公之伐宋，故见梦盛怒以禁止之。
现代文：成汤、伊尹死后精神有知，憎恶景公进攻宋国，所以出现在梦中大怒以禁止景公伐宋。
English: After the death of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin, he had a wise spirit and detested Jing Gong's attack on Song, so he appeared in a dream and became furious to prohibit Jing Gong from attacking Song.

古文：景公不止，军果不吉。
现代文：景公不停止进攻宋国，军队果然不吉利。
English: Jing Gong did not stop attacking Song, and the army was indeed unlucky.

古文：曰：夫景公亦曾梦见彗星，其时彗星不出，然而梦见之者，见彗星其实非。
现代文：回答说：景公也曾经梦见过彗星，当时彗星并没有出现，然而梦见的那颗彗星，其实并不是真的彗星。
English: He replied: Jing Gong also once dreamed of a comet, but the comet did not appear at that time. However, the comet he dreamed of was not actually a real comet.

古文：梦见汤、伊尹，实亦非也。
现代文：梦见成汤、伊尹，其实也并不是真的成汤、伊尹。
English: Dreaming of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin is not really Cheng Tang and Yi Yin.

古文：或时景公军败不吉之象也。
现代文：或许是景公的军队要吃败仗而出现的不吉利的妖象。
English: Perhaps it was an unlucky monster elephant that appeared when the army of King Gyeongbokgung was about to be defeated.

古文：晏子信梦，明言汤、伊尹之形，景公顺晏子之言，然而是之。
现代文：晏子相信梦，明确地说出成汤、伊尹的形象，景公顺从晏子的话，同意并肯定晏子所说的成汤、伊尹的像貌。
English: Xun Zi believed in the dream and clearly stated the image of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin. Jing Gong obeyed the words of Xun Zi and agreed and affirmed the image of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin said by Xun Zi.

古文：秦并天下，绝伊尹之後，遂至於今，汤、伊尹不祀，何以不怒乎？
现代文：秦国统一天下，断绝了成汤、伊尹的后代，竟至于当今，成汤、伊尹没有人祭祀，怎么却不发怒呢？
English: Qin unified the country on the same day and cut off the descendants of Cheng Tang and Yi Yin. As for today, Cheng Tang and Yi Yin have no one to worship, so how can they not be angry?

古文：郑子产聘於晋。
现代文：郑国的子产访问晋国。
English: Zheng's offspring visit Jin.

古文：晋侯有疾，韩宣子逆客，私焉，曰： 寡君寝疾，於今三月矣，并走群望，有加而无瘳。
现代文：晋侯正在生病，由韩宣子接待客人，他同子产私下交谈，说： 我国君卧病，至今已三个月了，把该祭祀的山川都去祭遍了，君王的病只见加重而不见好转。
English: Prince Jin was ill, and guests were received by Han Xuan Zi. He had a private conversation with his son-in-law, saying, "Our country's sovereign has been lying ill for three months now, and we have gone all over the mountains and rivers to offer this sacrifice. The sovereign's illness has only worsened, but has not improved.

古文：今梦黄熊入於寝门，其何厉鬼也？ 
现代文：现在梦见黄熊进入卧室门，它是什么恶鬼呢？ 
English: Now I dream of a yellow bear entering my bedroom door. What kind of evil spirit is it?

古文：对曰： 以君之明，子为大政，其何厉之有！
现代文：子产说： 凭你们国君的英明，您任正卿掌权，会有什么恶鬼呢？
English: Zi Yuan said: With the wisdom of your sovereigns, you have allowed Zhengqing to take power, what evil spirits will there be?

古文：昔尧殛鲧於羽山，其神为黄熊，以入於羽渊，实为夏郊，三代祀之。
现代文：从前尧在羽山杀了鲧，鲧的精神变成黄熊，钻进羽山的深渊中，成为夏朝祭天时配祭的神灵，夏、商、周三代都祭祀他。
English: Once upon a time, a baboon killed a roe deer in Mt. Hasan. The spirit of the roe deer turned into a yellow bear and burrowed into the abyss of Mt. Hasan, becoming the deity of the summer morning festival. The summer, merchants, and the third generation all worshiped him.

古文：晋为盟主，其或者未之祀乎！ 
现代文：晋国作为盟主，晋侯可能没有祭祀过鲧吧？ 
English: As the leader of Jin Province, Jin Hou may not have had any sacrificial rites, right?

古文：韩子祀夏郊，晋侯有间。
现代文：韩宣子祭祀夏朝所郊祀的鲧，晋侯的病就有所好转。
English: As soon as Han Xuan Zi made a ritual offering to the god enshrined on the outskirts of the Summer Palace, Jin Hou's illness improved.

古文：黄熊，鲧之精神，晋侯不祀，故入寝门。
现代文：黄熊，是鲧的精神变的，晋侯不祭祀它，所以它进入卧室门。
English: The yellow bear is the spirit of the dragonfly. Jin Hou does not worship it, so it enters the bedroom door.

古文：晋知而祀之，故疾有间。
现代文：晋国知道了就祭祀它，所以晋侯的病好转了。
English: When the Jin state found out, they sacrificed it, so Jin Hou's illness got better.

古文：非死人有知之验乎？
现代文：这不是死人有知的证明吗？
English: Isn't that proof that dead people know things?

古文：夫鲧殛於羽山，人知也。
现代文：回答说：鲧被杀死在羽山，这是人们所知道的事。
English: He replied, "It is a well-known fact that the baboons were killed in Hasan.

古文：神为黄熊，入於羽渊，人何以得知之？
现代文：鲧的精神变成黄熊，进入羽山的深渊，人们根据什么得以知道呢？
English: What is the basis for people to know that the spirit of the dragonfly turns into a yellow bear and enters the abyss of the mountain?

古文：使若鲁公牛哀病化为虎，在，故可实也。
现代文：假如鲁国的公牛哀患病后变成老虎，老虎确实存在，所以可以肯定这件事。
English: If Lu's bull Ying became a tiger after falling ill, tigers do exist, so we can be sure of this.

古文：今鲧远殛於羽山，人不与之处，何能知之？
现代文：鲧被杀于远远的羽山，人们又没有和他在一起，怎么能知道他变为黄熊呢？
English: If a roe deer is killed far away in the mountains, and people are not with it, how can they know that it has turned into a yellow bear?

古文：且文曰： 其神为熊。 
现代文：况且子产说： 鲧的精神变成了黄熊。 
English: Moreover, the offspring said: the spirit of the dragonfly turned into a yellow bear.

古文：是死也。
现代文：这是说鲧死了。
English: It means the toad is dead.

古文：死而魂神为黄熊，非人所得知也。
现代文：死后魂神变成黄熊，不是人们所能知道的。
English: After death, the soul god turns into a yellow bear, which is not something that people can know.

古文：人死世谓鬼，鬼象生人之形，见之与人无异，然犹非死人之神，况熊非人之形，不与人相似乎？
现代文：人死后世人称为鬼，鬼的形象和活人的一样，看见鬼和人没有什么不同，然而他不是死人的精神所变的，何况黄熊不是人的形状，并不与人相似呢！
English: After a person dies, the world calls him a ghost. The image of a ghost is the same as that of a living person. Seeing a ghost is no different from seeing a person. However, he is not changed by the spirit of a dead person. What's more, the yellow bear is not a human shape and does not resemble a person!

古文：审鲧死，其神为黄熊。 则熊之死，其神亦或时为人，人梦见之，何以知非死禽兽之神也？
现代文：如果鲧死后他的精神确实变成了黄熊，那么黄熊死后，它的精神或许变成人形，人们在梦中见到一个人，怎么知道不会是死去的禽兽的精神变成的呢？
English: If after the death of the baboon, his spirit really turned into a yellow bear, then after the death of the yellow bear, its spirit may turn into a doll. When people see a person in a dream, how do they know that it is not the spirit of a dead animal?

古文：信黄熊谓之鲧神，又信所见之鬼以为死人精也，此人物之精未可定，黄熊为鲧之神未可审也。
现代文：相信黄熊是鲧的精神变的，又相信梦中见到的鬼是死人的精神变的，这就是说连梦见的黄熊是人的精神变的还是熊的精神变的都不能确定，那么黄熊是鲧的精神变的也不能确定了。
English: Believing that the yellow bear is the spirit of a baboon, and believing that the ghost seen in a dream is the spirit of a dead person, that is to say, even if the yellow bear seen in a dream is the spirit of a person or the spirit of a bear, it cannot be determined, then the yellow bear is the spirit of a baboon.

古文：且梦，象也，吉凶且至，神明示象，熊罴之占，自有所为。
现代文：况且梦是一种虚象，吉凶将要出现，神明用虚象预示，熊罴表现的预兆，自有它所要预示的事情。
English: Moreover, a dream is an illusion, good and evil will appear, the gods foreshadow with an illusion, the omen of the bear's appearance has its own things to be foreshadowed.

古文：使鲧死，其神审为黄熊，梦见黄熊，必鲧之神乎？
现代文：假如鲧死后他的精神确实变成了黄熊，晋侯梦中见到的黄熊，就一定是鲧的精神所变的吗？
English: If the spirit of Xing really turned into a yellow bear after Xing's death, would the yellow bear seen in Jin Hou's dream have been changed by Xing's spirit?

古文：诸侯祭山川，设晋侯梦见山川，复以祀山川，山川自见乎？
现代文：诸侯祭祀山川，假如晋侯梦见山川，难道还能认为由于晋侯不祭山川，山川会自己现在梦中吗？
English: Princes worship mountains and rivers. If a prince dreams of mountains and rivers, can he still think that because the prince does not worship mountains and rivers, the mountains and rivers are now in his dream?

古文：人病，多或梦见先祖死人来立其侧，可复谓先祖死人求食，故来见形乎？
现代文：人病了，有时多会梦见先祖死人来站在他的身旁，难道还能说先祖死人来要求享受供物，所以在梦中现形吗？
English: When a person is ill, sometimes he will dream of dead ancestors coming to stand beside him. Can it be said that the dead ancestors come to enjoy the offerings, so they appear in the dream?

古文：人梦所见，更为他占，未必以所见为实也。
现代文：人在梦中见到的，可能是别的事情的征兆，不一定真是梦见的那种事情的预兆。
English: What one sees in a dream may be a sign of something else, not necessarily a harbinger of the kind of thing one really dreamed about.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：梦见生人，明日所梦见之人，不与己相见。
现代文：梦中见到某位活着的人，第二天问梦中所见到的那个人，他并没有和自己相见过。
English: If you see someone alive in a dream, the next day ask the person you saw in the dream if he or she has seen you.

古文：夫所梦见之人不与己相见，则知鲧之黄熊不入寝门；不入，则鲧不求食；不求食，则晋侯之疾非废夏郊之祸；非废夏郊之祸，则晋侯有间，非祀夏郊之福也。
现代文：从梦中所见到的人并没有和自己相见，就能知道鲧变的黄熊不会进入卧室门。黄熊不进入卧室门，那么鲧就不要求享受供物。不要求享受供物，那么晋侯的病并不是废止了祭祀夏朝所郊祀的鲧而引起的灾祸。不是废止了祭祀夏朝所郊祀的鲧引起的灾祸，那么晋侯的病好转也并不是由于祭祀了夏朝郊祀的鲧而获得的福佑。
English: From the fact that the person seen in the dream did not meet himself, it can be known that the transformed yellow bear will not enter the bedroom door. If the yellow bear does not enter the bedroom door, then the rooster will not ask to enjoy the offering. If the rooster does not ask to enjoy the offering, then the illness of Jinhou is not a disaster caused by the abolition of the sacrifice of the rooster in the suburbs of the Summer Palace. If it is not a disaster caused by the abolition of the sacrifice of the rooster in the suburbs of the Summer Palace, then the improvement of the illness of Jinhou is not a blessing obtained by the sacrifice of the rooster in the suburbs of the Summer Palace

古文：无福之实，则无有知之验矣。
现代文：既然夏郊没有真正得到福佑，那也就证明鲧死后是没有知觉的。
English: Since Xia Jiao didn't really receive the blessing, it also proves that there is no consciousness after death.

古文：亦犹淮南王刘安坐谋反而死，世传以为仙而升天。
现代文：也就像淮南王刘安因谋反而畏罪自杀，世人传说他成仙升天了一样。
English: Just like Liu An, the king of Huainan, who committed suicide because he was afraid of committing a crime, the world's legend says that he became a god and ascended to heaven.

古文：本传之虚，子产闻之，亦不能实。
现代文：本来是虚妄的传说，子产听到这种传说，也是不能加以证实的。
English: Originally, it was a false legend, and when Zibo heard this legend, it could not be confirmed.

古文：偶晋侯之疾适当自衰，子产遭言黄熊之占，则信黄熊鲧之神矣。
现代文：偶然晋侯的病正好自己减轻，子产碰巧说黄熊的预兆，人们就相信黄熊是鲧的精神了。
English: By chance, Jinhou's illness eased on its own, and his offspring happened to say that the yellow bear was an omen, and people believed that the yellow bear was the spirit of the dragonfly.

古文：高皇帝以赵王如意为似我而欲立之，吕后恚恨，后鸩杀赵王。
现代文：汉高祖因为赵王如意很像自己而想把他立为太子，吕后怨恨此事，后来就用鸩酒毒杀了赵王。
English: Han Gao Zu wanted to make Zhao Wang Ruyi the crown prince because he was very similar to himself. Lv Hou resented this, and later poisoned Zhao Wang with wine.

古文：其後，吕后出，见苍犬，噬其左腋，怪而卜之，赵王如意为祟，遂病腋伤，不愈而死。
现代文：事后，吕后外出，看见一只灰白色的狗，咬她的左腋。吕后感到奇怪而占卜此事，发现是赵王如意在作祟，于是她患了腋伤病，病未好她就死了。
English: After the incident, Lv Hou went out and saw a grey-white dog bite her left shin. Lv Hou felt strange and divined the matter, and found out that Zhao Wang Rongyi was the culprit. As a result, she suffered from bruising disease, and she died before she got better.

古文：盖以如意精神为苍犬，见变以报其仇也。
现代文：大概是赵王如意的精神变成灰白色的狗，现出异常现象来报他的仇。
English: It was probably the spirit of Zhao Wang Ruxi that turned into a grey-white dog, manifesting abnormal phenomena to avenge him.

古文：愤曰：勇士忿怒，交刃而战，负者被创，仆地而死。
现代文：回答说：勇士忿怒之时，用锋利的刀交战，战败的被刀刃所伤，倒地而死。
English: He answered, "When a warrior is enraged, he fights with a sharp sword, but when he is defeated, he falls to the ground and dies.

古文：目见彼之中己，死後其神尚不能报，吕后鸩如意时，身不自往，使人饮之，不知其为鸩毒，愤不知杀己者为谁，安能为祟以报吕后？
现代文：他亲眼看到对方击中自己，死后他的精神尚且不能报仇。吕后用鸩酒毒杀如意时，她并不亲自前往，派人让如意喝酒，如意不知道那是鸩毒，不知道杀死自己的是谁，怎么能作祟以向吕后报仇呢？
English: He saw with his own eyes that the other party hit him, and after his death, his spirit was still unable to take revenge. When Lv Hou poisoned Ruyi with poisoned wine, she did not go there in person, but sent someone to let Ruyi drink. Ruyi did not know that it was poisoned wine, and did not know who killed him, so how could he plot to take revenge on Lv Hou?

古文：使死人有知，恨者莫过高祖。
现代文：如果死人有知，没有谁比汉高祖更痛恨杀死如意的。
English: If the dead know anything, no one hates killing more than Han Gaozu.

古文：高祖爱如意而吕后杀之，高祖魂怒，宜如雷霆，吕后之死，宜不旋日。
现代文：高祖喜爱如意而吕后杀了如意，高祖魂神的震怒应当像雷霆一般，吕后被处死应当不超过一天。
English: Gaozu loved her as he wished and killed her as he wished. Gaozu's god's wrath should be like thunder, and it should not take more than one day for Lu to be executed.

古文：岂高祖之精，不若如意之神，将死後憎如意，善吕后之杀也？
现代文：是高祖的精神还不如如意的精神神灵呢？还是高祖死后又憎恨起如意来，赞成吕后杀死他呢？
English: Is Gaozu's spirit still not as good as Ruyi's spirit? Or did Gaozu hate Ruyi after his death and approve of Lü's killing him?

古文：丞相武安侯田与故大将军灌夫怀酒之恨，事至上闻。
现代文：丞相武安侯田蚡与故大将军灌夫在酒席上产生了怨恨，事情发展到皇上听说了这件事。
English: The chancellor of the imperial court, Buan Houtian, and the former general, Kanfu, developed a grudge at a banquet, and the matter came to the attention of the emperor.

古文：灌夫系狱，窦婴救之，势不能免灌夫坐法，窦婴亦死。
现代文：灌夫被逮捕入狱，窦婴要援救他，大势已去灌夫不能免罪。灌夫因此被治罪，窦婴也因罪被处死。
English: Ganfu was arrested and sent to prison. Dou Ying wanted to rescue him. The situation was such that Ganfu could not be exonerated. As a result, Ganfu was convicted and Dou Ying was also executed for the crime.

古文：其後，田蚡病甚，号曰 诺诺 ，使人视之，见灌夫、窦婴惧坐其侧，蚡病不衰，遂至死。
现代文：事后，田蚡病得很厉害，喊叫 是是 ，派占鬼的人去看他，见灌夫、窦婴都坐在他的身旁，田蚡的病不见转轻，终于死了。
English: After the incident, Tian Yao was very ill. He shouted, "Yes, yes," and sent a ghost catcher to see him. He saw Guanfu and Dou Ying sit beside him. Tian Yao's illness did not get any better, and he finally died.

古文：曰：相杀不一人也，杀者後病，不见所杀，田蚡见所杀。
现代文：回答说：杀害别人的人不只是田蚡一个，后来杀人的人病了，并不见被他杀害的人来作祟，田蚡却见到他所杀的人来作祟。
English: He replied, "Tian Ye is not the only one who killed others. Later, when the murderer fell ill, he did not see the person he killed coming to harm him, but Tian Ye saw the person he killed coming to harm him.

古文：田蚡独然者，心负愤恨，病乱妄见也。
现代文：唯独田蚡如此，是由于他感到亏心而烦闷悔恨，病中神志昏乱，误认为看到了鬼。
English: However, only Tian Yao did so, because he felt a sense of loss and regret, and during his illness, he was confused and mistakenly thought he had seen a ghost.

古文：或时见他鬼，而占鬼之人，闻其往时与夫、婴争，欲见神审之名，见其狂 诺诺 ，则言夫、婴坐其侧矣。
现代文：或许是看到了其他的妖象，而占鬼之人了解他过去与灌夫、窦婴的仇恨，想显示一下自己占卜鬼神非常灵验的名声，看到田蚡狂叫 是是 ，就编造说灌夫、窦婴坐在他的身旁。
English: Perhaps he saw other monsters, and the fortune teller, knowing his past hatred of Ganfu and Douyou, wanted to show his reputation as a very effective diviner of ghosts and gods. When he saw Tianyao yelling yes, yes, he made up that Ganfu and Douyou were sitting next to him.

古文：淮阳都尉尹齐，为吏酷虐，及死，怨家欲烧其尸，亡去归葬。
现代文：淮阳郡都尉尹齐为吏残暴，到他死后，怨恨尹齐的人想烧他的尸体，尸体逃到埋葬他的地方。
English: Captain Yin Qi of Huaiyang County was a brutal official. After his death, people who resented Yin Qi wanted to burn his body, and the body fled to the place where he was buried.

古文：夫有知，故人且烧之也；神，故能亡去。
现代文：死人有知，所以知道别人将要烧他；死人有神灵，所以尸体能逃离。
English: The dead have knowledge, so they know that someone is going to burn them; the dead have gods, so the bodies can escape.

古文：曰：尹齐亡，神也，有所应。
现代文：回答说：尹齐的尸体能逃走，是死人有神灵，能够有所感应。
English: He replied, "Yin Qi's corpse can escape. Dead people have spirits and can feel things.

古文：秦时三山亡，周末九鼎沦，必以亡者为神，三山、九鼎有知也？
现代文：秦代时候有三座山不见了，周代末期九鼎沦亡了，一定会认为消失的东西有神灵，三山、九鼎也有知觉了。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, three mountains disappeared, and at the end of the Zhou Dynasty, Jiuding fell into ruin. People will certainly think that the disappeared things have gods, and that the three mountains and Jiuding are also conscious.

古文：或时吏知怨家之谋，窃举持亡，惧怨家怨己，云自去。
现代文：或许是尹齐的部吏知道冤家们的打算，便偷偷地运走了尹齐的尸体，又害怕这些人恨自己，就说尹齐的尸体是自己逃走的。
English: It may be that Yin Qi's officials knew the plans of the wrongdoers and secretly took away Yin Qi's body, and they were afraid that these people would hate themselves, so they said that Yin Qi's body had escaped on its own.

古文：凡人能亡，足能步行也。
现代文：凡是人能逃亡，脚就能行走。
English: If a man can run, he can walk.

古文：今死，血脉断绝，足不能复动，何用亡去？
现代文：人死了，血脉断绝，脚不能再动，靠什么逃走呢？
English: A man is dead, his blood is cut off, his feet can no longer move. How can he escape?

古文：吴烹伍子胥，汉菹彭越。
现代文：吴王烹煮伍子胥，汉朝把彭越剁成肉酱。
English: Wu Wang cooked wu zi wonton, and the Han Dynasty made Peng Yue wonton into meat sauce.

古文：烧、菹，一僇也；胥、越，一勇也。
现代文：烧和剁都是同样的杀法；伍子胥和彭越是同样的勇敢。
English: Yan and Zou are the same way of killing; Wu Zi Zou and Peng Yue are equally brave.

古文：子胥、彭越不能避烹亡菹，独谓尹齐能归葬，失实之言，不验之语也。
现代文：伍子胥和彭越不逃避烹煮和剁成肉酱的刑戮，唯独说尹齐的尸体能回到葬他的地方，不真实的谣言，是没有验证的说法。
English: Wu Zixuan and Peng Yue did not escape the torture of cooking and stewing into meat sauce, except that Yin Qi's body could return to the place where he was buried, an untrue rumor, there is no verification.

古文：亡新改葬元帝傅后，发其棺，取玉柙印玺，送定陶，以民礼葬之。
现代文：新朝改葬汉元帝傅后，打开她的棺材，取出玉柙印玺，送回定陶，用埋葬一般百姓的礼节埋葬她。
English: After the new dynasty changed the burial of Emperor Han Yuan, they opened her coffin, took out the jade seal, sent it back to Dingtao, and buried her with the burial etiquette of ordinary people.

古文：发棺时，臭憧於天，洛阳丞临棺，闻臭而死。
现代文：打开棺材时，臭气冲天，洛阳丞靠近棺材，闻了臭气就死了。
English: When the coffin was opened, the stench rose to the sky. Luo Yangzheng approached the coffin, smelled the stench and died.

古文：又改葬定陶共王丁後，火从藏中出，烧杀吏士数百人。
现代文：又改葬定陶共王丁后，烈火从墓穴中冲去，烧死吏士几百人。
English: After Ding Tao and Wang Ding were reburied, a fierce fire swept through the tomb, burning hundreds of officials to death.

古文：夫改葬礼卑，又损夺珍物，二恨怨，故为臭、出火，以中伤人。
现代文：改葬用卑下的礼节，又毁坏夺取珍贵之物，使傅后和丁后怨恨，所以放出臭气冲出烈火，用来伤害开棺的人。
English: Using despicable etiquette to change the funeral, and destroying and seizing precious things, they made Fu Hou and Ding Hou resentful, so they released stench to flush out the fire and use it to hurt the person who opened the coffin.

古文：曰：臭闻於天，多藏食物，腐朽猥发，人不能堪毒愤，而未为怪也。
现代文：回答说：臭气冲天，是因为棺材内外食物很多，腐烂后臭气猛烈发作的缘故，人不能忍受臭气而窒息，并不是怪事。
English: He replied, "The stench is so bad because there is a lot of food inside and outside the coffin. It is no wonder that people can't stand the stench and suffocate because of the strong smell after decay.

古文：火出於藏中者，怪也，非丁后之神也。
现代文：烈火出于墓穴中，虽然奇怪，但并不是丁后的精神所为。
English: Strange as it may seem, the flames coming out of the tomb were not caused by the spirit of Queen Ting.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：改葬之恨，孰与掘墓盗财物也？
现代文：改葬与掘墓盗窃财物相比，哪样更让人痛恨呢？
English: Compared to grave robbing, which is more detestable?

古文：岁凶之时，掘丘墓取衣物者以千万物数，死人有知，人夺其衣物，倮其尸骸，时不能禁，後亦不能报。
现代文：饥荒年头，挖掘丘墓盗取衣物的人以千万数，死人一定应当有所知觉，活人夺取他的衣物，裸露他的尸骨，当时既不能禁止，事后也不能报复。
English: During the years of famine, tens of millions of people dug up mounds and tombs to steal clothes. The dead must have been aware that the living were stealing their clothes and exposing their bones. It could not be prohibited at the time, nor could it be avenged afterwards.

古文：此尚微贱，未足以言。
现代文：这尚且是微贱人的事，不足以说明问题。
English: This is still a trivial matter and is not enough to explain the problem.

古文：秦始皇葬於骊山，二世末，天下盗贼掘其墓，不能出臭、为火，以杀一人。
现代文：秦始皇葬在骊山，秦二世末年，天下盗贼挖掘秦始皇的墓，墓中却不能放出臭气冲出烈火来杀死一个人。
English: Qin Shihuang was buried in Shaoshan. At the end of Qin II's reign, thieves dug up the tomb of Qin Shihuang, but they couldn't release the foul fumes from the tomb to kill a person.

古文：贵为天子不能为神，丁、傅妇人，安能为怪？
现代文：秦始皇贵为天子，不能变成神，丁后、傅后是妇人，怎么能作怪呢？
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang was the Son of Heaven and could not be turned into a god. Empress Ding and Empress Fu were women. How could they do such a thing?

古文：变神非一，发起殊处，见火闻臭，则谓丁、傅之神，误矣。
现代文：怪异现象的出现不只一个，又发生在不同的地方，见到烈火闻到臭气，就说是丁后、傅后的精神所为，这就错了。
English: The appearance of strange phenomena is not only one, but also occurs in different places. If you see a blazing fire and smell the stench, it is said that the spirit of Ding Hou and Fu Hou is responsible. This is wrong.

