古文：斛斯椿，字法寿，广牧富昌人也。
现代文：斛斯椿，字法寿，广牧富昌人。
English: 斯椿,字法寿,广牧富昌人.

古文：其先世为莫弗大人。
现代文：他的先祖为莫弗大人。
English: His ancestor was Lord Moff.

古文：父足，一名敦，明帝时为左牧令。
现代文：父亲斛斯足，又名斛斯敦，孝明帝时任左牧令。
English: His father, Shisoku, also known as Shishtun, was the left shepherd of Emperor Xiaoming at that time.

古文：时河西贼起，牧人不安，椿乃将家投尔硃荣。
现代文：当时，黄河以西盗贼猖獗，牧民受到骚扰，斛斯椿便携带全家投奔尔朱荣。
English: At that time, thieves were rampant west of the Yellow River, herdsmen were harassed, and Gong Sichen took his whole family to Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：征伐有功，稍迁中散大夫，署外兵事。
现代文：因作战有功，被任为中散大夫，任外兵事。
English: Due to his meritorious service in the war, he was appointed as a Zhongshan doctor, and served as a foreign military attaché.

古文：椿性佞巧，甚得荣心，军之密谋，颇亦关预。
现代文：他性情乖巧，很得尔朱荣的欢心，军中的机密，常参与商议。
English: He is good-natured, enjoys Zhu Rong's favor, keeps military secrets, and often participates in negotiations.

古文：庄帝初，改封阳曲县公，除荣大将军府司马。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，改封他为阳曲县公，任尔朱荣大将军府的司马。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was given the title of Yangqu County official and appointed as the Sima of the General Zhu Rong's General Office.

古文：后为东徐州刺史。
现代文：后来，任东徐州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of East Xuzhou.

古文：及荣死，椿甚忧惧。
现代文：尔朱荣被杀，斛斯椿颇为恐惧。
English: When Er Zhu Rong was killed, Zou Shizhong was quite scared.

古文：时梁以汝南王悦为魏主，资其士马，次于境上。
现代文：这时，南梁封汝南王元悦为魏王，支援给他军队马匹，驻扎在边境上。
English: At this time, Nan Liang appointed the Southern King Yuan Rong as the King of Wei, supported him with army horses, and stationed them on the border.

古文：椿遂弃州归悦。
现代文：斛斯椿便丢下东徐州，投奔元悦。
English: He left East Xuzhou and went to Yuan Yue.

古文：悦授尚书左仆射、司空公，封灵丘郡公，又为大行台前驱都督。
现代文：元悦授给他尚书左仆射、司空公，封为灵丘郡公，又封为大行台前驱都督。
English: Yuan Yue awarded him the titles of Shangshu Zuopuchai and Sikuo Gong, Lingqiu County Gong, and Dagongtai Zengrui Governor.

古文：会尔硃兆入洛，悦知不逮，南旋。椿复背悦归兆。
现代文：尔朱兆带兵进入洛阳，元悦知道目的无法实现，便南还入梁，斛斯椿又背叛元悦，归附尔朱兆。
English: Lzhu Zhao led the troops into Luoyang, and Yuan Yue knew that the goal could not be achieved, so he returned the south to Liang, and Jiesqin betrayed Yuan Yue and returned to Lzhu Zhao.

古文：以参立节闵谋，拜侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，封城阳郡公。
现代文：他因参与拥立节闵帝的谋划，被任命为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，封为城阳郡公。
English: Because of his participation in the plan to support the enthronement of Emperor Jie, he was appointed as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and was given the title of Jiaoyang County Grand Duke.

古文：寻加开府。
现代文：不久，加封为开府。
English: Soon, Kaifeng became the capital.

古文：时椿父足先在秀容，忽有传其死问，椿请减己阶以赠之。
现代文：这时，他的父亲斛斯足在秀容，忽然传来死讯，他便请求减去自己的官阶赠送给父亲。
English: At this time, his father, 斯足, was in his pomp, and when the news of his death suddenly came, he requested that his official rank be deducted and given to his father.

古文：寻知其父犹存，诏复官，仍除其父为车骑将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：不久，知道他的父亲还活着，朝廷又下诏恢复他原来的官职，仍任命他父亲为车骑将军、扬州刺史。
English: Soon, knowing that his father was still alive, the imperial court issued an edict to restore his original official position, and still appointed his father as the general of cavalry and cavalry, Yangzhou Jishi.

古文：椿以尔硃兆擅权，惧祸，乃与贺拔胜俱说世隆以正道。
现代文：他看到尔朱兆专权妄为，惧怕祸患的到来，便与贺拔胜一起劝说尔朱世隆实行正道。
English: He saw the arbitrary power of Er Shuzhao and feared the arrival of disaster. Together with He Baxian, he persuaded Er Shulong to take the right path.

古文：世隆不悦，欲害椿，赖尔硃天光救，得免。
现代文：世隆不高兴，想加害于他，幸赖尔朱天光拯救，才免于一死。
English: Shilong was not happy and wanted to harm him. Fortunately, Zhu Tianguang saved him from death.

古文：及世隆、度律与兆自相疑，椿与贺拔胜和之，兆执椿、胜还营。
现代文：尔朱世隆、尔朱度律与尔朱兆互相猜疑，他与贺拔胜去劝说调解，尔朱兆将他和贺拔胜扣押，带回大营。
English: Lzhu Shilong, Lzhu Duru and Lzhu Zhao were suspicious of each other. He and He Baxian went to persuade and mediate. Lzhu Zhao detained him and He Baxian and took them back to the camp.

古文：椿又陈以正理，兆谢而遣之。
现代文：他又向尔朱兆陈述正确的道理，尔朱兆很是感谢，将他们放回。
English: He also stated the correct reason to Lzhu Zhao, and Lzhu Zhao was very grateful and put them back.

古文：椿谓胜曰： 天下皆怨毒尔硃，吾等附之，亡无日矣，不如图之。 
现代文：他对贺拔胜说 ：天下人都怨恨尔朱氏，我们却依附他们，看来离死的日子不远了，不如反叛他们。 
English: He said to He Baxian: The whole world resents the Lzhu clan, but we cling to them. It seems that the day of death is not far away. It is better to rebel against them.

古文：胜曰： 天光与兆，各据一方，今俱禽为难。 
现代文：贺拔胜说： 尔朱天光与尔朱兆各据一方，现在要都擒获他们是很困难的。 
English: He Baxian said: Lzhu Tianguang and Lzhu Zhao each have their own side, and it is very difficult to capture them now.

古文：椿曰： 易致耳。 
现代文：他说： 很容易做到啊！ 
English: He said: "It's so easy to do!

古文：乃说世隆追天光等赴洛，讨齐神武。
现代文：他便劝说尔朱世隆追赶先期出发的尔朱天光等人，奔赴洛阳，去讨伐高欢。
English: He then persuaded Lzhu Shilong to catch up with Lzhu Tianguang and others who had set out earlier, and rushed to Luoyang to fight Gao Huan.

古文：及韩陵之败，椿谓都督贾显智等曰： 若不先执尔硃，我等死无类矣。 
现代文：韩陵之战失败后，他对都督贾显智说： 如果不先抓住尔朱氏，我们就死无葬身之地了。 
English: After the defeat in the Battle of Hanling, he said to Governor Jia Xianzhi: "If we don't catch the Lzhu clan first, we'll be dead and buried."

古文：遂与显智等夜于桑下盟约，倍道兼行。
现代文：他便与贾显智等人晚上在一棵桑树下订立盟约，倍道兼程，进兵洛阳。
English: He then made a pact with Jia Xianzhi and others under a mulberry tree in the evening, and marched into Luoyang.

古文：椿入北中城，收尔硃部曲，尽杀之。
现代文：他率兵进入北中城，先包围尔朱家的部曲家兵，将他们全部杀死。
English: He led his soldiers into Kitanakagusuku, and first surrounded the Buge soldiers of the Erju family, and killed them all.

古文：令弟元寿与张欢、长孙承业、显智等袭世隆、彦伯兄弟，并斩于阊阖门外。
现代文：又派他的弟弟斛斯元寿与张欢、长孙承业、贾显智等人率兵袭击尔朱世隆与尔朱彦伯兄弟二人，将他们在闾阖门外斩首。
English: He also sent his younger brother, Jies Yuan Shou, Zhang Huan, his eldest grandson, Chengye, Jia Xian Zhi, and others to attack the two brothers, Lzhu Shilong and Lzhu Yanbo, and beheaded them outside the city gate.

古文：椿入洛，县世隆兄弟首于其门树。
现代文：他进入洛阳，将世隆兄弟的首级悬挂在自己家门前的树上。
English: He entered Luoyang and hung the severed heads of the Shilong brothers on a tree in front of his house.

古文：椿父出见，谓曰： 汝与尔硃约为兄弟，今何忍县其头于家门？
现代文：他的父亲看见后，对他说： 你与尔朱氏结拜为兄弟，今天怎么忍心将他们的头颅悬挂在咱们家门前？
English: When his father saw him, he said to him, "You and Mr. Rzhu have always worshiped as brothers. How can you bear to hang their heads in front of our house today?"

古文：宁不愧负天地！ 
现代文：难道不愧对苍天厚土吗？ 
English: Does it really deserve to be called the richest country in the world?

古文：椿乃传世隆等首，并囚度律、天光，送于齐神武。
现代文：他便把世隆、彦伯等人的头颅，和抓获的尔朱度律、尔朱天光送给高欢。
English: He then sent the heads of Shilong, Yanbo and others, as well as the captured Lzhu Duru and Lzhu Tianguang to Gaohuan.

古文：及神武入洛，椿谓贺拔胜曰： 今天下事在吾与君，若不先制人，将为人所制。
现代文：高欢入据洛阳，斛斯椿又对贺拔胜说 ：现在天下的事由我和你来决定，如果不先发制人，恐怕会被别人所制。
English: According to Luoyang, Gao Huan-Yin and Gao Shizhong also said to He Baxeng: Now the world affairs are decided by me and you. If you don't preempt others, I'm afraid you will be preempted by others.

古文：高欢初至，图之不难。 
现代文：高欢初来乍到，要图谋他并不难。 
English: Gao Huan is a newcomer, it is not difficult to plot against him.

古文：胜曰： 彼有心于人，害之不详。
现代文：贺拔胜说 ：他有恩于天下人，加害他恐怕不好。
English: He Baxing said, "He is grateful to the people of the world, and I'm afraid it's not good to harm him."

古文：比数夜与欢同宿，具序往昔之怀，兼荷兄恩意甚多，何苦惮之！ 
现代文：过去好几个晚上我们与他住在一起，一起抒发以前交往的情谊，他蒙受您的好处甚多，为什么害怕他呢？ 
English: For the past several nights, we have been staying with him, sharing our previous friendship. He has benefited a lot from you. Why are you afraid of him?

古文：椿乃止。
现代文：斛斯椿才停止图谋高欢的打算。
English: It was only then that he stopped his plans for a high-spirited party.

古文：孝武帝立，拜椿侍中、仪同开府、城阳郡公。
现代文：孝武帝继位，命斛斯椿为侍中、仪同开府、城阳郡公。
English: Emperor Xiaowu succeeds to the throne, and orders Gong Shizhong to be an attendant, a member of the imperial court, and the governor of Chengyang County.

古文：父足亦加开府，子悦太中大夫，同日受拜。当时荣之。
现代文：他的父亲也被封为开府，儿子斛斯悦为太中大夫，父子三人同一天被朝廷封职，当时人们都很羡慕他们。
English: His father was also given the title of Kaifu, and his son, Gong Siyue, was given the title of Taichung Taifu. The three of them were appointed by the imperial court on the same day, and people were very envious of them at the time.

古文：椿自以数反，意常不安，遂密劝孝武帝置阁内都督部曲，又增武直人数百，直阁已下员别数百，皆选天下轻剽以充之。
现代文：斛斯椿认为自己几次反复，心里很不安稳，便暗中劝说孝武帝设置阁内都督部曲，再增加武将官职的人数。自直阁以下，设置武职数百名，都挑选天下轻捷勇悍的人充任。
English: Gao Shizhun thought that he had repeated himself several times and was very insecure in his heart, so he secretly persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to set up a cabinet governor department and then increase the number of military generals. From Zhiqiao and below, hundreds of military posts were set up, and all the light and brave people in the world were selected to fill the positions.

古文：又说帝数出游幸，号令部曲，别为行阵，椿自约勒指麾其间。
现代文：又劝说孝武帝多次出外巡游，指挥部曲，布列成阵，他负责指挥调动。
English: He also persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to go out on patrols many times. He was in charge of commanding and mobilizing the troops.

古文：从此以后，军谋朝政，一决于椿。
现代文：从此以后，军国大事，都由他来决定。
English: From then on, military affairs were decided by him.

古文：又劝帝徵兵，诡称南讨，将以伐齐神武。
现代文：他还劝说孝武帝征集士兵，声言讨伐南朝，实则准备袭击高欢。
English: He also persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to recruit soldiers, claiming to fight against the Southern Dynasty, but actually preparing to attack Gaohuan.

古文：帝从之。以椿为前驱大都督。
现代文：孝武帝也同意了，命斛斯椿为前驱大都督。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also agreed to this, and gave the order to Zhu Xiqin to become the forerunner of the great governor.

古文：椿因奏请率精骑二千，夜度河，掩其劳弊。帝始然之，黄门侍郎杨宽说帝曰： 高欢以臣伐君，何所不至？
现代文：他因此奏请率精锐骑兵二千人，乘夜渡过黄河进攻劳累疲惫的高欢的军队，孝武帝开始同意，黄门侍郎杨宽劝阻孝武帝说 ：高欢曾以臣子的身份讨伐国君，还有什么事干不出来？
English: He therefore requested 2,000 elite cavalry to cross the Yellow River at night to attack Gao Huan's tired and exhausted army. Emperor Xiaowu began to agree, and the Yellow Gate attendant Yang Guang dissuaded Emperor Xiaowu, saying: Gao Huan had fought against the sovereign as a vassal, what else could he not do?

古文：今假兵于人，恐生他变。
现代文：现在把军权交给别人，恐怕会发生意外变故。
English: If we hand over military power to someone else now, I'm afraid something will go wrong.

古文：今度河，万一有功，是灭一高欢，复生一高欢矣。 
现代文：今日渡过黄河万一能成功，只怕会灭掉一个高欢又生出一个高欢哪！ 
English: If I succeed in crossing the Yellow River today, I'm afraid I'll kill one high roller and give birth to another!

古文：帝遂敕椿停行。
现代文：孝武帝命斛斯椿停止出兵。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ordered Genghis Khan to stop sending troops.

古文：椿叹曰： 顷荧惑入南斗，今上信左右间构，不用吾计，岂天道乎！ 
现代文：斛斯椿叹息说 ：近日火星侵入南斗，现在皇上听信左右的挑拨，不按我的意见办，这难道是天意吗？ 
English: Gao Shizhu sighed and said, "Recently, Mars invaded Nandou, and now the emperor listens to the provocation of the left and right, and does not follow my opinion. Is this the will of heaven?

古文：帝勒兵河桥，命椿自洛而东，至武牢。
现代文：孝武帝将军队驻扎在河桥，命斛斯椿从洛阳向东，进至武牢关。
English: Emperor Xiaowu stationed his army in Heqiao, and ordered his troops to march eastward from Luoyang to Wuyongguan.

古文：帝以贾显智背叛，东师失律，将幸关中。乃遣使命椿因从入关。
现代文：孝武帝因贾显智反叛，东部的军队失利，想避入关中，便派人命斛斯椿一起入关。
English: Emperor Xiaowu, because of the rebellion of Jia Xianchi and the defeat of the eastern army, wanted to avoid entering the customs center, so he sent people to enter the customs center together with Jieszczyński.

古文：拜尚书令，侍中如故，封常山郡公。
现代文：封他为尚书令，侍中的职务不变，又加封为常山郡公。
English: He was given the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令), his position as an attendant remained unchanged, and he was also given the title of Changshan County official.

古文：历位司徒、太保，仍尚书令。
现代文：他历任司徒、太保，仍兼尚书令。
English: He successively served as a magistrate and a court official, and he still holds the title of Shurei.

古文：时寇难未息，内外戒严，唯椿得列威仪，鸣驺清路。
现代文：这时，四方盗寇不断，朝廷内外都戒备森严，惟有他能够摆列仪仗，有骑马的武士吆喝开道。
English: At this time, thieves and robbers from all sides were constantly on the move, and both inside and outside the imperial court were on high alert. Only he was able to stage a ceremonial battle, with knights on horseback shouting and leading the way.

古文：迁太傅，薨，年四十三。
现代文：迁任太傅，去世，终年四十三岁。
English: He was transferred to the position of taifu and died at the age of forty-three.

古文：帝亲临吊，百僚赴哭。
现代文：孝武帝亲自去祭吊，朝廷百官都去哭丧。
English: Emperor Xiaowu himself went to the hanging ceremony, and hundreds of officials from the imperial court went to mourn.

古文：诏赐东园秘器，遣尚书、梁郡王景略监护丧事。
现代文：朝廷又赐给他棺木，派尚书、梁郡王元景略负责办理丧事。
English: The imperial court also gave him a coffin and sent Shang Shu and Liang Gu Wang Yuanjing to be in charge of the funeral.

古文：赠大将军、录尚书、三十州诸军事、侍中、恆州刺史、常山郡王，谥曰文宣，祭以太牢。
现代文：追赠他为大将军、录尚书、三十州诸军事、侍中、恒州刺史、常山郡王，谥号为文宣，用太牢的大礼祭奠他的亡灵。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of "Grand General," "Record of Distinguished Service," "Military Commander of the Thirty Provinces," "Chamberlain," "Embroiderer of Hengzhou" and "King of Changshan County." His nickname was "Wen Xuan."

古文：又诏改大将军，赠大司马，给辒辌车。
现代文：又下诏改封为大将军，赠职为大司马，赠鍂车京车一辆。
English: He was also given the title of grand general, given the post of grand steward, and given a carriage from the capital.

古文：及葬，车驾临于渭阳，止绋恸哭。
现代文：埋葬时，孝武帝亲自到渭水以北，拉着捆绑棺木的绳子失声痛哭。
English: During the burial, Emperor Xiaowu personally went to the north of Surabaya to pull the rope tying the coffin and wept uncontrollably.

古文：有四子：悦、恢、徵、演。演为齐神武所杀，三子入关。徵字士亮，博涉群书，尤精三礼，兼解音律。
现代文：孝武帝曾赏给他几处店铺和三十头耕牛，他因国家的动乱还未平息，不应该与百姓们争利，便不要店铺，接受了耕牛，每天杀掉一头牛，以犒赏部下的将士。死的时候，家中没有多余的资产。斛斯征，字士亮，斛斯椿的第三子。他博览群书，尤精通于《三礼》，也通达音律。
English: Emperor Xiaowu once awarded him several shops and thirty farmed cattle. Due to the unrest in the country, he had not yet calmed down. He should not compete with the people for profits, so he did not want shops. He accepted farmed cattle and killed a cow every day to reward his subordinates. When he died, there were no extra assets in the family. He was the third son of Shizheng, Zhixiliang, and Shizhuan. He was well-read, especially proficient in the "Three Rites," and also fluent in music.

古文：有至性。居父丧，朝夕共一溢米。
现代文：有孝心，为父亲斛斯椿守丧，早晚只吃一镒米。
English: He was a filial son, and only ate a stalk of rice in the morning and evening to mourn his father's death.

古文：少以父勋赐爵城阳郡公。
现代文：小时因父亲建立的功勋，被朝廷赐爵为城阳郡公。
English: As a result of his father's achievements, he was given a knighthood by the imperial court and became the lord of Seongyang County.

古文：大统末，起家通直散骑常侍，稍迁兼太常少卿。
现代文：大统末年，离家做官，任通直散骑常侍，不久迁任太常少卿。
English: In the last years of the Great Reign, he left home to work as an official, and was appointed as a regular attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, and was soon transferred to the position of a regular junior secretary.

古文：自魏孝武迁西，雅乐废缺，徵博采遗逸，稽诸典故，创新改旧，方始备焉。
现代文：自从魏孝武帝西迁长安，皇家需要的各种音乐都因废弃而缺失。斛斯征收集散逸，翻阅各种典章册籍，改造旧乐，创立新章，雅乐才得以完备。
English: Since Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty moved west to Chang'an, all kinds of music needed by the royal family were lost due to abandonment. It was not until the Song Sect collected dissipated music, read through all kinds of regulations and books, reformed old music, and created new chapters that elegant music was completed.

古文：又乐有錞于者，近代绝此器，或有自蜀得之，皆莫之识。
现代文：另外，音乐中有钅享于这种乐器，近代已经失传。有人从蜀地得到它，都不认识。
English: In addition, there is a tradition in music of enjoying this musical instrument, which has been lost in modern times. Some people got it from Shoudi, but they do not know it.

古文：徵见之曰： 此錞于也。 
现代文：他看见后说： 这是钅享于呀。 
English: When he saw it, he said, "This is a crocodile.

古文：众弗信之，徵遂依干宝《周礼注》，以芒筒捋之。其声极清，众乃叹服。
现代文：众人不相信，他便依照干宝著的《〈周礼〉注》，用钅享于的配件芒筒捋拔，声音极其清脆，大家才叹服。
English: People didn't believe him, so he followed Gan Bao's "<Circle of the Week>Note" and used the accessories enjoyed by the cymbals to pluck the cymbals. The sound was extremely crisp, and everyone was impressed.

古文：徵仍取以合乐焉。
现代文：他便用它来伴奏乐曲。
English: He then used it to accompany the music.

古文：六官建，拜司乐下大夫，迁司乐中大夫，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转内史下大夫。
现代文：六宫建成，朝廷封他为司乐下大夫，又迁任司乐中大夫，晋官位为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，转任内史下大夫。
English: After the completion of the Sixth Palace, the imperial court appointed him as Sile Lower Doctor, and he was transferred to the position of Sile Middle Doctor, promoted to the rank of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and transferred to the position of Inner History Lower Doctor.

古文：天和三年，周武帝以徵经有师法，诏令授皇诸子。
现代文：天和三年，周武帝认为他的经书学有渊源，命他教授几位皇子。
English: In the 3rd year of Tianhe, Emperor Zhou Wudi thought that his study of the classics had a good source and ordered him to teach several princes.

古文：宣帝时为鲁公，与诸皇子等咸服青衿，行束脩之礼，受业于徵。
现代文：周宣帝宇文当时为鲁公，与其他皇子等都穿着读书人的衣服，向斛斯征行束大礼，请求学问。
English: At that time, Zhou Xuan Diyuwen was the ruler of Lu, and he and other princes wore the clothes of scholars and made a grand procession to Xi'an to solicit scholarship.

古文：仍并呼徵为夫子，儒者荣之。
现代文：皇子们都称他为夫子，儒生们都羡慕他。
English: Princes have called him their father, and Confucians have envied him.

古文：六年，除司宗中大夫，行内史，仍摄乐部。进封岐国公，寻转小宗伯。
现代文：天和六年，授他为司宗中大夫，任内史，仍掌管乐部，晋封为岐国公，不久转为小宗伯。
English: At the age of six, he was given the title of Shizong Zhongdafu (Junior Doctor of the Shizong) and promoted to Shizongbo (Minister of Internal Affairs) while he was still in charge of the ministry.

古文：除太子太傅，仍小宗伯。
现代文：宣帝即位，升任他为上大将军、大宗伯。
English: Emperor Xuan came to the throne, and he was promoted to the rank of senior general and grand patriarch.

古文：宣帝嗣位，迁上大将军、大宗伯。时武帝初崩，梓宫在殡，帝意欲速葬，令朝臣议之。徵与内史宇文孝伯等，固请依《礼》七月，帝竟不许。
现代文：这时，武帝刚去世，停柩待殡。宣帝想赶快埋葬，命朝臣们商议，斛斯征与内史宇文孝伯等人坚持请求按《礼经》的规定，停柩七个月，宣帝不同意。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu had just died and was awaiting burial. Emperor Xuan wanted to bury him as soon as possible, and the courtiers discussed the matter. Emperor Xuan did not agree to Emperor Xuan's insistence that Emperor Xuan and Inner Shi Uwen Xiao and others should wait for seven months in accordance with the provisions of the Book of Rites.

古文：帝之为太子也，宫尹郑译坐不能以正道调护，被谪除名。
现代文：宣帝当太子时，宫尹郑译因不能正确引导和教育太子，坐罪被免去官职。
English: When Emperor Xuan was crown prince, Gong Yin Zheng was removed from his official post for failing to properly guide and educate the crown prince.

古文：而帝雅亲爱译。
现代文：而宣帝却很喜欢和亲近郑译。
English: Emperor Xuan, however, was very fond of and close to Zheng.

古文：至是，拜译内史中大夫，甚委任之。
现代文：他即位后，便封郑译为内史中大夫，十分信任他。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he appointed Zheng Zang as the doctor of internal history, and he trusted him very much.

古文：译乃献新乐，十二月各一笙，每笙用十六管。
现代文：郑译便献上新谱写的音乐，十二月各用一件笙，每件笙用十六支簧管。
English: Zheng Yue then presented the newly composed music, using one gong each in December, with sixteen reeds for each gong.

古文：夫音乐之起，本于人心，天之应人，有如影响。
现代文：宣帝命郑译与斛斯征商讨新乐，斛斯征驳斥了郑译，陈奏说： 音乐的产生，发自人的内心。上天受人感应，正如回音和影子。
English: Emperor Xuan decreed that Zheng Rong and Mu Si should discuss the new music. Mu Si refuted Zheng Rong, and Chen Suo said: Music originates from the heart of man. Heaven is affected by man, just like echoes and shadows.

古文：为善者，天报之以福；为恶者，天谴之以殃。
现代文：做善事的，上天赐给他福气；干坏事的，上天降给他灾难。
English: If a man does good, God will bless him; if he does evil, God will curse him.

古文：故舜弹五弦之琴，歌《南风》之诗，而天下化。
现代文：所以，舜弹奏五弦琴，唱着《南风》这首诗，而天下向化。
English: Therefore, the dragonfly played the five-stringed fiddle and sang the poem "South Wind," and the world turned upside down.

古文：纣为朝歌、北里之音，而社稷灭。
现代文：纣王唱朝歌和北方的俚歌，国家破灭。
English: The king of the reeds sings the morning song and the reeds of the north, and the country is shattered.

古文：是知乐也者，和情性，移风俗，动天地，感鬼神，祸福所基，盛衰攸系，安可不慎哉！
现代文：由此可知音乐的作用，在于调和人的性情，改变风俗习惯，感动天地鬼神，是祸福的基础，盛衰的依赖，怎么能够不慎重呢？
English: From this, it can be seen that the role of music is to harmonize human temperament, change customs and habits, and move heaven and earth. It is the foundation of misfortune and fortune, and the dependence of rise and fall. How can we not be cautious?

古文：案译之所为，不师古始。
现代文：郑译谱写的新乐，不师法往古。
English: The new music composed by Zheng Yi is not the same as before.

古文：若以月奏一笙，则钟鼓诸色，各须一十有二。
现代文：如果每月用一种笙，那么钟鼓各种乐器，也都需要十二套。
English: If you use a gong once a month, then a gong and various musical instruments also require twelve sets.

古文：雅乐之备，已充庙廷，今若益之，于何陈列？
现代文：演奏雅乐的乐器已经摆满庙堂，现在如果再增加，陈列在哪里呢？
English: The instruments for playing court music have already been placed all over the temple. If they are added now, where will they be displayed?

古文：进退无据，窃谓不可。 
现代文：还需要再开辟台阶，增修廊宇，这不是非常紧急的事情，怎么可以去役使百姓呢？ 
English: We still need to open up more steps and add more corridors. This is not a very urgent matter. How can we serve the people?

古文：帝颇纳之，且令停译所献。
现代文：宣帝十分同意他的意见，命停止演奏郑译所献的新乐。
English: Emperor Xuan fully agreed with his opinion and ordered to stop playing the new music translated by Zheng.

古文：及武帝山陵回，帝欲作乐，复令议其可不。
现代文：周武帝安葬后，宣帝想创作音乐，又令朝臣们议论是否可以进行？
English: After the burial of Emperor Zhouwu, Emperor Xuan wanted to compose music, which made the courtiers discuss whether it could be done.

古文：徵曰： 《孝经》云 闻乐不乐。 
现代文：斛斯征说 ：《孝经》上说 ：父母丧，听到音乐也不高兴。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says, "Parents mourn, and they are not happy to hear music."

古文：闻尚不乐，其况作乎！ 
现代文：听到尚且不高兴，更何况创作新乐呢？ 
English: I'm not happy to hear it, let alone create new music.

古文：郑译曰： 既云闻乐，明即非无，止可不乐，何容不奏。 
现代文：郑译说 ：既然说是听到音乐而不高兴，明明是说不如没有音乐。只可以不娱乐，怎么能不奏乐？ 
English: Zheng said: Since it is said that it is not happy to hear music, it is clearly better to have no music. You can only not entertain, how can you not play music?

古文：帝遂依译议，译因此衔之。
现代文：宣帝同意郑译的意见，郑译因此恼恨斛斯征。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed with Zheng's opinion, which made Zheng angry.

古文：帝后肆行非度，昏虑日甚。
现代文：宣帝后来肆意妄为，没有节制。昏聩暴虐，日甚一日。
English: Later, Emperor Xuan behaved recklessly and without restraint. He was delirious and tyrannical day in and day out.

古文：徵以荷武帝重恩，尝备位师傅，乃上疏极谏，指陈帝失。不纳。
现代文：斛斯征因蒙受周武帝的厚恩，又曾经任过宣帝的师傅，便上疏极力劝谏，指出宣帝的过失，不被采纳。
English: Because he had been favored by Emperor Zhouwu and had once served as Emperor Xuan's teacher, he was strongly advised by Shang Zuo to point out Emperor Xuan's mistakes and was not accepted.

古文：译因谮之，遂下徵于狱。
现代文：郑译借机攻击他，宣帝便把他关进监狱。
English: Zheng took the opportunity to attack him, and Emperor Xuan put him in prison.

古文：徵惧不免，狱卒张元平哀之，乃以佩刀穿墙，送之出。
现代文：他害怕被处死，狱卒张元平同情他，用佩刀挖开墙壁，送他出去。
English: He was afraid of being put to death. The jailer Zhang Yuanping took pity on him, dug out the wall with a saber, and sent him out.

古文：元平被捶拷百数，而无所言。
现代文：张元平被拷打一百多下，没有说一句话。
English: Zhang Yuanping was beaten more than a hundred times without saying a word.

古文：徵既出，匿于人家，后遇赦得免，然犹坐除名。
现代文：斛斯征逃出后，藏匿在别人家里，后来遇到大赦，得以免除处罚，但仍然被削去官职。
English: After escaping conscription, he hid in someone else's home. Later, he encountered an amnesty and was able to be exempted from punishment, but he was still stripped of his official position.

古文：隋文帝践极，例复官爵，除太子太傅，仍诏徵修撰乐书。
现代文：隋文帝登基，照例恢复他的官爵，授予他太子太傅，仍命他修撰乐书。
English: Sui Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, as usual, restored his official title, awarded him the title of crown prince, and still ordered him to write a music book.

古文：开皇四年薨，年五十六。
现代文：开皇四年去世，享年五十六岁。
English: The emperor died four years later, at the age of fifty-six.

古文：初，隋文帝为大司马，有外姻丧，徵就第吊之。
现代文：早先，隋文帝任北周的大司马，有一个外戚办丧事，斛斯征准备与他一起到外戚家吊唁。
English: Earlier, when Emperor Sui Wen was the grand steward of Northern Zhou, he had a maternal relative to handle the funeral, and Xie Shizheng prepared to go with him to the maternal relative's home to offer condolences.

古文：于长寿津为相州刺史窦泰所破。
现代文：斛斯征等他很久，他也不出来。斛斯征很恼火，便不再等待。
English: He waited for him for a long time, but he did not come out. He was very angry and did not wait any longer.

古文：天平初，赴晋阳。
现代文：隋文帝出来等候时，斛斯征已经离去。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen came out to wait, He Shixian had already left.

古文：智去就多端，后坐事死。樊子鹄，代郡平城人也。
现代文：隋文帝因此对他很不满意，这时，隋文帝下诏命有司给他谥号为暗。樊子鹄，代郡平城人。
English: Therefore, Emperor Sui Wen was very dissatisfied with him. At this time, Emperor Sui Wen issued an edict to have a secretary to give him a nickname. Zang Zi Zang, a representative of Pingcheng.

古文：其先荆州蛮酋，徙代。
现代文：他的祖先是荆州蛮族的首领，迁徙到代地。
English: His ancestor was the leader of the Jingzhou barbarians, who migrated to Dengdian.

古文：父兴，平城镇长史、归义侯。
现代文：父亲樊兴，任平城镇长史、归义侯。
English: His father, Hao Xing, was appointed to the post of Changshi of Pingcheng Town and returned to Yiwu.

古文：普泰中，子鹄贵，乃赠荆州刺史。
现代文：普泰年间，子鹄获得很高的官位，樊兴被赠封为荆州刺史。
English: During the Putai era, Zi Yao received a high official rank, and Xing Xing was awarded the title of Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：子鹄逢北镇扰乱，南至并州，尔硃荣引为都督府仓曹参军。
现代文：子鹄遭遇北镇的动乱，向南避至并州，尔朱荣任他为都督府仓曹参军。
English: Zixuan encountered the turmoil in Beizhen and fled south to annex the state. Er Zhu Rong appointed him as the governor of Cangcao to join the army.

古文：使诣京师，灵太后问荣兵势，子鹄应对称旨。
现代文：尔朱荣派他到京城，灵太后询问尔朱荣军队的情形，他的回答很让灵太后满意。
English: Lv Zhurong sent him to Beijing, and the Empress Dowager inquired about the situation of Lv Zhurong's army. His answer was very satisfactory to the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后嘉之，除直齐，封南和县子，令还赴荣。
现代文：太后奖励他，命他为直斋，封为南和县子，让他回到尔朱荣那里。
English: The empress dowager rewarded him by appointing him as Naisai (直斋) and Nanko (南和) and let him go back to Lezhurong.

古文：建义初，拜晋州刺史，封永安县伯。
现代文：建义初年，朝廷命他为晋州刺史。封爵为永安县伯。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the imperial court appointed him as the prefect of Jinzhou. He was knighted as the Yong'an County magistrate.

古文：永安二年，以招纳叛蜀，进封中都县公，又兼尚书行台，政有威信。
现代文：永安二年，因招降叛乱的蜀人有功，被晋封为中都县公。又兼任尚书行台，为政颇有威信。
English: In the second year of Yong'an, he was promoted to the position of Zhongdu County magistrate due to his success in recruiting and subduing the rebellious people of Shu. He also served as Shang Shujangdai, which was quite a prestigious position in politics.

古文：时尔硃荣在晋阳，京师之事，子鹄颇预委寄，故在台阁，征官不解。
现代文：不久，朝廷又授予他督官尚书、西荆州大中正。后来，兼任右仆射，任行台。当时，尔朱荣在晋阳，京城的事都委托子鹄办理。所以他在台阁，连续升迁并受到重用。
English: Soon, the imperial court also awarded him the inspector Shangshu and Xi Jingzhou Da Zhongzheng. Later, he also served as the right-hand man of Sha and was appointed to Gaotai. At that time, Er Zhu Rong was in Jinyang, and the affairs of the capital were entrusted to Zibo. Therefore, he was in Taigak, continuously promoted and received heavy use.

古文：后出为殷州刺史。
现代文：后来，出任为殷州刺史。
English: Later, he served as the chief historian of Yinzhou.

古文：属岁旱俭，子鹄恐人流亡，乃勒有粟家分济贫者，并遣人牛易力，多种二麦，州内以此获安。
现代文：这年荒旱歉收，子鹄怕人流亡到别处，便命殷实之家将贮藏的粮食分别接济贫穷之家。并派耕牛代替人力，多种植大麦和小麦，州内因此十分安定。
English: This year, the harvest was poor due to the drought, and the Empress Dowager was afraid that people would emigrate to other places, so she ordered the wealthy families to give the stored grain to the poor families separately. She also sent oxen to replace the manpower, and planted a variety of barley and wheat, so the state was very stable.

古文：尔硃荣死，世隆等遣书招子鹄，子鹄不从。
现代文：尔朱荣被朝廷处死，尔朱世隆写信召请子鹄，他没有服从。
English: Er Zhu Rong was put to death by the imperial court. Er Zhu Shilong wrote a letter to call for a son-in-law, but he did not obey.

古文：以母在晋阳，启求移镇河南。庄帝嘉之，除都督、豫州刺史。
现代文：因母亲住在晋阳，他请求朝廷让他移镇黄河以北，孝庄帝很赞赏他，任他为都督、豫州刺史。
English: Because his mother lived in Jinyang, he asked the imperial court to let him move the town north of the Yellow River. Emperor Xiaozhuang appreciated him very much and appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：行达汲郡，闻尔硃兆入洛，乃度河见仲远。仲远遣镇汲郡。
现代文：他行至汲郡，听说尔朱兆领兵进入洛阳，便渡过黄河拜见尔朱仲远，仲远派他镇守汲郡。
English: He went to Kyu County, and when he heard that Er Zhu Zhao led the troops into Luoyang, he crossed the Yellow River to meet Er Zhu Zhongyuan, who sent him to guard Kyu County.

古文：兆徵子鹄赴洛，既见，责以乖异之意，夺其部众，将还晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆命他到洛阳，责备他对尔朱氏存有二心，夺去他率领的军队，让他回晋阳。
English: Lzhu Zhao ordered him to go to Luoyang, accused him of having a double-hearted attitude toward the Lzhu clan, took away the army he led, and sent him back to Jinyang.

古文：元晔以为侍中、御史中尉、中军大都督。
现代文：东海王元晔命他为侍中、御史中尉、中军大都督。
English: Wang Yuan of the East Sea ordered him to be a chamberlain, a lieutenant of the imperial history, and a grand governor of the Chinese army.

古文：太昌初，兼尚书左仆射、东南道大行台，总大都督杜德等追讨尔硃仲远。仲远奔梁，收其兵马。
现代文：太昌初年，他兼任尚书左仆射、东南道大行台。总大都督杜德等追讨尔朱仲远，仲远逃向梁，杜德收编了仲远的兵马。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he concurrently served as Shangshu Zuopuzha, and Daigongdae of Southeast Province. The supreme governor Dude and others pursued Zhu Zhongyuan, Zhongyuan fled to Liang, and Dude collected Zhongyuan's soldiers.

古文：时梁遣元树入寇，陷据谯城，诏子鹄与德讨之。
现代文：这时，南梁派元树入犯北魏，占据谯城，朝廷命子鹄与杜德一起讨伐梁军。
English: At this time, Nan Liang sent Yuan Shu to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty and occupy Shicheng, and the imperial court ordered Shih Tzu and Du De to fight Liang's army together.

古文：树大败，奔入城门，遂围之。
现代文：元树大败，逃进城去，魏军包围了谯城。
English: Yuan Shu was defeated and fled into the city. The Wei army encircled the city.

古文：树请归南，以地还魏，许之。
现代文：元树请求撤兵南归，把占领的土地归还给北魏，子鹄允许了。
English: Yuan Shu requested the withdrawal of troops to the south and the return of the occupied land to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Zi Gan allowed it.

古文：及树众半出，子鹄击破之，禽树及梁谯州刺史硃文开。
现代文：等到元树的军队有一半出城，他又领兵进击，把南梁军队打败，抓获元树和梁委任的谯州刺史朱文开。
English: When half of Yuanshu's army was out of the city, he led his troops to attack, defeated Nanliang's army, and captured Zhu Wenkai, the governor of Zhangzhou who was appointed by Yuanshu and Liang.

古文：班师，迁吏部尚书，转尚书右仆射。
现代文：班师回来，他升任为吏部尚书，转任尚书右仆射。
English: When his class teacher came back, he was promoted to Shang Shu of the Cadre Department, and then transferred to Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：寻加骠骑大将军、开府，典选。
现代文：不久，加封为骠骑大将军、开府，负责选拔官吏。
English: Soon after, Jafeng became the commander-in-chief and the head of the government, responsible for the selection of officials.

古文：后除兗州刺史。
现代文：后来，任兖州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：子鹄先遣腹心，缘历人间，采察得失。
现代文：他先派心腹到百姓中查访，询问那里为政的得失。
English: He first sent his henchmen to visit the people and inquire about the gains and losses of politics there.

古文：及至境，太山太守彭穆参候失仪，子鹄责让穆，并数其罪状，穆皆引伏，于是州内震悚。
现代文：刚上任到达兖州境内，太山太守彭穆参拜长官失去礼仪，子鹄责备彭穆，并历数他过去的罪状，彭穆都一一承认，于是州内官员大为震骇。
English: When he arrived in Zhangzhou after taking office, Taishan Taishu Pengmu lost his etiquette, Zixu scolded Pengmu, and recounted his past crimes, Pengmu confessed one by one, so the officials in the state were greatly shocked.

古文：及孝武帝入关，子鹄据城为应，南青州刺史大野拔率众就子鹄。
现代文：孝武帝西奔长安，子鹄据守城池作为接应，南青州刺史大野拔率部属前来投奔子鹄。
English: Emperor Xiaowu fled west to Chang'an, and Zi Xi took over the defense of Chengchi as a response, while Nan Qingzhou's Zhishi Ohno led his subordinates to flee to Zi Xi.

古文：天平初，齐神武遣仪同三司娄昭等讨之。城久不拔，昭以水灌城。
现代文：天平初年，高欢派仪同三司娄昭等率兵进攻子鹄驻守的城池，很久不能攻下，娄昭用水灌城。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Gao Huanpai and his three subordinates, including Zi Zhao, led an army to attack the castle of Zi Zi, which could not be captured for a long time. Zi Zhao flooded the castle with water.

古文：而大野拔因与相见，令左右斩子鹄以降。
现代文：大野拔借故求见子鹄，命左右随从将子鹄杀死，向敌兵投降。
English: Ohno Haku asked to see his son-in-law under false pretenses. He ordered his followers to kill his son-in-law and surrender to the enemy soldiers.

古文：侯深，神武尖山人也。
现代文：侯深，神武尖山人。
English: Hou Shen, Jinwu Jianshan people.

古文：机警有胆略。
现代文：为人机警，颇有胆略。
English: He is alert and daring.

古文：孝明末年，六镇饥乱，深随杜洛周南寇。
现代文：孝明帝末年，六镇因饥饿发生变乱，他跟随杜洛周向南进犯。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaoming, six towns were in turmoil due to hunger, and he followed Du Luo Zhou to attack the south.

古文：后与妻兄念贤，背洛周归尔硃荣。
现代文：后来与妻兄念贤一起背叛杜洛周，归顺尔朱荣。
English: Later, together with his brother-in-law, Nian Xian, he betrayed Du Luo Zhou and returned to Shun'er Zhu Rong.

古文：路中遇寇，身披苫褐。
现代文：他们在途中遇到强盗抢劫，只披了块褐色的布遮挡身子。
English: They encountered bandits and robbers on the way, and only wore a brown cloth to cover their bodies.

古文：荣赐其衣帽，厚待之，以为中军副都督。
现代文：尔朱荣送给他衣服帽子，很优厚地对待他，任命他为中军副都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong gave him clothes and a hat, treated him very generously, and appointed him vice-governor of the Chinese army.

古文：庄帝即位，封厌次县子。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，封他为厌次县子。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of the most hated son of the county.

古文：从荣讨葛荣于滏口，战功尤多。除燕州刺史。
现代文：他跟随尔朱荣讨伐葛荣，在滏口大战，立功最多，被朝廷命为燕州刺史。
English: He followed Er Zhu Rong to fight against Ge Rong, and made the most contributions in the Battle of Hekou. He was appointed by the imperial court to write the history of Yanzhou.

古文：时葛荣别帅韩楼、郝长等屯据蓟城，荣令深讨楼，配众甚少。
现代文：这时，葛荣的别帅韩楼、郝长等人率兵屯据在蓟城，尔朱荣命他进攻韩楼，给他的人马却很少。
English: At this time, Ge Rong's second-in-command, Han Lou, Zou Chang and others were entrenched in Zoucheng with their troops. Er Zhu Rong ordered him to attack Han Lou, but he had very few men.

古文：或以为言，荣曰： 深临机设变，是其所长，若总大众，未必能用。 
现代文：有人替他说话，嫌人马太少，尔朱荣却说： 随机应变，是侯深的特长。如果让他带很多人去，未必能用得上。 
English: There were too few people to speak for him, but Le Zhu Rong said: "Hou Shen's specialty is to make random adjustments. If he were allowed to take a lot of people with him, he might not be able to use them."

古文：止给骑七百。
现代文：所以，只给他七百兵马。
English: Therefore, he was only given seven hundred soldiers.

古文：深遂广张军声，率数百骑深入楼境。去蓟百余里，遇贼帅陈周马步万余，大破之，虏其卒五千余人。
现代文：侯深故意虚张声势，率领数百骑兵深入韩楼占领的区域，离蓟城百多里，遇上贼帅陈周率马步两军一万多人，侯深把敌人打得大败，俘虏敌兵五千多人。
English: Hou Sheng deliberately bluffed and led hundreds of cavalrymen deep into the area occupied by Han Lou, more than a hundred miles away from Handan City. He encountered more than ten thousand people from the two armies led by the thief Chen Zhou. Hou Sheng defeated the enemy and captured more than five thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：寻还其马仗，纵令入城。左右谏，深曰： 我兵少，不可力战，事须为计以离隙之。 
现代文：然后将缴获的马匹武器又归还给他们，放他们回蓟城，左右的人都劝阻他，他说 ：我们的人数少，不可以以力相拼，事情需要设法离间敌人。 
English: Then he returned the captured horse weapons to them and let them go back to Handan. People on both sides tried to dissuade him, saying, "Our number is small, we can't fight with force, we need to find a way to separate the enemy."

古文：深度其已至，遂率骑夜进，昧旦叩其城门。
现代文：他估计放回的敌兵已回到蓟城，便率领骑兵连夜进发，早晨叩打城门。
English: He estimated that the enemy soldiers who had been released had returned to Lucheng, so he led the cavalry to advance overnight and beat the city gate in the morning.

古文：韩楼果疑降卒为内应，遂遁走。追禽之。
现代文：韩楼果然怀疑降卒要作内应，便弃城逃走，侯深纵兵追赶，将他擒拿。
English: Han Lou really suspected that the surrendering soldiers wanted to make a secret agreement, so he abandoned the city and fled. Hou Sheng's soldiers chased him and captured him.

古文：以功赐爵为侯，寻为平州刺史，仍镇范阳。
现代文：因立功被赐爵为侯，不久被任命为平州刺史，镇守范阳。
English: For his meritorious service, he was given the title of marquess, and was soon appointed as the governor of Pingzhou and the town guard of Fanyang.

古文：及尔硃荣死，太守卢文伟诱深出猎，闭门拒之。
现代文：尔朱荣被杀，太守卢文伟引诱侯深出外打猎，然后关闭城门，不让他进城。
English: When Er Zhu Rong was killed, the grand marshal Lu Wenwei lured Hou Sheng out to hunt, and then closed the city gate to prevent him from entering the city.

古文：深率部曲屯于郡南，为荣举哀，勒兵南向。
现代文：他率领部曲家丁驻扎在南郊，为尔朱荣举丧致哀，然后率兵向南进发。
English: He led the Qu Jia Ding detachment stationed in the southern suburbs to mourn the death of Er Zhu Rong, and then led the troops southward.

古文：庄帝使东莱王贵平为大使，慰劳燕、蓟。
现代文：孝庄帝派东莱王元贵平为大使，慰劳燕、蓟一带的军队。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang sent Donglai King Yuan Guiping as an ambassador to comfort the troops in and around Luoyang and Handan.

古文：乃诈降，贵平信之，遂执贵平自随。
现代文：侯深诈降，元贵平相信了他。他便将贵平抓获。
English: Hou Sheng committed treason, and Yuan Guiping believed him. He then captured Guiping.

古文：进至中山，行台仆射魏兰根邀击之，为深所败。
现代文：军队进至中山，行台仆射魏兰根向他进攻，被他打败。
English: The army advanced to Zhongshan, and Wei Langen, a foot soldier, attacked him and was defeated by him.

古文：元晔立，授深仪同三司、定州刺史、左军大都督、渔阳郡公。
现代文：东海王元晔即位，授予侯深仪同三司、定州刺史、左军大都督、渔阳郡公。
English: Donghai King Yuancheng ascended to the throne, and conferred the titles of Hou Shanyi Tong San Shi, Dingzhou Shishi, Zuo Jun Daduo, and Yuyang County Gong.

古文：节闵帝立，仍加开府。
现代文：节闵帝即位，又加封他为开府。
English: Emperor Jiechi ascended to the throne, and he was also given the title of Kaifu.

古文：后随尔硃兆拒齐神武于广阿，兆败走。
现代文：后来，他随尔朱兆在广阿与高欢对垒，尔朱兆败走。
English: Later, he followed Er Zhu Zhao to fight against Gao Huan in Guang'a, and Er Zhu Zhao was defeated.

古文：深后从神武破尔硃氏于韩陵。
现代文：侯深投降高欢，后来与高欢一起在韩陵打败尔朱氏。
English: Hou Sheng surrendered to Gao Huan, and later, together with Gao Huan, defeated the Er Zhu clan in Hanling.

古文：永熙初，除齐州刺史。
现代文：永熙初年，他被任命为齐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, he was appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：孝武帝末，深与衮州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史东莱王贵平使信往来，以相连结。
现代文：孝武帝末年，他与兖州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史、东莱王元贵平之间，书信和使者不断往来，互相联络。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, letters and emissaries were constantly exchanged between him, Zhang Zixu, Zhang Shi of Zhangzhou, Zhang Shi of Qingzhou and Wang Yuan Guiping of Donglai, and they kept in touch with each other.

古文：又遣使通诚于神武。
现代文：他又派人向高欢表示忠诚。
English: He also sent someone to express his loyalty to Gaohuan.

古文：及孝武入关，复怀顾望。
现代文：孝武帝西入长安，他对魏室仍存希望。
English: As Emperor Xiaowu enters Chang'an from the west, he still has hope for the Wei dynasty.

古文：汝阳五暹既除齐州刺史，深不时迎纳。城人刘桃符等潜引暹入，据西城。
现代文：汝阳王元暹任齐州刺史，侯深不按时迎纳他进城内，城里的人刘桃符等偷偷将元暹领进城，占据了城的西部。
English: Ruyang King Yuan Siam was appointed as the governor of Qizhou, and Hou Sheng Lu did not welcome him into the city on time. The people in the city, such as Liu Taofu, secretly led Yuan Siam into the city and occupied the western part of the city.

古文：深争门不克，率骑出奔，妻兒部曲，为暹所虏。
现代文：侯深争夺，不能获胜，率领骑兵出逃。他的妻子儿女和家丁都被元暹俘获。
English: Unable to win the battle, Hou led his cavalry to flee. His wife, children, and household were all captured by Yuan Siem.

古文：行达广里，会承制以深行青州事，齐神武又遗书深曰： 卿勿以部曲轻少，难于东迈。
现代文：行至广里，适逢接到皇帝的圣旨，命侯深管理青州政务。高欢也给他送来书信，说： 你不要认为自己军队的数量少，难于向东前进。
English: Gao Huan also sent him a letter, saying: Don't think that the number of your army is small and it is difficult to advance eastward.

古文：齐人浇薄，齐州人尚能迎汝阳王，青州人岂不能开门待卿也？ 
现代文：齐人人情淡薄，齐州人还能迎接汝阳王元暹，青州人难道不能打开城门等待你吗？ 
English: Qizhou people can still welcome Ruyang Wangyuan Siem, can't Qingzhou people open the city gate and wait for you?

古文：深乃复还，暹始归其部曲。
现代文：侯深又回来，元暹才归还他的家丁。
English: Hou Sheng came back again, and Yuan Sie only returned his son.

古文：而贵平自以斛斯椿党，亦不受代。
现代文：而元贵平认为自己是斛斯椿一党，也不让他代替。
English: However, Yuan Guiping considered himself to be a member of the Jinshchun Party and did not allow him to take his place.

古文：深袭高阳郡，克之，置部曲家累于城中，亲率轻骑，夜趣青州，城人执贵平出降。
现代文：侯深袭击高阳郡，克复了城池，把家属和家丁都安置在城中，亲自率领精锐骑兵，夜晚驰向青州，城内的人抓住元贵平开城投降。
English: Hou Sheng attacked Gaoyang County, recaptured the city, placed his family members and children in the city, personally led the elite cavalry, and drove to Qingzhou at night. People in the city captured Yuan Gui Ping Kaicheng and surrendered.

古文：深自惟反覆，虑不获安，遂斩贵平，传首于鄴，明不同于斛斯椿。
现代文：侯深思虑自己多次反复，怕不能得到平安，便杀了元贵平，将他的头颅传示邺地，标明自己不是斛斯椿一党。
English: Hou thoughtfully repeated himself many times, fearing that he could not get peace, he killed Yuan Guiping, and showed his head to the public, indicating that he was not a member of the Jinshchun Party.

古文：及子鹄平，诏以封延之为青州刺史。
现代文：樊子鹄被平定后，朝廷下诏命封延之为青州刺史。
English: After the subjugation of Shanzi County, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to extend the title to Qingzhou.

古文：深既不获州任，情又恐惧。行达广川，遂劫光州库军反。
现代文：侯深没有得到州牧的任职，心里恐慌害怕，行至广川，便抢劫光州的仓库造反。
English: Hou Sheng did not get the post of the state herdsman, panicked and feared in his heart, went to Guangchuan, then robbed the warehouse in Gwangju and rebelled.

古文：遣骑诣平原，执前胶州刺史贾璐，夜袭青州南郭，劫前廷尉卿崔光韶以惑人情，攻掠郡县。
现代文：他派骑兵到平原，抓住前胶州刺史贾璐，夜晚袭击青州南面的外部，劫去前任廷尉卿崔光韶以迷惑人心，又攻掠其他州县。
English: He sent cavalry to the plains, seized the former Jiaozhou chief Jia Jia, attacked the south of Qingzhou at night, kidnapped the former imperial lieutenant Cui Guangya to confuse the people, and attacked and plundered other states and counties.

古文：允弟胜。胜字破胡，少有志操，善左右驰射，北边莫不推其胆略。
现代文：他的部将纷纷背叛了他，他便投奔南梁。行至南青州境内，被卖饭的人杀死，首级传示邺城，家里的其他人都被流放。贺拔胜，字破胡，从小就有志气节操，会骑在马上向左右两旁射箭，北人无不称赞他的胆略。
English: His subordinates betrayed him one after another, and he fled to Nanliang. He went to the territory of South Qingzhou, was killed by a rice seller, the head of the family was sent to Shicheng, and the rest of the family was exiled. He Baxing, who was nicknamed Hu, had the spirit of self-restraint since childhood, and would ride a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right. The northerners all praised his boldness.

古文：卫可瑰之围怀朔，胜时亦为军主，从父度拔镇守。
现代文：卫可环围困怀朔，他当时也为军主，和父亲度拔一起镇守怀朔。
English: Wei Kehuan besieged Wai Shuo. He was also the commander of the army at that time, and together with his father Dubao guarded Wai Shuo.

古文：既被围，经年而外援不至，胜乃慷慨白镇将杨钧，请告急于大军。
现代文：他们已经被围一年，而外援却迟迟不来。贺拔胜便激昂慷慨地告诉镇将杨钧，他愿出城向大军告急。
English: They had been besieged for a year, but foreign aid had been slow to arrive. He Baxian then impetuously and generously told the town's commander, Yang Xuan, that he was willing to leave the town to appeal to the large army.

古文：钧许之，乃募勇敢少年，得十余骑，夜溃围出。
现代文：杨钧同意，便招募勇敢的少年，共十多个骑兵，乘夜突围出城。
English: Yang Xuan agreed, so he recruited brave boys, a total of more than ten cavalrymen, to break out of the city at night.

古文：贼追及之，胜曰： 我贺拔破胡也。 
现代文：敌兵追来，他大喊道： 我是贺拔破胡！ 
English: Pursued by the enemy soldiers, he shouted, "I am He Bapu Hu!

古文：贼不敢逼。
现代文：敌人不敢逼进。
English: The enemy did not dare to advance.

古文：至朔州，白临淮王彧以怀朔被围之急。
现代文：到了朔州，他向临淮王元报告了怀朔被包围的紧急情况。
English: When he arrived in Shuozhou, he reported to Lin Huai Wangyuan about the emergency situation in which Huai Shuo was surrounded.

古文：彧以胜辞义恳至，许以出师，还令报命。
现代文：元看他话语恳切，答应出兵救援。命他回怀朔报告。
English: Yuan saw his words as sincere and promised to send troops to rescue him. He ordered him to report back to Huai Shuo.

古文：乃复攻围而入，贼追之，射杀数人。
现代文：他又突破敌人的防线，敌兵追赶，他射杀了好几个人。
English: He broke through the enemy lines again, the enemy soldiers chased him, and he shot several people.

古文：至城下，大呼曰： 贺拔破胡与官军至矣！ 
现代文：来到城下，他大声喊道： 贺拔破胡与官军一起来了。 
English: When he came to the outskirts of the city, he shouted loudly: He Ba Hu and the government army have come together.

古文：城中纳之。
现代文：城里的人开门放他进来。
English: The townspeople opened their doors and let him in.

古文：钧复遣胜出觇武川。武川已陷。胜乃驰还报怀朔。怀朔亦溃，胜父子遂为贼所虏。
现代文：杨钧又派他出城去偷偷察看武川的情况，武川已被敌人占领，他便赶快回怀朔报告，怀朔也被攻陷，他们父子都被敌兵俘虏。
English: Yang Hui also sent him out of the city to secretly inspect the situation in Wuchuan. Wuchuan had been occupied by the enemy, and he quickly returned to Wai Shuo to report. Wai Shuo was also captured, and both father and son were captured by enemy soldiers.

古文：寻而袭杀可瑰，众令胜驰告朔州，未反而度拔已卒。
现代文：不久，人们偷袭杀死了卫可环，将士们让贺拔胜骑马去朔州报告，没有回来，他的父亲已经去世。
English: Soon after, Wei Kehuan was killed in a sneak attack. The generals ordered He Baxeng to ride to Shuozhou to report, but he did not return. His father had died.

古文：刺史费穆奇胜才略，厚礼留之，委以兵事。
现代文：刺史费穆很欣赏他的才能武略，重重地奖赏他，并挽留他，委任他统率军队。
English: The Earl of Stafford, appreciating his skill, rewarded him handsomely and retained him, appointing him to command the army.

古文：时广阳王深在五原，为破六韩贼所围，召胜为军主。
现代文：这时，广阳王元深在五原被破六韩的军队包围，邀请他去任军主。
English: At this time, Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng was surrounded by the troops of the defeated six Koreas in Wuhan and invited him to serve as commander.

古文：以功拜统军。
现代文：他因立有军功被任为统军。
English: He was appointed as the leader of the unified army for his distinguished military service.

古文：又隶仆射元纂镇恆州。
现代文：他又隶属于仆射元纂，镇守恒州。
English: He was also subordinate to Genzo Pusha, the town guard of Hengzhou.

古文：时有鲜于河胡拥朔州流人南下为寇，恆州城人应之。
现代文：这时，有个叫鲜于阿胡的聚集朔州流亡的百姓南下，成为盗寇，恒州的人也响应他们。
English: At this time, there was a gathering of Shuozhou exiled people called "Fresh in Ahu" who went south and became robbers, and the people of Hengzhou also responded to them.

古文：胜与兄允弟岳相失，胜南投肆州，允、岳投尔硃荣。
现代文：贺拔胜与哥哥贺拔允、弟弟贺拔岳走失。贺拔胜南投肆州，贺拔允、贺拔岳投奔尔朱荣。
English: He Bascheng and his brother He Bajun and his brother He Bajue lost their way. He Bascheng went to Nantou Zhouzhou, and He Bajun and He Bajue went to Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：荣与肆州刺史尉庆宾构隙，引岳攻肆州，陷。
现代文：尔朱荣与肆州刺史尉庆宾有矛盾，带着贺拔岳攻陷肆州。
English: Le Zhu Rong had a conflict with Wuzhou Jinshi lieutenant Qing Bin, and took He Baturan with him to invade Wuzhou.

古文：荣得胜，大悦曰： 吾得卿兄弟，天下不足定。 
现代文：尔朱荣得到贺拔胜，十分高兴，说 ：我得到你们兄弟三人，平定天下就不在话下了。 
English: Le Zhu Rong was very happy to win the victory and said, "I won three of your brothers, so it is not a matter of pacifying the world."

古文：胜兄弟三人，遂委质事荣。
现代文：他们兄弟三人都投靠了尔朱荣。
English: All three of their brothers sided with Le Zhurong.

古文：时杜洛周据幽、定，葛荣据冀、瀛。
现代文：这时，杜洛周占据幽州、定州，葛荣占据冀州、瀛州。
English: At this time, Dulozhou occupied Yuzhou and Dingzhou, and Ge Rong occupied Jizhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：荣谓胜曰： 并陉险要，我之东门，欲屈君镇之，如何？ 
现代文：尔朱荣对贺拔胜说： 井陉这个地方很险要，是我们的东大门，想委屈你去镇守，怎么样？ 
English: Le Zhu Rong said to He Baxing: Jingyao, this place is very important, it is our eastern gate. If you want to be wronged, how about going to the town guard?

古文：胜曰： 是所愿也。 
现代文：贺拔胜说 ：这是我愿意从命的。 
English: He Baxing said, "This is what I am willing to do."

古文：荣乃表胜镇井陉，以所乘大马并银鞍遗之。
现代文：尔朱荣便上表朝廷，让贺拔胜镇守井陉，并把自己乘坐的高头大马，连同装饰有银质的马鞍都送给他。
English: Le Zhu Rong then went to the court and asked He Baxian to guard the well, and gave him the tall horse he was riding, along with a silver-decorated saddle.

古文：及荣入洛，以预定策立孝庄帝功，封易阳县伯。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳后，他因参与拥立孝庄帝有功，被封为当阳县伯。
English: After Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, he was awarded the title of Dangyang County Mayor for his participation in supporting Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：后元天穆北征葛荣，大破之。
现代文：他跟随元天穆北征葛荣，将葛荣打得大败。
English: He followed the Northern Expedition of Yuan Tianmu against Ge Rong and defeated Ge Rong.

古文：时杜洛周余烬韩楼在蓟城结聚，以胜为大都督，镇中山，楼詟胜威名，竟不敢南寇。
现代文：这时，杜洛周的余党韩楼在蓟城聚集人马，朝廷任贺拔胜为大都督，镇守中山。韩楼慑于贺拔胜的威名，竟不敢向南进犯。
English: At this time, Han Lou, the remaining party of Du Luo Zhou, gathered people and horses in Lucheng, and the imperial court appointed He Baxian as the grand governor and the town guard of Zhongshan. Han Lou was intimidated by He Baxian's prestige and did not dare to attack the south.

古文：元颢入洛阳，荣徵胜，使与尔硃兆自硖石度，大破颢军，禽其子冠受，遂前驱入洛。
现代文：元颢进占洛阳，尔朱荣调来贺拔胜，派他与尔朱兆在硖石渡过黄河。大破元颢的军队，俘获元颢的儿子元冠受，作为前驱进入洛阳。
English: When Yuan Shao marched into Luoyang, Zhu Rong dispatched He Baxun and sent him and Zhu Zhao across the Yellow River. They defeated Yuan Shao's army, captured Yuan Shao's son Yuan Guanzhu, and marched into Luoyang as the vanguard.

古文：进爵真定县公。
现代文：后来他被晋爵为真定县公。
English: Later, he was promoted to the peerage and became the governor of Jinding County.

古文：及荣死，胜与田怡等奔赴荣第，时宫殿之门未加严防，怡等议即攻门。
现代文：尔朱荣被孝庄帝杀死，贺拔胜与田怡等人奔入尔朱荣的府第。当时，宫廷的大门还没有严加防范，田怡等建议立即进攻宫门。
English: Er Zhu Rong was killed by Emperor Xiaozhuang, and He Baxiong and Tian Yi and others rushed into Er Zhu Rong's residence. At that time, the palace gate was not strictly guarded, and Tian Yi and others suggested attacking the palace gate immediately.

古文：胜止之曰： 天子既行大事，必当更有奇谋，吾众旅不多，何轻尔！ 
现代文：他制止他们说 ：天子既然决断大事，一定会有出人意料的计谋，我们的军队数量不多，何必轻举妄动呢？ 
English: He stopped them and said, "Since it is the Son of Heaven who decides great matters, there will surely be unexpected strategies. Our army is small in number, why should we act rashly?"

古文：怡乃止。
现代文：田怡等人才停止。
English: Tian Yi and other talents stopped.

古文：及世隆夜走，胜随至河桥。胜以为臣无仇君之义，遂勒所部还都。
现代文：尔朱世隆连夜离开洛阳，贺拔胜跟随他到达河桥，贺拔胜认为做臣子的没有仇恨国君的道理，便带领他的部下返回都城。
English: Zhu Shilong left Luoyang overnight, and He Baxun followed him to the bridge. He Baxun thought that there was no reason to hate the sovereign as a courtier, so he led his men back to the capital.

古文：庄帝大悦。
现代文：孝庄帝十分高兴。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was very happy.

古文：仲远逼东郡，诏以本官假骠骑大将军、东征都督，率骑一千，会郑先护讨之，为先护所疑，置之营外，人马未得休息。
现代文：尔朱仲远进逼东郡，朝廷命贺拔胜以原来的官职代理骠骑大将军、东征都督，率领骑兵一千人，会同郑先护的军队讨伐尔朱仲远。他被郑先护怀疑，关闭在军营以外，人马没有得到休息。
English: When Zhu Zhongyuan marched into Dong County, the imperial court ordered He Bu Sheng to use his former official position as acting cavalry general and governor of the Eastern Expedition to lead a thousand cavalrymen to fight Zhu Zhongyuan together with the army of Zheng Xianguo. He was suspected by Zheng Xianguo and closed outside the military camp, and the men and horses did not get any rest.

古文：俄而仲远兵至，与战不利，降之。
现代文：不大一会儿，尔朱仲远的兵马来到，交战不利，只得投降。
English: A short while later, the soldiers and horses of the Zhouzhong soldiers came, the battle was unfavorable, and they had to surrender.

古文：复与尔硃氏同谋立节闵帝，以功拜右卫将军。
现代文：他又与尔朱氏共同计谋拥立节闵帝，因立有功勋被封为右卫将军。
English: He also conspired with the Erzhu clan to support the establishment of Emperor Jiechi, and was awarded the title of General of the Right Division for his distinguished service.

古文：及尔硃氏将讨齐神武，胜时从尔硃度律。
现代文：尔朱氏将要讨伐高欢，贺拔胜归属尔朱度律。
English: The Lzhu clan is going to fight Gaohuan, and the victory belongs to the Lzhu rule.

古文：度律与兆不平。胜以临敌构隙，取败之道，乃与斛斯椿诣兆营和之，反为兆所执。
现代文：尔朱度律与尔朱兆不和，他认为面临敌人而内部却失和，是自取失败，便与斛斯椿一起到尔朱兆的大营讲和，反而被尔朱兆拘禁。
English: Lzhu Duru did not get along with Lzhu Zhao. He thought that it was self-defeating to face the enemy and lose the internal harmony, so he went to Lzhu Zhao's camp to talk about peace with Zou Shizhu. Instead, he was detained by Lzhu Zhao.

古文：度律大惧，引军还。
现代文：尔朱度律很是恐惧，带军退却。
English: Terrified, he led his army in retreat.

古文：兆将斩胜，数之曰： 尔杀可环，罪一也；天柱薨后，不与世隆等俱来而东征仲远，罪二也。
现代文：尔朱兆准备斩杀贺拔胜，数落他的罪状说： 你杀死卫可环，是罪状之一；天柱大将军死后，你不与世隆等一块来，而却东征尔朱仲远，是罪状之二。
English: Lzhu Zhao prepared to kill He Baxing and counted off his charges, saying: You killed Wei Kehuan, which is one of the charges; after the death of General Tianzhu, you did not wait for Shilong, but went to the East to fight Lzhu Zhongyuan, which is the second charge.

古文：我欲杀尔久矣！ 
现代文：我早就想杀你了。 
English: I've wanted to kill you for a long time.

古文：胜曰： 可环作逆，胜父子诛之，其功不小，反以为罪。
现代文：贺拔胜说 ：卫可环是国家的叛逆，我们父子一起诛杀他，这是不小的功劳，怎么反而成了罪状？
English: He Baxing said: Wei Kehuan was a traitor to the country, our father and son fought and killed him together, this is no small achievement, how did it become a crime?

古文：天柱被戮，以君诛臣，胜宁负王，不负朝廷。
现代文：天柱大将军被孝庄帝杀戮，是国君杀臣子，我宁肯负天柱大将军，也不愿背叛朝廷。
English: General Tianzhu was killed by Emperor Xiaozhuang. It is the sovereign who kills his vassals. I would rather lose General Tianzhu than betray the imperial court.

古文：今日之事，生死在王。
现代文：今天的事，生死由您决定。
English: What happens today, life or death, is up to you.

古文：但去贼密迩，内构嫌隙，自古迄今，未有不破亡者。
现代文：但是，离敌兵很近，而您却在内部制造摩擦，从古至今，没有不失败的。
English: However, if you are very close to the enemy soldiers, and you create internal friction, from ancient times to the present, there is no failure.

古文：胜不惮死，恐王失策。 
现代文：我不怕死，恐怕您这样作也是很大的失策。 
English: I'm not afraid of death, and I'm afraid it's a big mistake for you to do this.

古文：兆乃舍之。
现代文：尔朱兆便放走了他。
English: Lzhu Zhao then let him go.

古文：胜既免，行百余里，方追及度律。
现代文：他既被放归，走了一百多里路才追上尔朱度律。
English: Since he was released, he has walked more than a hundred miles to catch up with Lzhu DuLu.

古文：齐神武既克相州，兵威渐盛，于是兆及天光、仲远、度律等众十余万阵于韩陵。
现代文：高欢攻克相州，兵威越来越盛，于是，尔朱兆及尔朱天光、尔朱仲远、尔朱度律等率军十余万众列阵于韩陵，与高欢决战。
English: Gao Huan attacked Kesang State, and his military power became more and more powerful. Therefore, Er Zhu Zhao, Er Zhu Tianguang, Er Zhu Zhongyuan, and Er Zhu DuLu led more than one hundred thousand troops in Hanling, and fought a decisive battle with Gao Huan.

古文：兆率铁骑陷阵，出齐神武后，将乘其背而击之。度律恶兆之骁悍，惧其陵己，勒兵不进。
现代文：尔朱兆率领精锐骑兵冲陷敌阵，出现在高欢军队之后，准备在他的背后发起进攻，尔朱度律妒嫉尔朱兆的骁勇凶悍，害怕他超过自己，所以，按兵不动。
English: Le Zhu Zhao led the elite cavalry to storm the enemy lines, appeared after the Gaohan army, ready to launch an attack behind him. Le Zhu Du Rui was jealous of Le Zhu Zhao's bravery and ferocity, afraid that he would surpass himself, so he did not move.

古文：胜以其携贰，遂以麾下降齐神武。
现代文：贺拔胜看到他们各怀鬼胎，便率领部下向高欢投降。
English: He Baxing saw that each of them was pregnant with a ghost fetus, so he led his subordinates to surrender to Gaohuan.

古文：度律军以此先退，遂大败。
现代文：尔朱度律的军队因此退却，尔朱氏的军队便遭到惨败。
English: As a result, the forces of the Rzhu Duru retreated, and the armies of the Rzhu clan were soundly defeated.

古文：太昌初，以胜为领军将军，寻除侍中。
现代文：太昌初年，朝廷命贺拔胜为领军将军，不久，任侍中。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the imperial court ordered He Bu Sheng to be the leading general, and he was soon appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：孝武帝将图齐神武，以胜弟岳拥众关西，欲广其势援，乃拜都督、荆州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南道大行台、尚书左仆射。
现代文：孝武帝准备平定高欢，因贺拔胜的弟弟贺拔岳在关西拥有大批军队，想扩充势力，增加援助，于是便命贺拔胜为都督、荆州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南道大行台、尚书左仆射。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was preparing to subdue Gaohuan, because He Batsheng's younger brother, He Batsheng, had a large number of troops in Kansai and wanted to expand his power and increase aid, so he ordered He Batsheng to be the governor of the capital, the governor of Jingzhou, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry.

古文：胜多所克捷，沔北荡为丘墟。
现代文：他所向披靡，沔水以北的敌兵被全部扫荡。
English: He was victorious, and all the enemy soldiers north of Surabaya were swept away.

古文：梁武帝敕其子雍州刺史续曰： 贺拔胜北间骁将，尔宜慎之，勿与争锋。 
现代文：梁武帝告诫他的儿子、雍州刺史萧绩说： 贺拔胜是北朝的一员骁将，你应该慎重对待他，不要与他死打硬拼。 
English: Emperor Liangwu admonished his son, the Yongzhou statesman Xia Rong, saying: He Ba Sheng is a member of the Northern Dynasty. You should treat him carefully and not fight with him.

古文：续遂城守不敢出。
现代文：萧绩便坚守城池，不敢出战。
English: With poor results, they stick to the castle and do not dare to go to war.

古文：寻进位尚书令，进爵琅邪郡公。
现代文：不久，朝廷给贺拔胜晋位为尚书令，晋爵为琅邪公。
English: Soon after, the imperial court gave He Baxing the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the title of Shizanggong (邪公).

古文：及齐神武与孝武帝有隙，诏胜引兵赴洛，至广州，犹豫未进，而帝已入关。
现代文：齐神武帝高欢与孝武帝有了裂痕，朝廷下诏命贺拔胜带兵返回洛阳，他行至广州，却徘徊不前，而孝武帝已被迫逃向关内。
English: Qishenwu Emperor Gao Huan and Xiaowu Emperor had a rift, and the imperial court ordered He Bu Sheng to return to Luoyang with soldiers. He went to Guangzhou, but lingered, and Xiaowu Emperor had been forced to flee to Guanzhong.

古文：胜还军南阳，遣右丞杨休之奉表入关，又令府长史元颖行州事，胜自率所部，将西赴关中。
现代文：他带兵返回南阳，派右丞相阳休之奉表入关，又命府长史元颖代理州牧，他自己亲率所部，准备西入关中。
English: He led the troops back to Nanyang and sent the right-hand man, the minister of justice, Yang Hui, to enter the pass. He also ordered the prefectural governor, Shi Yuanying, to act as the provincial governor, and he himself led the headquarters to prepare for the western entry into the pass.

古文：进至浙阳，诏授胜太保、录尚书事。
现代文：进至淅阳，朝廷下诏封他为太保、录尚书事。
English: When he went to Shenyang, the imperial court gave him the title of Tai Bao and recorded his records.

古文：闻齐神武已平潼关，禽毛鸿宾，胜乃还荆州。
现代文：他听说高欢已占据潼关，擒获了毛鸿宾，便退回荆州。
English: He heard that Gao Huan had occupied Shaoguan, captured Mao Hongbin, and returned to Jingzhou.

古文：州人邓诞执元颖，引齐师。
现代文：州人邓诞抓住元颖，引来高欢的军队。
English: The statesman Deng Xizhi seized Yuan Ying and attracted high-spirited troops.

古文：时齐神武已遣行台侯景、大都督高敖曹赴之，胜败，中流矢，奔梁。
现代文：这时，高欢已派行台侯景、大都督高敖曹奔赴荆州，贺拔胜战败，被流矢射中，逃奔梁国。
English: At this time, Gao Huan had dispatched the Tai Houjing and the Grand Dictator Gao Bing Cao to Jingzhou. He was defeated and was shot by the arrow, and fled to Liangguo.

古文：在南三年，梁武帝遇之甚厚。
现代文：他在南朝三年，梁武帝对待他非常优厚。
English: He spent three years in the Southern Dynasty, and Emperor Liang Wu treated him very generously.

古文：胜乞师北讨齐神武，既不果，乃求还。
现代文：他请求带兵向北讨伐高欢，梁武帝没有答应，他便要求北返。
English: He asked Liang Wudi to lead his troops to the north to fight Gaohan. Liang Wudi did not agree, so he asked to return to the north.

古文：梁武帝许之，亲饯于南苑。
现代文：梁武帝同意了，亲自在南苑为他送行。
English: Emperor Liangwu agreed and personally escorted him to Nanyuan.

古文：胜自是之后，每执弓矢，见鸟兽南向者，皆不射之，以申怀德之意。
现代文：他从此以后，每拿起弓箭，看见向南飞来的鸟雀、跑来的野兽，都不射杀，以表达他怀念南朝恩德的感情。
English: From then on, whenever he picked up a bow and arrow and saw birds and sparrows flying south or wild animals running, he would not shoot them to express his feelings of missing the blessings of the Southern Dynasty.

古文：既至长安，诣阙谢罪。魏帝握胜手，嘘欷久之，曰： 初平西徙，永嘉南度，汉、晋皆尔。
现代文：到达长安后，他向朝廷谢罪，魏帝握着他的手说： 东汉献帝初平年间被迫向西奔徙，晋怀帝永嘉时不得不南度，汉、晋还是这个样子。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, he apologized to the imperial court. Emperor Wei shook his hand and said, "During the Eastern Han Dynasty's Consecration of the Emperor at the beginning of the Heian Period, he was forced to travel west. During the Jin Dynasty's Consecration of the Emperor Yongjia, he had to travel south. Han and Jin are still like this."

古文：事乃关天，非公之咎也。 
现代文：事情在天，不是你的过失啊！ 
English: It's not your fault!

古文：乃授太师。
现代文：便授予他太师的官职。
English: He was then given the official title of Grand Master.

古文：从周文帝禽窦泰于小关。攻弘农。下河北，禽郡守孙晏。摧破东魏军于沙苑，奔追至河上。
现代文：他与周文帝宇文泰在小关擒获窦泰，进攻弘农；移军河北，俘获郡守孙晏；在沙苑摧毁东魏的军队，追赶败兵至黄河。
English: Together with Zhou Wenzong, he captured Dou Tai in Xiaoguan and attacked Hongnong; he moved his army to Hebei and captured the county governor Sun Qian; he destroyed the Eastern Wei army in Shayuan and chased the defeated soldiers to the Yellow River.

古文：仍与李弼别攻河东，略定汾、绛。
现代文：他与李弼分别进攻河东，平定汾州、绛州。
English: He and Li Xi separately attacked Hedong and pacified Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：河桥之役，胜大破东魏军，周文令胜收其降卒而还。
现代文：河桥一战，他大破东魏的军队，宇文泰命他收集东魏投降的士兵后撤还。
English: In the First Battle of Heqiao, he defeated the Eastern Wei army, and Yu Wentai ordered him to collect the East Wei soldiers who had surrendered and withdraw them.

古文：及齐神武率众攻玉壁，胜以前军大都督从周文。
现代文：高欢率军进攻玉璧，贺拔胜以前军大都督的身份跟随宇文泰与高欢接战。
English: Gao Huan led the army to attack Yubi, and He Bi Sheng, as the former military governor, followed Yu Wentai and Gao Huan into battle.

古文：见齐武旗鼓，识之，乃募敢勇三千人，配胜以犯其军。
现代文：他看见高欢的旗帜军鼓，非常熟悉，便招募骁勇精锐三千人向高欢进攻。
English: He saw Gao Huan's banner and war drums and was very familiar with them, so he recruited three thousand brave elites to attack Gao Huan.

古文：胜适与神武遇，连叱而字之曰： 贺六浑，贺拔破胡必杀汝也！ 
现代文：他与高欢在战阵中相遇，他连连喊着自己的名字说： 我贺六浑、贺拔破胡一定要杀死你！ 
English: He and Gao Huan met in battle, and he repeatedly shouted his own name and said, "I, He Liuhun, He Baprakhu, must kill you!"

古文：时胜持槊追神武数里，刃垂及之，神武汗流，气殆尽。
现代文：他挺着长矛将高欢追赶了好几里，长矛的锋刃即将刺中高欢，高欢汗流浃背，气息殆尽。
English: He chased Gao Huan with a spear for several miles. The sharp blade of the spear was about to pierce Gao Huan. Gao Huan was drenched in sweat and exhausted.

古文：会胜马为流矢所中，死。比副骑至，神武已逸去。
现代文：恰巧贺拔胜的马被流矢射中，倒地死去，等到副骑赶到，高欢已经逃跑。
English: Coincidentally, He Buxing's horse was hit by a stray arrow and fell to the ground dead. By the time the second rider arrived, Gao Huan had already fled.

古文：胜叹曰： 今日之事，吾不执弓矢者，天也！ 
现代文：他叹息说： 今天的事情没有成功，怨我没有带上弓箭，真是天意啊！ 
English: He sighed and said, "Today's event was not a success. I regret that I did not bring a bow and arrow. It was truly God's will!"

古文：是岁，胜诸子在东者，皆为神武所害。
现代文：这一年，他在东魏的儿子都被高欢杀害。
English: In the same year, his sons in Eastern Wei were all killed by Gaohuan.

古文：胜愤恨，因动气疾，大统十年，薨于位。
现代文：他悲愤异常，因过于生气而得病，大统十年，死在官位上。
English: He was extremely sad and angry, got sick because he was too angry, and died in office ten years later.

古文：临终，手书与周文曰： 胜万里杖策，归身阙庭，冀望与公扫除逋寇。
现代文：临终时，他亲手写信给宇文泰说： 我万里策马，回到朝廷，希望与您一起扫除贼寇。
English: When he was on his deathbed, he wrote a letter to Uwentai with his own hand, saying, "I have come all the way back to the imperial court, and I hope to sweep away the bandits with you."

古文：不幸殒毙，微志不申。
现代文：今日不幸殒命，目的无法实现。
English: Unfortunately, he died today and his goal could not be achieved.

古文：若死而有知，犹望魂飞贼庭，以报恩遇耳。 
现代文：如果死后有知，还希望魂魄飞至敌人的宫廷，以报答朝廷对我的恩遇。 
English: If there is knowledge after death, I also hope that my soul will fly to the enemy's court to repay the court's kindness to me.

古文：周文览书，流涕久之。
现代文：宇文泰看后，流了很长时间的眼泪。
English: After watching it, Yu Wentai shed tears for a long time.

古文：胜长于丧乱之中，尤工武艺，走马射飞鸟，十中其五六。
现代文：贺拔胜生长在动乱之中，尤其精通武艺。他骑在马上射击飞鸟，十中其五六。
English: He Baxing grew up in the turmoil, especially proficient in martial arts. He rode a horse and shot birds, with a score of 56 out of 10.

古文：周文每云： 诸将对敌，神色皆动，唯贺拔公临阵如平常，真大勇也。 
现代文：宇文泰常说： 将领们与敌人对垒，神色都有所改变，惟独贺拔胜公临阵和平常一样，真是大智大勇啊！ 
English: Uven Tai used to say: When generals go to battle with the enemy, their countenances change, but when they go into battle, they are just as brave and wise as usual.

古文：自居重任，始爱坟籍，乃招引文儒，讨论义理。
现代文：贺拔胜自从担任要职以来，开始喜爱读经史典籍，便招请文人儒士，一起讨论义理。
English: Ever since he assumed the important position, He Basheng began to enjoy reading the classics of history and invited writers and Confucians to discuss the principles together.

古文：性又通率，重义轻财，身死之日，唯有随身兵仗及书千卷而已。
现代文：他的性情又通达坦率，轻财好义。去世的时候，只有随身的武器和一千来册图书。
English: When he died, he had only his weapons and a thousand or so books with him.

古文：初，胜至关中，自以年位素重，见周文不拜。
现代文：当初，他来到关中，自以为年纪大，官位重，见了宇文泰也不下拜。
English: At first, when he came to Guanzhong, he thought he was older and had a higher official rank, but he didn't bow down when he saw Uwentai.

古文：寻而自悔，周文亦有望焉。
现代文：不久又后悔起来，宇文泰也想和他亲近。
English: Soon he regretted it, and Uwentai also wanted to be close to him.

古文：后从宴昆明池，时有双凫游池中，周文授弓矢于胜曰： 不见公射久矣，请以为欢。 
现代文：后来，他在昆明池参加朝廷的宴会，这时，池中有两只水鸟在游水，宇文泰将弓箭交给他说： 很久不见您射箭了，请射箭助兴。 
English: Later, he was attending a royal banquet at Kunming Pool. At that time, there were two waterbirds swimming in the pool. Uwentai handed the bow and arrow to him and said, "It's been a long time since I've seen you shoot arrows. Please help us have fun with archery."

古文：胜射之，一发俱中。因拜曰： 使胜得奉神武，以讨不庭，皆如此也。 
现代文：贺拔胜援弓射箭，一箭将两只鸟都射中，因而他拜谢宇文泰说： 如果让我和您在一起讨伐叛逆，我也会这样。 
English: He pulled out his bow to shoot an arrow, and one arrow hit both birds, so he bowed to Yu Wentai and said, "If you let me fight against the rebels with you, I will do the same."

古文：周文悦，因是恩礼日重，胜亦尽诚推奉焉。
现代文：宇文泰十分高兴，因此对他更加尊重，贺拔胜也竭尽诚心与宇文泰相处。
English: Uwentai is very happy, so he has more respect for him. He also tries his best to get along with Uwentai.

古文：赠太宰、录尚书事，谥曰贞献。
现代文：他去世后，朝廷追赠他为太宰、录尚书事，谥号为贞献。
English: After his death, the imperial court posthumously bestowed upon him the titles of Dazai (Grand Vizier) and Zuo (Recorder), and his posthumous name was Zhenxian.

古文：胜弟岳。岳字阿斗泥，少有大志，爱施好士。
现代文：周明帝即位第二年，让他配享魏文帝元宝炬的庙庭。贺拔岳，字阿斗泥，贺拔胜的弟弟。他从小胸怀大志，爱好施舍，喜欢交结读书人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Zhou Ming's reign, he was allowed to enjoy the temple garden of Weiwen Emperor Yuan's torch. He Bajue, also known as A Dou Di, was the younger brother of He Bajue. He was ambitious from a young age, loved to give alms, and liked to mingle with readers.

古文：初为太学生。及长，能左右驰射，骁果绝人。
现代文：开始，为太学生，长大后能骑马向左右两边射箭，骁勇绝伦。
English: At the beginning, he was a high school student. When he grew up, he was able to ride a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right. He was very brave.

古文：不读兵书，而暗与之合，识者咸异之。
现代文：他不读兵书，而谋略却与兵法相符，了解他的人都很惊奇。
English: People who know him are surprised that he doesn't read military manuals and that his strategy is consistent with the laws of war.

古文：与父兄赴援怀朔，贼王卫可环在城西三百余步，岳乘城射之，箭中环臂，贼大骇。
现代文：他与父亲和哥哥一起赴援怀朔，敌兵首领卫可环在城西，离他有三百多步，他凭借城墙掩护射箭，射中了卫可环的臂膀，敌兵十分惊骇。
English: Together with his father and brother, he went to assist Huai Shuo. The enemy commander, Wei Kehuan, was more than three hundred paces from him in the west of the city. He took advantage of the protection of the city wall to shoot arrows and hit Wei Kehuan's arm. The enemy soldiers were very shocked.

古文：后广阳王深以为帐内军主，与兄胜俱镇恆州。
现代文：后来，广阳王元深任他为军营中的军主，与他的哥哥贺拔胜一起镇守恒州。
English: Later, Guangyang Wang Yuan-shen appointed him as the commander of the military camp, and together with his brother He Baxian, they guarded Hengzhou.

古文：州陷，投尔硃荣，荣以为都督。
现代文：州城失陷，他投靠了尔朱荣，尔朱荣任命他为都督。
English: After the fall of the state capital, he sided with Er Zhu Rong, who appointed him as the new governor.

古文：每帐下与计事，多与荣意合。
现代文：每次在军帐中参与议论进军方略，他的见解都与尔朱荣相吻合。
English: Every time he participated in the discussion of the military strategy in the military account, his views coincided with those of Le Zhu Rong.

古文：荣与元天穆谋入匡朝廷，问计于岳。岳曰： 夫非常之事，必俟非常之人。
现代文：尔朱荣与元天穆准备去匡扶朝廷，向他征求意见，他说 ：非常的事情，一定要非常的人来干。
English: When Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Tianmu were preparing to go to support the imperial court and ask him for advice, he said, "Extraordinary things must be done by extraordinary people."

古文：将军士马精强，位望隆重，若首举义旗，伐叛匡救，何往不克，何向不摧！
现代文：将军您兵强马壮，地位和声望都很高，如果首先举起义旗，讨伐逆天背人的奸佞，拯救朝廷的危难，何往而不被攻克？何向而不被摧毁？
English: General, your army is strong and powerful, and your status and reputation are very high. If you first raise the banner of righteousness, fight the treacherous traitors, and save the imperial court from danger, where will you go without being conquered? Where will you go without being destroyed?

古文：古人云： 朝谋不及夕，言发不俟驾。 
现代文：古人说： 早晨计谋，不到晚上就会实现；话说出后，不等到去做就能成功。 
English: The ancients said: "If you plan in the morning, you will achieve it by the evening; if you say it, you can succeed without waiting to do it."

古文：此之谓矣。 
现代文：这正像说的是您要匡扶朝廷的事情啊。 
English: That's a good point.

古文：荣与天穆相顾良久，曰： 卿此言，真丈夫之论也。 
现代文：尔朱荣与元天穆互相看着思虑很久，说： 你的这些话真是大丈夫的议论呀。 
English: Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Tian Mu looked at each other thoughtfully for a long time and said: These words of yours are really fine talk.

古文：未几，孝明帝暴崩，荣疑有故，乃举兵赴洛。
现代文：不久，孝明帝突然去世，尔朱荣怀疑其中定有缘故，便带兵奔赴洛阳。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaoming died suddenly, and Le Zhu Rong suspected that there must be a reason for this, so he rushed to Luoyang with his soldiers.

古文：配岳甲卒二千为先驱。
现代文：调拨二千人马归贺拔岳指挥，作为先锋。
English: He dispatched two thousand horsemen under the command of He Batyue as the vanguard.

古文：至河阴，荣既杀朝士，因欲称帝，疑未能决。
现代文：到达河阴，尔朱荣杀死朝臣，想自己称帝，犹豫未决。
English: Arriving in Hebei, Er Zhu Rong killed a courtier, wanted to proclaim himself emperor, and hesitated.

古文：岳乃从容致谏，荣寻亦自悟，乃尊立孝庄。
现代文：贺拔岳便从容劝阻，尔朱荣不久也已省悟，便拥立孝庄帝即位。
English: He Batyue then calmly dissuaded him, and Er Zhu Rong soon came to his senses and supported the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：以定策功，赐爵樊城乡男。
现代文：贺拔岳因决定国策的功劳，被朝廷赐爵为樊城乡男。
English: As a result of his contribution to determining national policy, the Imperial Court bestowed a knighthood on He Batyue, making him a man of both town and country.

古文：从荣破葛荣，平元颢，累迁左光禄大夫、武卫将军。
现代文：他跟随尔朱荣打败葛荣，平定元颢，多次升迁，官至左光禄大夫、武卫将军。
English: He followed Er Zhu Rong to defeat Ge Rong, subdued Yuan Shao, and was promoted many times, rising to the post of doctor of the Left Guanglu and general of the Wuwei.

古文：时万俟丑奴僭称大号，关中骚动，荣将遣岳讨之。私谓其兄胜曰： 丑奴足为勍敌，若岳往无功，罪责立至；假令克定，恐谗诉生焉。 
现代文：这时，万俟丑奴伪称帝号，关中一片骚乱，尔朱荣将派遣贺拔岳前去讨伐，私下对他的哥哥贺拔胜说 ：万俟丑奴足可以称得上是一股强劲的敌人，如果贺拔岳前去讨伐不能成功，罪责马上就会降到他的身上；如果一举获胜，恐怕嫉妒和诽谤就会产生。 
English: At this time, Wan Xun Ugly Slave pretended to be Emperor, and there was a riot in Guanzhong. Le Zhu Rong would send He Batur to go to the crusade, and privately said to his brother He Batur: Wan Xun Ugly Slave could be said to be a strong enemy. If He Batur went to the crusade and could not succeed, the blame would immediately fall on him; if he won at one stroke, I am afraid that jealousy and slander would arise.

古文：乃请尔硃氏一人为元帅，岳副贰之。
现代文：贺拔胜便请求让尔朱氏的一个人当元帅，让贺拔岳当副帅。
English: He Baxing then requested that a person from the Er Zhu clan be made marshal, and that He Batyue be made vice-marshal.

古文：荣大悦，乃以天光为使持节、大都督、雍州刺史，以岳为左厢大都督，又以征西将军侯莫陈悦为右厢大都督，并为天光之副，以讨之。
现代文：尔朱荣很高兴，便命尔朱天光为使持节、大都督、雍州刺史，贺拔岳为左厢大都督，又命征西将军侯莫陈悦为右厢大都督，一起作为尔朱天光的副手，去讨伐万俟丑奴。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very pleased, so he ordered Le Zhu Tianguang to be the envoy of the festival, the grand governor, and the governor of Yongzhou, He Batyue to be the grand governor of the left compartment, and also ordered the Western General Hou Mo Chen Yue to be the grand governor of the right compartment, together as the deputy of Le Zhu Tianguang, to fight the ugly villain.

古文：时赤水蜀贼兵断路，天光众不满二千。及军次潼关，天光有难色，岳乃进破之于渭北，军容大振。
现代文：这时，赤水蜀的敌兵阻断道路，而天光率领的人马不满二千，军队来到潼关，天光面有难色，直到贺拔岳在渭北打败敌兵，军威才为之一振。
English: At this time, the enemy soldiers of Chishui-Shu blocked the road, but the number of men and horses led by Tianguang was less than two thousand. The army came to Shaoguan, and Tianguang was in a difficult situation. It was not until He Baturan defeated the enemy soldiers in the north of Shaoguan that the military power was shaken.

古文：时丑奴自围岐州，遣其大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟行丑同向武功，南度渭水，攻围趋栅。
现代文：这时，万俟丑奴亲自包围岐州，派他的大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟行丑一起进军武功，南渡渭水，进攻魏军大营外围的栅栏。
English: At this time, Wanzhong Ugliness personally encircled Qizhou, and sent his grand marshal Qi Bodhisattva and his squire Wanzhong Xingwuxi together to march into Wugong, south of Wushui, and attack the fence around the Wei army camp.

古文：天光遣岳率千骑赴援。菩萨攻栅已克，率步骑二万至渭北。
现代文：尔朱天光派贺拔岳率一千骑兵救援，尉迟菩萨已攻破栅栏，率领马步两军二万退回渭水以北。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent He Baturan with a thousand cavalry to rescue them, but by then Bodhisattva had broken through the fence and led the two armies of twenty thousand horsemen back to the north of Surabaya.

古文：岳以轻骑数十，与菩萨隔水交言。岳称扬国威，菩萨乃自骄，令省事传语。省事恃水，应答不逊。
现代文：贺拔岳率领数十名轻捷骑兵与尉迟菩萨隔着渭水对话，贺拔岳称颂魏朝的威势，尉迟菩萨骄傲自大，命下面的人替他传话，而自己不直接与贺拔岳说话，他手下的人凭借着有河水阻隔，说话很不恭顺。
English: He Batyue led dozens of light cavalry soldiers to have a dialogue with Fuxi Bodhisattva across the Surabaya River. He Batyue praised the power of the Wei Dynasty. Fuxi Bodhisattva was proud and arrogant. The people under his command transmitted messages for him, but he did not speak directly with He Batyue. The people under his command spoke very disrespectfully by virtue of the river barrier.

古文：岳怒，举弓射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：贺拔岳愤怒，举起弓来朝他射去，那个传话的人随着弓弦的响声中箭倒地。
English: Angered, He Baturake raised his bow and shot at him. The messenger fell to the ground with the sound of the bowstring.

古文：时已逼暮，于是各还。
现代文：这时天已黄昏，双方各自退还。
English: By this time it was dusk, and both sides withdrew.

古文：岳于渭南傍水，分精兵数十为一处，随地形势置之。
现代文：贺拔岳在渭水南岸傍水驻扎，分精兵数十人为一处，根据地形安置。
English: Mt. Hebatake was stationed on the southern shore of Surabaya along the water, with dozens of elite soldiers stationed in one place according to the terrain.

古文：明日，将百余骑，隔水与贼相见，且并东行。
现代文：第二天，他率一百多骑兵，隔着渭水与敌兵见面，而且双方一起向东行进。
English: The next day, he led more than a hundred horsemen to meet the enemy soldiers across Surabaya, and the two sides marched east together.

古文：岳渐前进，先所置骑，随岳而集，骑既渐增，贼不复测其多少。
现代文：贺拔岳逐渐前进，原先安置的骑兵相继出现，跟着他聚集一起，人数逐渐增加，弄得敌人也估量不出他有多少人马。
English: Mount He Batur gradually advanced, and the cavalrymen originally stationed there appeared one after another, gathered together with him, and gradually increased in number, so that the enemy could not estimate how many men and horses he had.

古文：行二十许里，至水浅可济处，岳便驰马东出，似欲奔遁。
现代文：前行二十多里，到水浅可以涉过的地方，他纵马向东，作出要逃跑的样子。
English: After travelling more than twenty miles, to a place where the water was shallow enough to wade through, he turned his horse to the east and made as if he wanted to run away.

古文：贼谓岳走，乃弃步兵，南度渭水，轻骑追岳。
现代文：敌人认为他要逃跑，便丢下步兵，派骑兵渡过渭水追击。
English: Thinking he was about to flee, the enemy abandoned the infantry and sent cavalry across the Surabaya in pursuit.

古文：岳东行十余里，依横冈设伏兵以待之，身先士卒，急击之，贼便退走。
现代文：贺拔岳向东跑了十多里，凭借一道横亘的山岗设置伏兵等待敌人。他身先士卒，迅速出击，敌兵退走。
English: Mt. Hebatake ran more than ten miles to the east, waiting for the enemy by setting up an ambush with the help of a long hill. He led the way, quickly attacked, and the enemy soldiers retreated.

古文：岳号令所部，贼下马者皆不听杀。
现代文：他号令部下，凡是下马的敌兵都不要杀死。
English: He ordered his men not to kill any enemy soldiers who dismounted.

古文：贼顾见之，便悉投马。
现代文：敌兵看见，纷纷下马。
English: Seeing this, the enemy soldiers dismounted one after another.

古文：俄虏三千人。马亦无遗，遂禽菩萨。
现代文：不大一会儿，俘虏敌兵三千人，马匹也全部得到，并活捉了尉迟菩萨。
English: In a short time, he captured three thousand enemy soldiers and all the horses, and he also captured Ichi Bodhisattva alive.

古文：仍度渭北，降步卒万余。
现代文：又引兵到渭水北边，降服敌人的步兵一万多人。
English: He also led troops to the northern side of Surabaya, where more than ten thousand enemy infantry surrendered.

古文：丑奴寻弃岐州，北走安定。
现代文：万俟丑奴不久丢弃岐州，向北逃向安定。
English: In the unlikely event that the Ugly One abandons Qizhou soon, he will flee north towards stability.

古文：天光方自雍至，与岳合势。
现代文：尔朱天光刚从雍州赶来，与贺拔岳合兵一处。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang had just arrived from Yongzhou and joined forces with He Baduyue.

古文：宣言今气候已热，非征讨之时，待至秋凉，更图进取。
现代文：故意散布说，现在天气已经炎热，不是进兵征讨的时候，等到秋天凉爽，再谋图进取。
English: They deliberately spread the rumor that now that the weather is already hot, it is not the time for conscription, and that they should wait until the autumn when it is cooler, and then try to advance.

古文：丑奴闻之，遂以为实，分遣诸军散营农于岐州北百里网川。
现代文：万俟丑奴听说后，便信以为真，把各路人马分散结营驻扎在岐州以北的百里细川。
English: After hearing about the ugly scoundrel, he believed it to be true and dispersed all the people and horses to camp in Hyakurinoshikawa, north of Qizhou.

古文：使太尉侯伏侯元进据险立栅。
现代文：派太尉侯伏侯元进凭险树立栅栏，以作防卫。
English: He sent Lieutenant Hou Fu, Hou Yuanjin to erect a fence to defend against the danger.

古文：岳知其势分，密与天光严备。
现代文：贺拔岳听说敌人的兵力已经分散，暗中与尔朱天光对他们严加防备。
English: He Batyue heard that the enemy's forces had been dispersed, and secretly he and Lzhu Tianguang made strict preparations against them.

古文：昧旦，攻围元进栅，拔之，即禽元进，自余诸栅悉降。
现代文：天明，进攻并包围了侯伏侯元进的栅栏，一举攻克，活捉了侯伏侯元进，其余营寨中的敌兵全部投降。
English: At dawn, they attacked and encircled the fence of Hou Fu Hou Yuanjin, defeated him at one stroke, captured Hou Fu Hou Yuanjin alive, and all the remaining enemy soldiers in the camp surrendered.

古文：又轻骑追丑奴，及之于平凉之长坑，一战禽之。高平城中又执萧宝夤以归。
现代文：他又派轻捷骑兵追击万俟丑奴，到了平凉的长坑，一战就将丑奴抓获，攻克高平城，又俘获了萧宝夤，胜利归来。
English: He also sent light cavalry to chase Wanju Ugly Bastard, and when they reached the cool Changkeng, they captured Ugly Bastard in a single battle, conquered Gaoping City, captured Xiao Baojun, and returned home victorious.

古文：贼行台万俟道洛退保牵屯，岳攻之。道洛败入陇，投略阳贼帅王庆云。
现代文：敌人的行台万俟道洛退守牵屯，贺拔岳率军进攻，道洛失败，退入陇中，投奔略阳的贼兵首领王庆云。
English: When the enemy marched to Taiwanzhong, Wang Qingyun, the leader of the bandits, retreated to Liaoyang. He Batyue led the army to attack. Wang Qingyun, the leader of the bandits, failed and retreated to Shizhong.

古文：以道洛骁果绝伦，得之甚喜，以为将。
现代文：因为万俟道洛异常勇猛，王庆云得到他十分高兴，命他为将军。
English: Wang Qingyun was very pleased to get Wan Xuan Douluo because of his extraordinary bravery, and appointed him as a general.

古文：天光又与岳度陇，至庆云所居永洛城。
现代文：尔朱天光又与贺拔岳进军略阳，到达王庆云屯居的水洛城。
English: Zhu Tianguang and He Bajue marched into Liaoyang and arrived at Shuilao City, where Wang Qingyun lived.

古文：庆云、道洛频出城拒战，并禽之，余众皆悉坑之。
现代文：王庆云和万俟道洛频频出城作战，都被捉住，他的部下全部被活埋。
English: Wang Qingyun and Wan Xingdao Luo frequently went out of the city to fight, but were both caught, and all of his subordinates were buried alive.

古文：三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯州咸来归款。
现代文：三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯州一带的人都来归降。
English: People from the areas of Sanqin, He, Handan, Gua, Liang, and Zhangzhou have all come to return.

古文：贼帅夏州人宿勤明达降复叛，岳又讨禽之。
现代文：敌兵首领夏州人宿勤明达降而复叛，贺拔岳讨伐并将他抓获。
English: The leader of the enemy soldiers, Xiazhou resident Suqin Mingda, surrendered and rebelled. He battled against Mount He and captured him.

古文：天光虽为元帅，而岳功效居多，进封樊城县伯。
现代文：尔朱天光虽然是元帅，而贺拔岳的功劳最多，朝廷晋封他为樊城县伯。
English: Although Er Zhu Tianguang was a marshal, He Batyue had the most achievements, and the imperial court promoted him to be the highest-ranking official in Licheng County.

古文：寻诏岳都督、泾州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：不久，又下诏任他为都督、泾州刺史，晋爵位为公。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of the capital, the governor of Zhangzhou, and promoted to the peerage.

古文：天光入洛，使岳行雍州事。
现代文：尔朱天光回洛阳，派贺拔岳负责雍州的事务。
English: Zhu Tianguang returned to Luoyang and sent He Batyue to take charge of the affairs of Yongzhou.

古文：普泰初，除都督、岐州刺史，进清水郡公，寻加侍中，给后部鼓吹。
现代文：普泰初年，朝廷命他为都督、岐州刺史，晋爵为清水郡公，不久加封为侍中，赐给后部鼓吹的礼遇。
English: In the first year of Putai, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of the capital, the crown prince of Qizhou, the prince of Shimizu County, and soon he was appointed as an attendant, giving him the courtesy of preaching to the rear.

古文：进位开府仪同三司兼尚书左仆射、陇右行台，仍停高平。
现代文：又晋位为开府仪同三司，兼任尚书左仆射、陇右行台，仍驻扎在高平。
English: He was also promoted to the third secretary of the Kaifu Ritsuryo, and concurrently held the posts of Shoshu Zuopuzha and Shoshu Zuogodai, and was still stationed in Gaoping.

古文：后以陇中犹有土人不顺，岳助侯莫陈悦，所在讨平之。
现代文：后来，因陇中还有土著人没有归顺，他帮助侯莫陈悦平定，所到之处，土人全部降服。
English: Later, because there were still aborigines in Yunnan who did not submit, he helped Hou Mo to subdue Chen Yue. Wherever he went, the natives all surrendered.

古文：二年，加都督、雍州刺史。
现代文：普泰二年，他被加封为都督、雍州刺史。
English: In the second year of Putai, he was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：天光将拒齐神武，遣问计于岳。
现代文：尔朱天光准备抗拒齐神武帝高欢，派人向贺拔岳征求意见。
English: Zhu Tianguang prepared to resist the Qishenwu Emperor's high-spirits and sent someone to solicit opinions from Mount Heba.

古文：岳曰： 莫若且镇关中，以固根本。 
现代文：他说 ：不如暂且镇守关中，以巩固根本。 
English: He said, "It's better to keep a low profile for the time being in order to strengthen the foundation."

古文：天光不从，后果败。
现代文：天光没有听从，后来果然失败。
English: Tian Guang did not obey, and later failed.

古文：岳率军下陇赴雍，禽天光弟显寿以应齐神武。
现代文：他便率军奔赴雍州，擒获尔朱天光的弟弟尔朱显寿，归顺高欢。
English: He then led the army to rush to Yongzhou, and captured Zhu Xianshou, the younger brother of Zhu Tianguang, and returned to Shun Gaohuan.

古文：及孝武即位，加关中大行台。
现代文：孝武帝即位，加封他为关中大行台。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Guanzhong Dagongdai.

古文：永熙二年，孝武密令岳图齐神武，遂刺心血，持以寄岳。
现代文：永熙二年，孝武帝密令贺拔岳图谋高欢，刺破手指，写成血书，送给贺拔岳。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, Emperor Xiaowu secretly ordered He Baturake to plan a high festival, prick his finger, write a blood book, and give it to He Baturake.

古文：岳惧，乃自诣北境，安置边防，率众趋平凉西界，布营数十里，托以牧马于原州，为自安之计。
现代文：贺拔岳十分害怕，便自己到北部边境，布置将士防守。他率领军队到平凉西界，安扎营寨数十里，借口要在原州牧马，作为自安之计。
English: He Batyue was very afraid, so he went to the northern border to arrange soldiers for defense. He led the army to the west of Pingliang, and camped for dozens of miles, on the pretext of wrangling horses in Yuanzhou, as a self-reliance strategy.

古文：先是，费也头万俟受洛干、铁勒斛律沙门、解拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利等拥众自守，至是皆款附。
现代文：原先，费也头的万俟受洛干、铁勒的斛律沙门、解拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利等人拥众自立，这时都归顺了贺拔岳。
English: Originally, Fei Yao's Wan Xuan was supported by Luo Gan, Tie Le's Balut Shamen, Xie Bao's Mirotong, Peasling Yili and other supporters, and they all surrendered to He Batyue.

古文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州刺史又会平凉，受岳节度。
现代文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州的刺史又会合在平凉，接受贺拔岳的节制。
English: The four prefectures of Qin, Southern Qin, He and Min also met in Pingliang and accepted the restraint of Mount He.

古文：唯灵州刺史曹泥不应召，通使于齐神武。
现代文：惟有灵州刺史曹泥不接受贺拔岳的召请，却派人与高欢联系。
English: However, the Lingzhou statesman Cao Di did not accept the call of He Batur, but sent someone to contact Gaohuan.

古文：神武乃遣左丞翟嵩使至关中，间岳及侯莫阵悦。
现代文：高欢便派左丞翟嵩到关中，离间贺拔岳与侯莫陈悦的关系。
English: Gao Huan then sent Zuo Jiaotong to Guanzhong, which caused a rift between He Baturake and Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：三年，岳召悦会于高平，将讨曹泥，令悦前驱，而悦受神武指，密图岳。
现代文：永熙三年，贺拔岳召请侯莫陈悦在高平会面，准备讨伐曹泥，让侯莫陈悦为先锋。而侯莫陈悦已受高欢指使，想暗中图谋贺拔岳，贺拔岳却毫无觉察。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, He Baturake invited Hou Mo Chen Yue to meet in Gaoping to prepare to fight Cao Di, and let Hou Mo Chen Yue be the vanguard. And Hou Mo Chen Yue had been instructed by Gaohuan to secretly plot against He Baturake, but He Baturake was completely unaware.

古文：岳弗之知，而先又轻悦，悦乃诱岳入营，共论兵事。
现代文：他原先又轻视侯莫陈悦，陈悦便将他诱入自己的军营，一起讨论用兵的事情。
English: He had previously despised Hou Mo Chen Yue, and Chen Yue then lured him into his military camp to discuss the use of soldiers together.

古文：悦诈云腹痛，起而徐行，令其婿元洪景斩岳于幕中。
现代文：陈悦诈称自己肚子疼，站起来慢慢走开，让他的女婿元洪景在军帐中将贺拔岳杀死。
English: Chen Yuexu said that he had a stomachache, stood up and slowly walked away, and let his son-in-law, Yuan Hongjing, kill He Batyue in the military account.

古文：朝野莫不痛惜之。
现代文：朝野上下听到他被杀害的消息，无不痛心惋惜。
English: Upon hearing the news that he had been killed, everyone in the morning and evening was filled with sorrow.

古文：赠侍中、太傅、录尚书事、都督关中二十州诸军事、大将军、雍州刺史，谥曰武庄。
现代文：朝廷赠给他侍中、太傅、录尚书事、都督关中二十州诸军事、大将军、雍州刺史等封号，谥号为武壮。
English: The imperial court bestowed upon him the titles of chamberlain, grand chamberlain, recorder of records, military governor of twenty states, great general, and Yongzhou statesman, etc. His nickname was Wu Zhuang.

古文：翟嵩复命于神武，神武下床鸣其颊曰： 除吾病者，卿也，何日忘之！ 
现代文：翟嵩向高欢复命，高欢走下座位指着他的面颊说： 去掉我心头之病的是你呀，我什么时候也忘不了你！ 
English: Hao Song gave his life back to Gao Huan. Gao Huan stepped down from his seat, pointed to his cheek and said, "You are the one who got rid of my heart disease. I will never forget you!"

古文：周保定中，录岳旧德，进爵霍国公，尚周文帝女。侯莫陈悦，代人也。
现代文：后来，贺拔岳的部下收葬了他的尸体，埋葬在雍州北面的石安原，用的是王一级的葬礼。侯莫陈悦，代地人。
English: Later, He Batyue's subordinates collected his body and buried it in Shianyuan, north of Yongzhou, with a first-class funeral. Hou Mo Chen Yue, a local resident.

古文：父婆罗门为驼牛都尉，故悦长于河西。
现代文：父亲婆罗门为驼牛都尉，所以，他在河西长大。
English: His father, Brahman, was a camel captain, so he grew up in the west of the river.

古文：好田猎，便骑射，会牧子作乱，遂归尔硃荣。
现代文：喜好打猎，善于骑马射箭。适逢牧民反叛，他便投奔尔朱荣。
English: He likes to hunt and is good at riding and archery. When the herdsmen rebelled, he joined Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：荣引为府长流参军。
现代文：尔朱荣任他为府长流参军。
English: Er Zhu Rong appointed him as the prefectural governor to join the army.

古文：庄帝初，除金紫光禄大夫，封柏人县侯。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，他被朝廷任命为金紫光禄大夫，封为柏人县侯。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was appointed by the imperial court as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and was named the prince of Baoren County.

古文：尔硃天光之讨关西，荣以悦为天光右厢大都督。
现代文：尔朱天光讨伐关西，尔朱荣命侯莫陈悦为尔朱天光的右厢大都督。
English: Lzhu Tianguang led a crusade against Kansai, and Lzhu Rong's vassal Mo Chen Rong became the right wing grand governor of Lzhu Tianguang.

古文：西伐克获，皆与天光、贺拔岳略同。
现代文：西伐成功的情形，与尔朱天光和贺拔岳的情况大致相同。
English: The success of the westward expedition is roughly the same as that of the expedition to Lzhu Tianguang and Mt.

古文：除鄯州刺史。
现代文：他被朝廷任命为鄯州刺史。
English: He was appointed by the imperial court as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：尔硃荣死后，亦随天光下陇。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，他跟着尔朱天光到达陇地。
English: After the death of Lzhu Rong, he followed Lzhu Tianguang to Shantou.

古文：元晔立，进爵为公，改封白水郡公。
现代文：东海王元晔即皇帝位，给他晋爵为公，改封为白水郡公。
English: The East Sea King Yuan Xuan, that is, the emperor, gave him the title of prince and changed his title to the Prince of Baishui County.

古文：普泰中，除秦州刺史。
现代文：普泰时，任秦州刺史。
English: When Putai was in power, he appointed Qinzhou to write history.

古文：天光之东出，将抗齐神武，悦与岳下陇以应神武，至雍州，会尔硃覆败。
现代文：尔朱天光率军东进，将要抵抗高欢，他与贺拔岳都离开陇中响应高欢。到达雍州，适逢尔朱氏失败。
English: Lzhu Tianguang led the army eastward and was going to resist Gao Huan. He and He Batyue both left Shizhong in response to Gao Huan. When they arrived in Yongzhou, it was time for Lzhu's defeat.

古文：永熙初，加开府仪同三司、都督陇右诸军事，仍兼秦州刺史。
现代文：永熙初年，朝廷加封他为开府仪同三司、都督陇右诸军事，仍兼任秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, the imperial court appointed him as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, the military governor of the capital and the right, and he still served as the Qin State chief historian.

古文：三年，岳召悦共讨曹泥，悦诱岳斩之。
现代文：永熙三年，贺拔岳召请他一起讨伐灵州刺史曹泥。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, He Batyue summoned him to fight the Lingzhou Scythian Caodong together.

古文：岳左右奔散，悦遣人安慰，众皆畏服。
现代文：他诱杀了贺拔岳，贺拔岳的部将逃散，他派人安抚，众人都畏惧服从。
English: He lured Mt. Heybatake to his death, the general of Mt. Heybatake fled, he sent someone to pacify, and everyone was afraid to obey.

古文：悦心犹豫，不即抚纳，乃还入陇，止永洛城。
现代文：他心里很犹豫，不立即安抚接纳，仍回到陇地，驻扎在水洛城。
English: He was very hesitant in his heart, and did not immediately appease and accept, but still returned to Shunde and stationed in Shuiluo City.

古文：岳所部聚于平凉，规还图悦。
现代文：贺拔岳的部下将士聚集在平凉，准备向他进攻。
English: He Baturake's subordinates gathered their soldiers in Pingliang and prepared to attack him.

古文：周文帝时为夏州刺史，众遣奉迎。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰这时任夏州刺史，贺拔岳的部下派人迎接他。
English: At that time, Zhou Wen Diyu Wentei was in charge of the history of Xiazhou, and He Batyue's subordinates sent someone to meet him.

古文：周文至，遂总岳部众并家口入高平城，以自安固。
现代文：宇文泰到平凉，便统领贺拔岳的部下及家属进入高平城，以自我保护。
English: When Uwentai arrived in Pingliang, he led all of He Batyue's subordinates and family members into Gaoping City to protect himself.

古文：乃勒众入陇征悦。悦闻之，弃城南据山水之险。
现代文：宇文泰又率领众人入陇讨伐侯莫陈悦，他听说后，弃城向南占据山水险要地势。
English: After hearing that, he abandoned the city and headed south to occupy the important terrain of the landscape and water hazard.

古文：悦先召南秦州刺史李景和。
现代文：他先召请南秦州刺史李景和。
English: He first summoned Li Jinghe, the governor of South Qin Province.

古文：其夜景和遣人诣周文，密许翻降。
现代文：当夜，景和派人到宇文泰那里，宇文泰秘密同意景和假装投降。
English: That night, Jinghe sent someone to Uwentai, and Uwentai secretly agreed with Jinghe and pretended to surrender.

古文：至暮，景和乃勒其所部，使上驴驼，云： 仪同有教，欲还秦州，守以拒贼。 
现代文：第二天日暮，景和便约束侯莫陈悦的部下，让他们骑上驴和骆驼，说： 侯莫陈悦有命令，想回到秦州，坚守城池以抗拒敌兵。 
English: At dusk the next day, Jing He restrained Hou Mo Chen Yue's subordinates and made them ride donkeys and camels, saying, "Hou Mo Chen Yue has orders to return to Qin State and hold the city to resist the enemy soldiers.

古文：复给帐下云： 仪同欲还秦州，汝等何不装办？ 
现代文：又哄骗陈悦帐下的人，说： 侯莫陈悦想回秦州，你们为何还不赶快准备？ 
English: He also deceived the people under Chen Yue's account, saying: Hou Mo Chen Yue wants to return to Qinzhou, why don't you prepare quickly?

古文：众谓言实，以次相惊，皆散趣秦州。
现代文：众人都信以为真，互相惊扰，纷纷奔向秦州。
English: Many people believed it to be true, scaring each other and rushing to Qinzhou.

古文：景和先驰至城，据门以慰辑之。
现代文：景和先一步来到秦州，站在城门上慰问劝说他们。
English: Jinghe came to Qinzhou first and stood at the city gate to console and persuade them.

古文：悦部众离散，猜畏傍人，不听左右近己。
现代文：侯莫陈悦的部下互相离散，都猜测怀疑周围的人，不让别人靠近自己。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue's subordinates are separated from each other, they all suspect the people around them, and do not let others get close to them.

古文：与其二弟井兒及谋杀岳者八九人，弃军迸走，数日之中，盘回往来，不知所趣。
现代文：侯莫陈悦与他的二弟、儿子，以及杀害贺拔岳的八九个人，离开军队逃走。一连好多天他们都来回徘徊，不知道应该到哪里去。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue, his second brother, his son, and the eighty-nine people who killed He Baturake left the army and fled. For many days, they wandered back and forth, not knowing where to go.

古文：左右劝向灵州，而悦不决。言下陇后恐为人见，乃放马山中，令从者悉步，自乘一骡，欲往灵州。
现代文：左右的人劝他到灵州，他却疑而不决，说是到陇地怕别人看见，便将马匹放入山中，让随从他的人都步行。他自己骑一头骡子，想往灵州去。
English: People around him advised him to go to Lingzhou, but he hesitated. He said that he would go to Handan, but he was afraid of being seen by others, so he put his horses in the mountains and let his followers walk. He himself rode a mule and wanted to go to Lingzhou.

古文：中路追骑将及，缢死野中。
现代文：中途看到追赶他的骑兵将要到来，便自缢在山野中。
English: Midway he saw that the cavalry pursuing him was about to arrive, so he bolted for the hills.

古文：弟息部下，悉见禽杀。
现代文：他的弟弟、儿子和部下，都被捉拿杀死。
English: His brother, his son and his men were all captured and killed.

古文：唯先谋杀岳者悦中兵参军豆卢光，走至灵州，后奔晋阳。
现代文：惟有参与谋杀贺拔岳的中兵参军豆卢光逃至灵州，后来又奔向晋阳。
English: However, the soldiers who participated in the murder of He Baturak fled to Lingzhou and later to Jinyang.

古文：悦自杀岳后，精神恍惚，不复如常。
现代文：侯莫陈悦自从杀害贺拔岳以后，精神恍惚，失去正常。
English: Ever since Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Batyue, she has been in a trance and has lost her sense of normalcy.

古文：恆言： 我睡即梦岳语我 兄欲何处去？ 
现代文：他常说： 我一入睡就梦见贺拔岳对我说 ：老兄你想到哪里去？ 
English: He used to say: As soon as I fall asleep, I dream of Mt. Hebatake saying to me: Dude, where do you want to go?

古文：随逐我不相置。 
现代文：便追赶我，不让我安生。 
English: They chased me and wouldn't let me go.

古文：因此弥不自安，而致败灭。
现代文：因此，常不自安，直到失败死去。
English: As a result, they often do not feel at ease until they fail and die.

古文：雷绍，字道宗，武川镇人也。
现代文：雷绍，字道宗，武川镇人。
English: Resho, member of the Jidoshu sect, from the town of Takekawa.

古文：九岁而孤。有膂力，善骑射。
现代文：九岁失去父亲，有臂力，善于骑马射箭。
English: He lost his father at the age of nine. He has strong arms and is good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：年十八，给事镇府。尝使洛阳。见京都礼义之美，还谓同僚曰： 徒知边备尚武，以图富贵；不谓文学，身之宝也。
现代文：十八岁，任给事镇府，曾出使洛阳，看见京都礼义的美好，回来对同僚们说： 我们只知道崇尚武功，守卫边防，以追求功名富贵。不料想文学才是处世的无价之宝呀。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was appointed to the town government. He was once sent to Luoyang, saw the beauty of Kyoto's etiquette, and came back to his colleagues saying, "We only know how to advocate martial arts, guard the border, and pursue fame and wealth. It's no surprise that literature is the priceless treasure of the world."

古文：生世不学，其犹穴处，何所见焉？ 
现代文：今生不学习，就好像仍住在洞穴里，能见到什么呀？ 
English: If you don't study in this life, it's like you're still living in a cave. What can you see?

古文：遂逃归，辞母求师。
现代文：他便离开军队，辞别母亲，拜师求学。
English: He left the army, said goodbye to his mother and went to school.

古文：经年，通《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：一年时间，通达了《孝经》、《论语》的内容。
English: In a year's time, the content of "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects" was completed.

古文：尝读书至人行莫大于孝，乃投卷叹曰： 吾离违侍养，非人子之道。 
现代文：曾读书读到人的道德没有大于孝敬父母的，便扔下书卷叹息说： 我离开家，不去赡养母亲，不是做儿子的道理啊！ 
English: Once he read in a book that people's morals are no greater than to honor and respect their parents, he threw down the book and sighed, "I left home to support my mother, but that's not what being a son is all about!

古文：即还乡里，躬耕奉养。
现代文：便立即回家耕田养母。
English: He immediately went home to his foster mother in the fields.

古文：遭母忧，哀毁骨立，由是知名。
现代文：母亲去世，他极度悲哀，身体消瘦，因此出名。
English: After his mother's death, he was extremely sad and became famous for his emaciated body.

古文：镇将召补镇佐。
现代文：镇将召请他，任为镇佐。
English: The town will call him and appoint him as a town councillor.

古文：后随贺拔岳征讨，为岳长史。
现代文：后来，他跟随贺拔岳到处征战，任长史。
English: Later, he followed He Baturake to fight everywhere, and was appointed to a long history.

古文：岳有大事，常访而后行。
现代文：贺拔岳每遇重大问题，常常先征求他的意见后再干。
English: Whenever He Batyue encounters a major problem, he is often consulted before taking action.

古文：及齐神武起兵，岳耻居其下。
现代文：高欢起兵，贺拔岳耻于在他之下。
English: Gao Huan raised an army, and He Bi Yue Shixin marched under him.

古文：绍乃劝岳迎孝武西都长安，以顺讨逆。
现代文：雷绍便劝贺拔岳迎接孝武帝到长安，以朝廷的名义讨伐叛逆。
English: Lessau then advised He Batyue to welcome Emperor Xiaowu to Chang'an and fight against the rebels in the name of the imperial court.

古文：岳曰： 吾本意也。 
现代文：贺拔岳说： 这是我的本意啊！ 
English: He Baduyue said: This is my original intention!

古文：后岳信诸将言，欲保关中，坐观成败。
现代文：后来，贺拔岳听信将领们的话，想保有关中，坐观关外战争的成败。
English: Later, He Batyue listened to the words of the generals and wanted to ensure the success or failure of the war.

古文：绍知计不用，请为边州，建功效。
现代文：雷绍看到自己的意见不被采纳，便请求到边境州郡任职，以建功立业。
English: When Ressau saw that his opinion was not accepted, he asked to be appointed to a post in a border state county in order to build a career.

古文：岳曰： 君有毗佐之力，当总大州。 
现代文：贺拔岳对他说 ：你有辅助全局的能力，应当管辖一个大州。 
English: He Batur said to him: You have the ability to assist the overall situation, and should govern a large state.

古文：遂以绍为京兆太守。
现代文：便呈报朝廷，任命雷绍为京兆太守。
English: He then reported to the imperial court and appointed Reishao as the governor of Beijing.

古文：清平理物，甚得人和。
现代文：他在任上，政治清平，处事公道，很得人心。
English: During his time in office, he was popular for his clean politics and fair dealings.

古文：在郡逾年，岳被害。
现代文：在郡任职一年多，贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害。
English: After serving in the county for more than a year, He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：初，绍见岳数与侯莫陈悦宴语，尝谓岳曰： 公其慎之！ 
现代文：早先，他见贺拔岳多次与侯莫陈悦宴饮交谈，曾对贺拔岳说： 您和侯莫陈悦打交道，可要谨慎啊。 
English: Earlier, he saw He Batur repeatedly having banquets and conversations with Hou Mo Chen Yue. He once said to He Batur, "You should be careful when dealing with Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：岳不从，果及于难。
现代文：贺拔岳没有听从。后来，果然被害。
English: Mt. Hebatake did not listen. Later, it was indeed destroyed.

古文：绍乃弃郡，驰赴岳军，与寇洛等迎周文帝。
现代文：他闻讯后放弃本郡，骑马赶赴贺拔岳的军中，与寇洛等将领一起迎来宇文泰。
English: After he heard the news, he gave up his county and rode to the army in Mt. He Batur. Together with Koro and other generals, he welcomed Uwentai.

古文：悦平，以功授大都督、凉州刺史。
现代文：侯莫陈悦被平定，他因为立功被授予大都督、凉州刺史。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue was subdued, and he was awarded the title of Grand Governor and Liangzhou History because of his meritorious service.

古文：绍请留所领兵以助东讨，请单骑赴州。
现代文：他请求率所带领的军队帮助宇文泰向东讨伐高欢，要求单骑回州。
English: He asked the army led by him to help Uwentai to go east to fight Gao Huan, and asked to ride back to the state alone.

古文：刺史李叔仁拥州逆命，绍遂归。
现代文：州刺史李叔仁已拥州独立，背叛朝廷，他只好归来。
English: He had no choice but to return, since Li Shuren, the governor of Shandong Province, had gained independence for the province and betrayed the imperial court.

古文：永熙三年，以绍为渭州刺史，进爵昌国伯。
现代文：永熙三年，朝廷任命他为渭州刺史。晋爵为昌国伯。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou. He was promoted to the rank of Changguobiao.

古文：初，绍为岳长史，周文为岳左丞，及居相，常以恩旧接之。
现代文：当初，他任贺拔岳的长史，宇文泰任贺拔岳的左丞。宇文泰官居相位后，常以有感情的旧交对待他。
English: At the beginning, he was the long history of He Baturake, and Uwentai was the left-hand man of He Baturake. After Uwentai took office, he often treated him as an old friend with feelings.

古文：卒于州。
现代文：他死在渭州刺史的任上。
English: He died in the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：绍性好施，禄赐皆分赡亲故，及死日，无以送终。
现代文：雷绍喜好施舍周济他人，他的俸禄和朝廷的赏赐都分给亲友故交，死的时候，家里竟没有替他办丧事的财产。
English: Ressau liked to give alms and help others. His salary and rewards from the court were distributed to relatives and friends. When he died, the family did not have the money to pay for his funeral.

古文：兼敬信佛道，遣敕其子曰： 吾本乡葬法，必杀犬马，于亡者无益。
现代文：他信奉道教和佛教，临终对儿子说： 咱们家乡埋葬人，一定要杀大马祭殉。这对于死者没有什么好处，你应该停止。
English: He was a believer in Taoism and Buddhism, and on his deathbed he said to his son: "In our hometown, when we bury someone, we must kill the horse and sacrifice it. This is of no benefit to the deceased, you should stop it."

古文：死之日，乡党赴葬，咸共痛惜。
现代文：装殓时给我穿上平时的衣服就行了，丧事一定要省俭。 
English: I just need to wear my usual clothes when decorating, and I must be frugal when it comes to funerals.

古文：鸿宾大鼻眼，多鬓须，黑而且肥，状貌颇异，氐、羌见者皆畏之。
现代文：他被埋葬在长安，天子也穿上素洁的衣服亲自祭吊，赠封他为太尉，并赐给棺木。毛鸿宾，长得大鼻子大眼睛，满脸的络腮胡须，又黑又胖，面貌形状十分怪异，氐族和羌族的人看见他都很害怕。
English: He was buried in Chang'an. Tianzi also dressed in plain clothes and went to the hanging ceremony himself. He was given the title of first lieutenant and given to the coffin. Mao Hongbin, with a big nose and big eyes, a full face of thick beard, was black and fat, with a very strange face shape. The Dai and Dai people were very afraid when they saw him.

古文：加胆略骑射，俶傥不拘小节，昆季之中，尤轻财好施。
现代文：他很有胆略，又善于骑马射箭；倜傥洒脱，不拘小节。在兄弟当中，他最为轻财好施。
English: He was bold, good on horseback and at archery; he was free-spirited and unconstrained. He was the most frivolous of the brothers.

古文：遐虽云早立，而名出其下。
现代文：他的哥哥毛遐虽说较早出来做官，但名望却在他之下。
English: Although his brother Mao Yao became an official earlier, his reputation was lower than his.

古文：及贼起，乡里推为盟主，常与遐一守一战。
现代文：盗贼突起，他被乡亲们推为盟主，常与毛遐配合，一个坚守后方，一个出击作战。
English: The thief jumped up, he was pushed by the villagers to be the leader, often cooperating with the felt, one to hold the rear, one to attack and fight.

古文：后拜岐州刺史、散骑常侍、开国县侯。
现代文：后来，他被朝廷封为岐州刺史、散骑常侍、开国县侯。
English: Later, the imperial court named him as the prince of Qizhou, the knight errant, and the prince of Kaigoku County.

古文：遐笑谓鸿宾曰： 击贼之功，吾不居汝后，至于受赏，汝在吾前，当以德济物，不及汝故。 
现代文：毛遐笑着对他说： 讨伐敌寇的功劳，我不在你的后面。至于朝廷的封赏，你却比我的重。这大概是依靠道德帮助别人方面我不如你的缘故。 
English: Mao Yao smiled and said to him, "I am not behind you in the merit of fighting the enemy bandits. As for the reward of the court, you are heavier than me. This is probably because I am not as good as you in terms of relying on morality to help others.

古文：明帝以鸿宾兄弟所定处多，乃改北地郡为北雍州，鸿宾为刺史。
现代文：孝明帝因鸿宾平定的地方很多，便改北地郡为北雍州，命他为刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaoming changed Beidai County to Beiyang County because there were many places that had been pacified by Hongbin, and ordered him to make history.

古文：诏曰： 此以昼锦荣卿也。 
现代文：朝廷下诏说 ：用这种方法使你锦上添花，增加荣耀啊。 
English: The imperial court decreed: Use this method to add icing to your cake and increase your glory.

古文：改三原县为建中郡，以旌其兄弟。
现代文：又改三原县为建中郡，以表彰他们兄弟的功劳。
English: They also changed Mihara County to Jianzhong County in recognition of their brothers' achievements.

古文：后尔硃天光自关中还洛，夷夏心所忌者，皆将自随。
现代文：后来，尔朱天光从关中返回洛阳，夷族和华夏族心有疑虑的人，都跟着天光至洛阳。
English: Later, Er Zhu Tianguang returned to Luoyang from Guanzhong. The Yi and Huaxia people who had doubts in their hearts all followed Tianguang to Luoyang.

古文：鸿宾亦领乡中壮武二千人以从。
现代文：鸿宾也带着乡里的勇壮二千人相随。
English: The honored guest was also accompanied by two thousand brave men from the countryside.

古文：洛中素闻其名，衣冠贫冗者，竞与之交。
现代文：京城中的人平素都听说过他的大名，不管是达官显贵还是穷儒寒士，都争相与他交往。
English: People in the capital have always heard of his daimyo, and whether they are high-ranking dignitaries or poor, cold-blooded people, they all compete to socialize with him.

古文：寻拜西衮州刺史。
现代文：不久，被封为西兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Xizang State History.

古文：羁寓倦游之辈，四座常满，鸿宾资给衣食，与己悉同。
现代文：那些郁郁不得其志的人不断求见，他家常座无虚席。他送给他们的衣服和饮食，和自己的完全一样。
English: His house was always full of people who wanted to see him, and he gave them clothes and food just like his own.

古文：私物不足，颇有公费。
现代文：自己家里的东西不够送，就动用公费。
English: If they don't have enough to send from home, they use public funds.

古文：转南青州刺史。
现代文：又转任南青州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the post of South Qingzhou chief historian.

古文：未几，徵还，为有司所纠，鸿宾遂逃匿人间。
现代文：不久，被朝廷调回，他被有司纠劾，便躲了起来。
English: Soon, he was transferred back by the court, he was reprimanded by a judge, and then he went into hiding.

古文：月余，特诏原之。
现代文：过了一个多月，朝廷下特诏将他赦免。
English: More than a month later, the Imperial Court issued a special edict to pardon him.

古文：及孝武帝与齐神武有隙，令鸿宾镇潼关，为西道之寄。
现代文：孝武帝与高欢有矛盾，命他镇守潼关，作西部道路的寄托。
English: Emperor Xiaowu had a conflict with Gao Huan, and ordered him to guard Shaoguan and be the anchor of the western road.

古文：车驾西幸，浆糗乏绝，侍官三二日间，唯饮涧水。
现代文：孝武帝西奔长安，沿途吃的东西断绝，侍从的官吏常常三两天只靠喝山涧的水过日子。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu was on his way to Chang'an, he stopped eating along the way. The officials who served him often lived for three or two days on nothing but drinking water from the mountain stream.

古文：鸿宾奉献酒食，迎于稠桑，文武从者，始解饥渴。
现代文：鸿宾奉献酒肉食品，将孝武帝迎到稠桑，跟随的文武官员才解除了饥渴。
English: Hongbin dedicated wine, meat and food to welcome Emperor Xiaowu to Zhusang, and the civil and military officials who followed only relieved their hunger and thirst.

古文：武帝把其手曰： 寒松劲草，所望于卿也。
现代文：孝武帝拉着他的手说 ：岁寒识松柏，疾风知劲草，这是我所希望你能做到的。
English: Emperor Xiaowu took him by the hand and said, "I hope you can be as wise as a pine tree in the winter and as wise as a rushing wind in the spring.

古文：事平之日，宁忘主人。 
现代文：天下太平之后，我怎么能忘掉你呢！ 
English: How can I forget you after the world is at peace!

古文：仍留守潼关。
现代文：仍命他留守潼关。
English: He remained in Shouguan with his life.

古文：后神武来寇，见禽至并州，忧恚卒。
现代文：后来高欢前来进攻，他被抓获，解送到并州，忧虑愤恨，因而死去。
English: Later, Gao Huan came to attack, he was captured, deported to Bianzhou, worried and angry, and died.

