古文：权德舆，字载之。
现代文：权德舆，字载之。
English: Quan Deyin, it is written.

古文：父皋，见《卓行传》。
现代文：父名皋。
English: His father's name was Tsune.

古文：德舆七岁居父丧，哭踊如成人。
现代文：德舆七岁时父亲去世，他哀哭跪拜一如成人。
English: When he was seven years old, his father died, and he cried and bowed down like an adult.

古文：未冠，以文章称诸儒间。
现代文：不到二十岁，他的文章就受到读书人的称赞了。
English: Before he was twenty, his writing was being praised by readers.

古文：韩洄黜陟河南，辟置幕府。
现代文：韩泗任河南黜陟使，召权德舆为自己幕府。
English: Han Yu served as the envoy to Henan Province, and summoned Quan Demu to form his own shogunate.

古文：复从江西观察使李兼府为判官。
现代文：后又跟随江西观察使李兼，在他府中任判官。
English: Later, he followed Li Jian, the Jiangxi observation envoy, and served as a judge in his government.

古文：杜佑、裴胄交辟之。
现代文：杜佑、裴胄交相推荐他。
English: Du You and Pei Yao's friends recommended him.

古文：德宗闻其材，召为太常博士，改左补阙。
现代文：德宗听说他的才能，召他任太常博士，改为左补阙。
English: Hearing of his talent, Emperor Dezong called him to serve as Taizang Doctor and changed his title to Zuo Zuo.

古文：贞元八年，关东、淮南、浙西州县大水，坏庐舍，漂杀人。
现代文：贞元八年，关东、淮南、浙西州县发大水，冲坏了房屋，淹死了好些人。
English: In the eighth year of the Zhengyuan era, large floods occurred in Guandong, Huainan, and Xizhou counties of Zhejiang, destroying houses and drowning many people.

古文：德舆建言： 江、淮田一善熟，则旁资数道，故天下大计，仰于东南。
现代文：权德舆向皇帝建议 ：江、淮一带的田地，若有一次好收成就能够支援好几道的食用，所以天下大计，一向仰仗东南。
English: Quan Demu advised the emperor that the fields around the Yangtze River and Huai River could support several kinds of food if there was a good harvest. Therefore, the world has always relied on the southeast.

古文：今霪雨二时，农田不开，逋亡日众。
现代文：现在两个季度淫雨不止，农田无法耕种，离乡求生的日渐增多。
English: Now, the rain has continued for two quarters, farmland cannot be cultivated, and the number of people leaving their hometowns to survive is increasing day by day.

古文：宜择群臣明识通方者，持节劳徠，问人所疾苦，蠲其租入，与连帅守长讲求所宜。
现代文：最好能在群臣中挑选能明察全局且有胆识权宜处理的人，去持节抚慰，深入了解百姓的疾苦，免其租赋，与当地连帅守长研究赈济办法。
English: It is best to select a person among the ministers who can clearly see the overall situation and have the courage to deal with it expediently, to comfort the people, deeply understand the sufferings of the people, exempt them from rent, and study the relief measures with the local company commander and warden.

古文：赋取于人，不若藏于人之固也。 
现代文：赋税从百姓中征来，现时不如藏在百姓手中更为有利。 
English: At the present time, it is more advantageous to collect taxes from the people than to hide them from the people.

古文：帝乃遣奚陟等四人循行慰抚。
现代文：皇帝于是派奚陟等四人巡察慰抚。
English: The emperor then sent four people, including Xing, to inspect and comfort him.

古文：裴延龄以巧幸进，判度支，德舆上疏斥言： 延龄以常赋正额用度未尽者为羡利，以夸己功；用官钱售常平杂物，还取其直，号别贮羡钱，因以罔上；边军乏，不禀粮，召祸疆场，其事不细。
现代文：裴延龄因善于奉迎而进官，管理财政。德舆上疏斥责说 ：裴延龄将常赋中计划支出未用尽的作为羡利进奉，以夸耀自己的功劳；用官钱收购一般杂物，又卖出取利，称之为 别贮羡钱 ，以此欺骗皇上；边军粮饷匮乏，他不运粮过去，以致招来边祸，此非小事。
English: Pei Yanling became an official and managed the finances because he was good at welcoming guests. German public opinion rebuked: Pei Yanling used the unspent funds from the planned expenditure as a gift to boast of his own merits; he used official money to purchase general miscellaneous items and sold them for a profit, calling it a gift to deceive the emperor; the border troops were short of food, and he did not transport the food, thus causing a disaster on the border, which was no small matter.

古文：陛下疑为流言，胡不以新利召延龄，质核本末，择中朝臣按覆边资。
现代文：陛下怀疑以上均为流言，可就新利为由召延龄来，查核其收支明细；另选朝臣去查核边域费用开支情况。
English: His Majesty suspects that all of the above is a rumor, and may, on the grounds of new profits, extend his term of office to check the details of his income and expenditure; he may also select a courtier to check the expenditure of border expenses.

古文：如言者不谬，则邦国之务，不宜委非其人。 
现代文：如果传言的事确实，则邦国的要务，不可交给不正派的人。 
English: If the rumours are true, the state's top job cannot be given to a crook.

古文：疏奏，不省。
现代文：奏疏送上去，没有下文。
English: There's no chorus.

古文：迁起居舍人。
现代文：权德舆升任起居舍人。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chief householder.

古文：岁中，兼知制诰，进中书舍人。
现代文：兼掌制诰之事，升为中书舍人。
English: In addition, he was promoted to the post of assistant professor of Chinese literature.

古文：当是时，帝亲揽庶政，重除拜，凡命诸朝，皆手制中下。
现代文：当时，皇帝亲理政务，十分重视除拜官职，凡有任命，必定亲自批示下发。
English: At that time, the emperor was personally in charge of government affairs and attached great importance to the removal of officials. Any appointment must be personally issued.

古文：始，德舆知制诰，而徐岱给事中，高郢为舍人。
现代文：起初，权德舆掌管制诰事，徐岱为给事中，高郢为舍人。
English: At the beginning, Quan De was in charge of controlling affairs, Xu Xi was in charge of giving affairs, and Gao Yao was in charge of giving up affairs.

古文：居数岁，岱卒，郢知礼部，德舆独直两省，数旬一还舍，乃上书言： 左右掖垣，承天子诰命，奉行详覆，各有攸司。
现代文：几年后，徐岱死，高郢调任礼部，权德舆一人担负了中书、门下两省之事，忙得几十天才能回一次家。于是上书皇帝： 中书、门下左右两省，承旨拟制天子诰命，奉行详覆，各有所司。
English: A few years later, Xu Xi died, Gao Xi was transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Guan Deyin alone shouldered the affairs of Zhongshu and the two provinces under his tutelage, and he was so busy that he could not return home for dozens of days at a time. Therefore, the emperor wrote: Zhongshu and the two provinces under his tutelage, each has a department to carry out the details of the imitation of God's will.

古文：旧制，分曹十员，以相防检。
现代文：旧制，分部治事共有十人，以备相互监督检查。
English: Under the old system, there were a total of ten people in charge of branch affairs, in preparation for mutual supervision and inspection.

古文：大抵事有所壅，则吏得为非。四方闻者，或以朝廷为乏士，要重之司，不宜久废。 
现代文：一般来说，若事有所壅闭，官吏有了干违法之事的机会，四方之士如得知这种情况，会认为朝中缺乏任事之人。政要部门不宜长期空缺。 
English: Generally speaking, if there is a cover-up and officials have the opportunity to do illegal things, the Quartet members, if they learn of this situation, will think that there is a lack of people in charge in the DPRK. Political departments should not be vacant for a long time.

古文：帝曰： 非不知卿之劳，但择如卿者未得其人耳。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我不是不知道你的辛苦，但想觅一个像你一样的人，还没找到啊。 
English: The emperor said, "I'm not unaware of your hard work, but I've been looking for someone like you, and I haven't found you yet.

古文：久之，知礼部贡举，真拜侍郎。
现代文：很久以后，权德舆主管礼部贡举、实授侍郎。
English: After a long time, Guan Deyi was appointed as the head of the ceremonial department, and was given the title of chamberlain.

古文：凡三岁，甄品详谛，所得士相继为公卿、宰相。
现代文：三年来，甄选评量极为仔细，他所选拔的人相继都任公卿、宰相。
English: Over the past three years, the selection has been evaluated very carefully, and the people he has selected have successively served as Kugyo and Prime Minister.

古文：取明经初不限员。
现代文：取明经不限名额由此始。
English: This is the beginning of the process of selecting an open-ended number of candidates.

古文：十九年，大旱，德舆因是上陈阙政曰： 陛下斋心减膳，闵恻元元，告于宗庙，祷诸天地，一物可祈，必致其礼，一士有请，必听其言，忧人之心可谓至已。
现代文：贞元十九年，天大旱，权德舆即此上书陈政事： 陛下净心精简膳食，同情怜悯百姓，到宗庙向祖先报告求助，再向天地祝祷，请求赐福。凡有可祈求之物，定致敬礼；一个士人有所请，定要详听其言，这样，关心他人之心可称完善。
English: In the 19th year of Zhengyuan, when there was a severe drought, Guan Deyin wrote the following to Chen Zhengji: Your Majesty, with a pure heart, streamline your diet, sympathize and pity the people, go to the ancestral temple to report to the ancestors for help, and then pray to heaven and earth to ask for blessings. If there is anything to pray for, set a tribute; if a scholar has a request, be sure to listen to his words in detail. In this way, the heart of caring for others can be called perfect.

古文：臣闻销天灾者脩政术，感人心者流惠泽，和气洽，则祥应至矣。
现代文：臣听说，消化天灾的，定要修善其政；感召人心的，定要广施惠泽。祥和之气洽比，自然会有祥瑞的应和。
English: The minister heard that those who digest natural disasters must improve their politics; those who inspire people must provide benefits to the public. If the atmosphere is peaceful, there will naturally be a harmonious response.

古文：畿甸之内，大率赤地而无所望，转徙之人，毙踣道路，虑种麦时，种不得下。
现代文：王城内外，大部分都成了荒地，转徙逃荒的人，不少都死于道路。担心到种麦时，无种可下。
English: In and around Wangcheng, most of the land has become wasteland, and many people who migrated to escape the famine have died on the roads. When it comes to planting wheat, there is no place to go.

古文：宜诏在所裁留经用，以种贷民。
现代文：最好诏令各地根据情况留下所需之种子，到时贷给百姓。
English: It is best to order all regions to leave the necessary seeds according to the situation, and then lend them to the people.

古文：今兹租赋及宿逋远贷，一切蠲除。
现代文：今年的租赋以及过去的欠债，一律均免除。
English: This year's rent, as well as past debts, have all been waived.

古文：设不蠲除，亦无可敛之理，不如先事图之，则恩归于上矣。
现代文：即使不免，也没理由收取。不如先做出决定，百姓就会感恩皇上。
English: Even if unavoidable, there is no reason to collect. It is better to make a decision first, and the people will be grateful to the emperor.

古文：十四年夏旱，吏趣常赋，至县令为民殴辱者，不可不察。 
现代文：以前十四年夏天的旱灾，官吏催促常年的租赋，以致发生县令被百姓殴打侮辱的事，不可不引以为戒。 
English: During the drought in the summer of fourteen years ago, officials urged long-term rent, resulting in the county magistrate being beaten and insulted by the people.

古文：又言： 漕运本济关中，若转东都以西缘道仓廪，悉入京师，督江、淮所输以备常数，然后约太仓一岁计，斥其余者以粜于民，则时价不踊而蓄藏者出矣。 
现代文：权德舆又说 ：漕运本是为关中需要而设。假如改将东都以西诸道的仓储都运入京师，再督促江、淮所缴纳的备足常数，然后估量太仓留一年的食用，多出来的全都卖给百姓，那时价不会涨得太高而储蓄的人愿意卖出来了。 
English: Quan Demu also said, "Cable transport was originally set up for the needs of Guanzhong. If, instead, the warehouses of the East and West were all transported to Beijing, and the reserve constants paid by Jiang and Huai were urged, and then the food that had been stored for one year was estimated, and the excess was all sold to the people, then the price would not rise too high and the savers would be willing to sell.

古文：又言： 大历中，一缣直钱四千，今止八百，税入如旧，则出于民者五倍其初。
现代文：税收仍与过去一样，百姓实际缴纳的则是以前的五倍。四方之官热中于上献，结果是为国家聚怨。
English: Taxes are still the same as in the past, but people are actually paying five times more than before. Officials in all four parties are enthusiastic about the donation, and as a result, they are gathering grievances for the country.

古文：四方锐于上献，为国掊怨，广军实之求，而兵有虚籍，剥取多方，虽有心计巧历，能商功利，其于割股啖口，困人均也。 
现代文：又广求军车器械等物，而兵籍中不少虚额，多方剥取。虽有心计巧法，能贾功利，但其做法有如割股肉塞口福，使大家都陷入困顿。 
English: In addition, military vehicles, equipment and other items were widely demanded, while many of the military ranks were stripped of fake amounts. Although there were clever tricks that could be beneficial, their practice was like cutting the thigh meat and stuffing the mouth, causing everyone to get into trouble.

古文：又言： 比经绌放者，自谓抆拭无期，坐为匪人，以动和气。而冬荐官逾三年未受命，衣食既空，溘然就毙，此亦穷人之一端也。
现代文：又说 ：近年来遭绌官外放的，自以为不可能再磨灭以前的过错，以致自暴自弃；冬荐官过了三年都未授具体官职，以致衣食皆尽，溘然而逝，这也是使人穷困的一个方面。
English: He also said: In recent years, those who had been released by eunuchs thought that it was impossible to erase their previous mistakes, so they gave up; after three years, the winter recommendation officers did not grant specific official positions, so they were exhausted and died, which is also an aspect that makes people poor.

古文：近陛下洗宥绌放者，或起为二千石，其徒更相勉，知牵复可望。
现代文：近来陛下为被绌放的洗宽恕罪，有的起用为二千石。其他与之相类的人则相互勉励，知道复官有望。
English: Recently, His Majesty pardoned those who were dismissed, and some of them were appointed with 2,000 koku, while others like them encouraged each other, knowing that there was hope for reinstatement.

古文：惟因而弘之，使人人自效。 
现代文：就此推而广之，可使人人自我约束。 
English: By extension, this would allow everyone to exercise self-restraint.

古文：帝颇采用之。
现代文：他的这些建议，皇帝很多都采用了。
English: The emperor adopted many of his suggestions.

古文：宪宗元和初，历兵部侍郎，坐累，徙太子宾客，俄还前官。
现代文：宪宗元和初年，曾任兵部侍郎，因牵连获罪，降为太子宾客，不久又回任前官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, he was once the attendant of the military department, but he was implicated and convicted, reduced to the prince's guest, and soon returned to his former position.

古文：时泽潞卢从史诈傲，浸不制，其父虔卒京师，而成德王承宗父死求袭，德舆谏，以为： 欲变山东，先择昭义之帅。
现代文：那时，泽潞的卢从史虚诈而又傲岸，渐渐不受制约，他的父亲卢虔死于京师。成德的王承宗父亲死了，上书请求承袭父职。权德舆入谏，他认为： 如想改变山东形势，先要选好昭义的将帅。
English: At that time, Lu Zehui's rise from a history of deception and arrogance gradually became unchecked. His father Lu Qian died in Beijing. Wang Chengzong of Chengde, whose father had died, sent a letter requesting to inherit his father's position. Guan Demu, he thought: If you want to change the situation in Shandong, you must first choose a good general.

古文：从史拔自军校，偃蹇不法，今可因其丧，选守臣代之。
现代文：卢从史从军校选拔上来，傲慢不遵法令。现在可以就其父丧期，另选守臣把他替下来。
English: Lu Congshi was selected from a military school and arrogantly disobeyed the law. Now he can replace his father during the period of his father's death and choose a retainer.

古文：成德习俗既久，当制以渐，许成德之请则可，许昭义则不可。 
现代文：成德父死子袭已成习俗，该慢慢地制约他们。可以同意成德的要求，而昭义的要求则不可应允。 
English: It has become a custom for Chengde's father and dead son to attack each other, and they should be slowly restrained. Chengde's request can be agreed to, while Zhao Yi's request cannot be met.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：及王承宗叛，从史乃诡计以挠王师，兵老无功。
现代文：及至王承宗叛变，卢从史设诡计阻挠王师，费时而无功。
English: As far as Wang Chengzong's rebellion, Lu Zongshi set up a ruse to obstruct Wang Shi, which was time-consuming and fruitless.

古文：德舆复请赦承宗，徙从史。
现代文：权德舆再次请求赦免王承宗，贬徙卢从史。
English: Guan Deyu once again requested Wang Chengzong to be pardoned and Lu Congshi to be exiled.

古文：后皆略如所料。
现代文：后来的事都如他所预料。
English: What happened next was just as he had predicted.

古文：会裴垍病，德舆自太常卿拜礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：其时宰相裴耹有病，权德舆从太常卿委任为礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: At that time, the Prime Minister Pei Jiong was ill, and Quan Deyi was appointed by Tai Changqing as the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：王锷繇河中入朝，求兼宰相，李籓以为不可，德舆亦奏： 平章事非序进宜得，比方镇带宰相，必有大忠若勋，否则强不制者，不得已与之。
现代文：王锷由河中入朝，求兼任宰相，李藩认为不可以，权德舆也奏言： 平章事一职不是逐步升迁可得。方镇而兼任宰相者，定要大忠有大功者，此外强悍不听制约的，不得已而给予以羁勒。
English: Wang Qian entered the imperial court from the middle of the river and asked to be concurrently appointed as prime minister, but the Li clan thought it was not possible, and the right and virtue public opinion also made a report: It is not possible to be promoted step by step. If you are concurrently appointed as prime minister, you must be very loyal and have great merits. In addition, if you are strong and do not listen to restrictions, you will be given detention as a last resort.

古文：今锷无功，又非姑息时，一假此名，以开后人，不可。 
现代文：现在王锷无功，又不是姑息之时。若一开此例，以后就无以禁止了。 
English: Now is not the time for complacency. If this example is set, there will be no way to ban it in the future.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：皇帝乃作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：董溪、于皋谟以运粮使盗军兴，流岭南，帝悔其轻，诏中使半道杀之。
现代文：董溪、于皋以运粮使之便盗取军需，判流放岭南，皇帝后悔判得太轻，诏令中使在半路上杀了他们。
English: The emperor regretted that the sentence was too light and ordered the envoys to kill them in the middle of the road.

古文：德舆谏： 溪等方山东用兵，乾没库财，死不偿责。
现代文：权德舆劝止说 ：董溪等人趁山东用兵之时，吞没军库财物，虽死也不足偿责。
English: Guan Deyin advised: "Dong Xi and others took advantage of Shandong to use soldiers, devouring the military treasury and property. Even if they died, it would not be enough to compensate for their responsibility."

古文：陛下以流斥太轻，当责臣等缪误，审正其罪，明下诏书，与众同弃，则人人惧法。
现代文：陛下若认为流放太轻，应该责备臣等的错误，审定明确其罪责，公开颁发诏书，与公众共同鄙弃他们。这样就能使人人警惕。
English: If His Majesty thinks that the banishment is too light, he should reprove the error of his ministers, determine their guilt, publicly issue an edict, and despise them together with the public. This will make everyone alert.

古文：臣知已事不诤，然异时或有此比，要须有司论报，罚一劝百，孰不甘心。 
现代文：臣知道已然之事不再诤谏，不过将来也许会有类似之事，因此须有司再予评论报请，使能罚一儆百，人人甘心。 
English: The minister knew that what had happened was no longer shocking, but that there might be something similar in the future, so it was necessary for the department to comment on the request again, so that the penalty could be one hundred, and everyone was willing.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：皇帝十分同意。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：尝问政之宽猛孰先，对曰： 唐家承隋苛虐，以仁厚为先。
现代文：皇帝曾向权德舆询问为政宽严哪一种该先行。权德舆回答： 唐家继隋而兴，隋时苛虐，就该以仁厚为主。
English: The emperor once asked Guan Deyin which kind of political leniency and severity should be the first. Guan Deyin replied: the Tang Dynasty followed the Sui Dynasty and prospered, while the Sui Dynasty was harsh and cruel, so benevolence should be the main.

古文：太宗皇帝见《明堂图》，始禁鞭背，列圣所循，皆尚德教。
现代文：太宗皇帝曾见到《明堂针灸图》，得知人五脏皆近背，若针灸有误，会致人死命，因而禁止鞭背之刑。列圣所遵行的，都是崇尚德教。
English: Emperor Taizong once saw the "Mingtang Acupuncture Chart" and learned that all five human organs are close to the back, and if acupuncture is wrong, it will cause death, thus prohibiting the punishment of whipping the back.

古文：故天宝大盗窃发，俄而夷灭，盖本朝之化，感人心之深也。 
现代文：所以天宝年大盗虽曾横行一时，但都不久即遭夷灭。都是因为本朝的教化，感人至深的缘故。 
English: Therefore, although the Heavenly Treasures Year Thieves were rampant for a while, they were all destroyed soon. It was all because of the enlightenment of this dynasty, which was deeply moving.

古文：帝曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：的确如你所说的一样。 
English: The emperor said, "It is indeed as you say."

古文：德舆善辨论，开陈古今本末，以觉悟人主。
现代文：权德舆善于论辩，常能将古今之事详加剖析，陈述本末利害，用来启发或警惕皇帝。
English: The authoritative and moral public opinion is good at argumentation, and can often analyze ancient and modern things in detail and state the ultimate interests, which can be used to inspire or alert the emperor.

古文：为辅相，宽和不为察察名。
现代文：他身为辅政的宰相，为人宽和不追求自己的名声。
English: As a deputy prime minister, he is broad-minded and does not pursue his own reputation.

古文：李吉甫再秉政，帝又自用李绛参赞大机。
现代文：李吉甫再次执政，皇帝又自己决定用李绛参与研究大政方针。
English: Li Jifu was once again in power, and the emperor himself decided to use Li Yong to participate in the study of major policies.

古文：是时，帝切于治，事钜细悉责宰相。
现代文：这时，皇帝求治心切，不论大小事都交与宰相。
English: At this time, the emperor was anxious to govern, and referred all matters, large and small, to the prime minister.

古文：吉甫、绛议论不能无持异，至帝前遽言亟辩，德舆从容不敢有所轻重，坐是罢为本官。
现代文：李吉甫、李绛容不得不同意见，常在皇帝面前说三道四。权德舆乃极谨慎不敢有所轻重。
English: Li Jifu and Li Jie could not tolerate dissenting opinions and often spoke ill of others in front of the emperor.

古文：以检校吏部尚书留守东都，进扶风郡公。
现代文：皇帝又因他缄默不言，有亏相职而罢相，以检校吏部尚书之职留守东都，晋爵扶风郡公。
English: Because of his silence, the emperor also dismissed him from his post, and he stayed in Dongdu with the post of inspecting school officials, and was promoted to the post of Fufeng County governor.

古文：于頔以子杀人，自囚，亲戚莫敢过门，朝廷无为请者。
现代文：那时，于由页因儿子杀了人，自己把自己囚禁起来，他的亲戚没一个再敢上他的门，朝廷中也没人为他说情的。
English: At that time, because of his son's murder, Yu Yufei imprisoned himself. None of his relatives dared to come to his door again, and no one at the court had any feelings for him.

古文：德舆将行，言于帝曰： 頔之罪既贷不竟，宜因赐宽诏。 
现代文：权德舆在离京前对皇帝说 ：于由页的罪既然蒙恩宽恕不再追究，应该写一宽恕诏赐他。 
English: Before leaving the capital, Quan Deyu said to the emperor: Since Yu Yufei's crime has been forgiven and will no longer be investigated, a pardon should be written and given to him.

古文：帝曰： 然，卿为吾过谕之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 不错，你提醒了我的疏忽。 
English: The emperor said: That's right, you reminded me of my negligence.

古文：复拜太常卿，徙刑部尚书。
现代文：又任权德舆为太常卿，调任刑部尚书。
English: He also appointed Quan Deyu as Tai Changqing and transferred him to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：先是，诏许孟容、蒋乂刊汇格敕，既成，上之，留禁中；德舆请出其书，与侍郎刘伯刍参复研考，定三十篇奏上。
现代文：起先，皇帝曾诏令许孟容、蒋耣汇集刊印格敕，书辑成后，进送皇帝审阅，后来留在禁中不下发。权德舆请求将书稿发出来，他与侍郎刘伯刍复核研究。最后选定三十篇奏上。
English: At first, the emperor had ordered Xu Meng Rong and Chiang Kai-shek to compile and publish the book. After the book was compiled, it was sent to the emperor for review, and later it was left in the ban without being issued. Quan Demu requested that the manuscript be sent out, and he and his attendant Liu Bo Xuan reviewed and studied it. Finally, thirty articles were selected.

古文：复检校吏部尚书，出为山南西道节度使。
现代文：后来，权德舆又被委任检校吏部尚书，出京任山南西道节度使。
English: Later, Quan Demu was appointed as the inspector of schools, and went to Beijing to serve as the envoy of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：后二年，以病乞还，卒于道。
现代文：两年后，因病请求还乡，死在返乡路上，年六十岁。
English: Two years later, he requested to return to his hometown due to illness, and died on his way back, at the age of sixty.

古文：年六十，赠尚书左仆射，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠尚书左仆射，赐谥为 文 。
English: Afterward, he gave Shang Shuxu to Zuofu Jie, and bestowed on him the imperial scepter.

古文：德舆生三岁，知变四声，四岁能赋诗，积思经术，无不贯综。
现代文：权德舆三岁时就懂得四声之变，四岁就能赋诗。他潜心研究经术，无不融汇贯通。
English: At the age of three, Quan Demu knew how to play the four-part harmony, and at the age of four, he was able to compose a poem. He devoted himself to studying the art of reading, and was able to integrate everything.

古文：自始学至老，未曾一日去书不观。
现代文：从他开始学习，一直到老，没有一天不读书。
English: From the time he began to study until his old age, there was never a day when he did not read.

古文：尝著论，辨汉所以亡，西京以张禹，东京以胡广，大指有补于世。
现代文：他曾写文章论述汉亡的原因，西汉因张禹、东汉因胡广，大旨对世有补。
English: He once wrote an article on the reasons for the death of the Han Dynasty, the West Han Dynasty because of Zhang Yu, and the East Han Dynasty because of Hu Guang, the gist of which is helpful to the world.

古文：其文雅正赡缛，当时公卿侯王功德卓异者，皆所铭纪，十常七八。
现代文：德舆的文章达练精密。当时公卿侯王中功德卓越的人，都有所铭记，大约有十之七八。
English: At that time, people of outstanding merit in the court nobles and princes were all remembered, about seventy-eight out of ten.

古文：虽动止无外饰，其酝藉风流，自然可慕。
现代文：他居家或处世，从不矫饰，但自有一种蕴藉风流，令人仰慕。
English: Whether at home or out and about, he is never pretentious, but he has his own style, which is admirable.

古文：贞元、元和间，为搢绅羽仪云。
现代文：贞元、元和年间，成为缙绅士子的表率。
English: In the years of Zhenyuan, Yuan and He, he became a model of a gentleman.

