古文：秦召燕王，燕王欲往。
现代文：秦国召见燕昭王，燕王想要去。
English: Qin State summoned Yan Zhao Wang, Yan Wang wanted to go.

古文：苏代约燕王曰： 楚得枳而国亡，齐得宋而国亡，齐、楚不得以有枳、宋事秦者，何也?
现代文：苏代阻止燕王说： 楚国虽得枳地却使国土沦丧，齐国虽得宋地也使国土沦丧，齐、楚两国都不是因为有了枳地、宋地就去侍奉秦国，为什么呢？
English: In the Su Dynasty, Yan Wang was stopped by the Su Dynasty, who said, "Although the Chu Kingdom gained Shantian, it lost its territory. Although the Qi Kingdom gained Song, it also lost its territory. Both Qi and Chu did not serve the Qin Kingdom because they had Shantian and Song. Why?

古文：是则有功者，秦之深雠也。
现代文：这是因为取得战功的国家，都是秦国最仇视的。
English: This is because the countries that have made war achievements are the most hated by Qin.

古文：秦取天下，非行义也，暴也。
现代文：秦国夺取天下，不是推行仁义，而是实施强暴。
English: Qin conquered the world, not by virtue of promoting justice, but by violence.

古文： 秦之行暴于天下，正告楚曰： 蜀地之甲，轻舟浮于汶，乘夏水而下江，五日而至郢。
现代文：秦国在天下实施强暴，曾直言不讳地告诉楚国说： 蜀地的军队，驾快船沿水而行，凭借夏天盛涨的江水进入长江，五天就可到达郢都。
English: The Qin state, which carried out violence throughout the world, once bluntly told the Chu state: The Shu army, driving a fast boat along the water, entered the Yangtze River with the help of the summer's rising river water, and could reach the capital in five days.

古文：汉中之甲，乘舟出于巴，乘夏水而下汉，四日而至五渚。
现代文：驻扎在汉中的军队，乘船从大巴山出发，依靠夏天盛涨的江水进入搜水，四天就能到达五涪。
English: The troops stationed in Hanzhong, starting from Dabashan by boat and relying on the summer rising river water to enter the water search, can reach Wuzhong in four days.

古文：寡人积甲宛，东下随，知者不及谋，勇者不及怒，寡人如射隼矣。
现代文：寡人在宛地集结军队，向东进睪随地，聪明的人来不及谋划，勇敢的人来不及发怒，寡人这样做就像射小鹰一样容易。
English: For some men it is as easy as shooting an eagle, to assemble an army in the right place, to march eastward, and to conquer the whole world. A wise man has no time to plan, a brave man has no time to be angry.

古文：王乃待天下之攻函谷，不亦远乎? 
现代文：楚王却要等待天下诸侯攻打函谷，这和实际情况不是相差得太远了吗？ 
English: However, King Chu had to wait for the world's lords to attack Hakodate. Isn't this too far from the actual situation?

古文：楚王为是之故，十七年事秦。
现代文：楚王因为这个缘故，十七年来一直侍奉秦国。
English: For this reason, King Chu has been serving Qin for seventeen years.

古文： 秦正告韩曰： 我起乎少曲，一日而断太行。
现代文：秦王也曾直言不讳地告诉韩国说： 我从少曲起兵，一天之内就可以阻断太行要道。
English: Qin Wang also bluntly told South Korea that: "I will raise an army from Shao Qu, and within one day I will be able to block the main road.

古文：我起乎宜阳而触平阳，二日而莫不尽繇。
现代文：我从宜阳起兵直达平阳，二天之内，六国没有不感到动摇的。
English: My troops set out from Yiyang and directly attacked Pyonyang. Within two days, the situation in all parts of South Korea was no longer stable.

古文：我离两周而触郑，五日而国举。 
现代文：我离开两周直逼郑地，五天时间就可以攻占整个韩国。 
English: My army will cross the east and west to attack Xinzheng in two weeks, and in five days I will conquer the whole of South Korea.

古文：韩氏以为然，故事秦。
现代文：韩国认为是这样，因此就开始侍奉秦国。
English: South Korea thought he had a point, so he served Qin.

古文： 秦正告魏曰： 我举安邑，塞女戟，韩氏、太原卷。
现代文： 秦王又直言不讳地告诉魏国说： 我攻下安邑，阻塞女戟要道，再断韩国、太行的交通。
English: Qin Wang also bluntly told Wei Guo that: I captured An'yun, blocked the important road of Niang, and then cut off the traffic of South Korea and Taihang.

古文：我下枳，道南阳、封、冀，包两周，乘夏水，浮轻舟，强弩在前，銛戈在后。决荣口，魏无大梁；决白马之口，魏无济阳；决宿胥之口，魏无虚、顿丘。
现代文：我从枳地进发，取道南阳、封地、冀地，包围两周，趁着夏天盛涨的大水，乘着快船，强劲的弓弩在前面开道，锋利的长戈在后面随行，掘开荥泽河口，魏国就将失去太梁；掘开自马河口，魏国就没有了济阳；掘开宿胥河口，魏国就会丧失虚地、顿丘。
English: I set out from Handan, taking the road to Nanyang, Fief and Hebei, and encircled it for two weeks. Taking advantage of the summer's rising water, I took a fast boat, with a strong bow and arrow opening the way in front and a sharp naggo following behind. If the Hunze estuary is excavated, Wei will lose Tai Liang; if the Zima estuary is excavated, Wei will no longer have Jiyang; if the Suqian estuary is excavated, Wei will lose the empty land and the hill.

古文：陆攻则击河内，水攻则灭大梁。 
现代文：在陆地上进攻，可以攻破河内，在水路进攻，就可以灭掉大梁。 
English: If we fight on land, we can attack Hanoi, and if we attack by water, we can destroy the girders.

古文：魏氏以为然，故事秦。
现代文：魏国认为是这样，因此就去侍奉秦国。
English: The State of Wei thought he was right, so he served the State of Qin.

古文： 秦欲攻安邑，恐齐救之，则以宋委于齐，曰： 宋王无道，为木人以写寡人，射其面。
现代文：秦国想攻打安邑，又担心齐国来救援，就把宋国抛给了齐国，秦王说： 宋王不行君道，制做一个木头人，画上寡人的模样，射木人的脸。
English: Qin wanted to attack An'yur, but feared that Qi would come to the rescue, so he abandoned Song to Qi. The Qin king said: "Song cannot be a monarch, so he made a wooden man, painted the appearance of a giant, and shot the face of a wooden man."

古文：寡人地绝兵远，不能攻也。
现代文：寡人的国土与宋国隔绝，军队远离，不能进攻宋国。
English: Many people's lands were cut off from Song, and the army was far away, so they could not attack Song.

古文：王苟能破宋有之，寡人如自得之。 
现代文：大王如果能攻破宋国并占有它，寡人就如同自己得到了宋国一样。 
English: King Qi, if you can defeat the Song Dynasty and take it as your own, then I will be as happy as if I owned it myself.

古文：已得安邑，塞女戟，因以破宋为齐罪。
现代文：秦国占领安邑后，堵塞女戟要道，于是又把攻破宋国算做齐国的罪过。
English: Later, Qin conquered Wei's An'yun and besieged Onna, but regarded defeating Song as Qi's sin.

古文： 秦欲攻齐，恐天下救之，则以齐委于天下曰： 齐王四与寡人约，四欺寡人，必率天下以攻寡人者三。
现代文： 秦王要攻打韩国，又担心天下诸侯援救韩国，就把齐国丢给天下诸侯说： 齐王四次与寡人订约，四次欺骗了寡人，坚持率领六国攻打寡人就有三次。
English: King Qin wanted to attack Korea, and he was worried that the princes of the world would come to the rescue of Korea, so he threw Qi to the princes of the world and said: King Qi signed a contract with several people four times, deceived several people four times, and insisted on leading six countries to attack several people three times.

古文：有齐无秦，无齐有秦，必伐之，必亡之! 已得宜阳、少曲，致蔺、石，因以破齐为天下罪。
现代文：因此有齐国就没有秦国，没有齐国才能有秦国，一定要进攻它，一定要灭掉它，在得到宜阳、少曲，夺取蔺、石两地之后，于是又把攻破齐国说成是天下诸侯的罪过。
English: Therefore, there is no Qin without Qi, and there can only be Qin without Qi. It is necessary to attack it, and it must be eliminated. After gaining Yiyang, Shaoqu, and seizing Shao and Shishi, it was said that breaking through Qi was a sin of the princes of the world.

古文： 秦欲攻魏，重楚，则以南阳委于楚曰： 寡人固与韩且绝矣!
现代文：秦王想攻打魏国，又担心楚国救援，就把南阳抛给楚国说： 寡人本来要同韩国绝交！
English: King Qin wanted to attack Wei, but was worried about Chu's rescue, so he threw Nanyang to Chu and said, "No one wanted to break off diplomatic relations with Korea!

古文：残均陵，塞鄳隘，苟利于楚，寡人如自有之。 
现代文：所以攻下了均陵，封锁黾塞，假如能对楚国有利，就如同寡人自己得到好处一样。 
English: Therefore, the capture of Junling, the blockade and the prevarication, if it can be beneficial to the state of Chu, it is as if they themselves have benefited.

古文：魏弃与国而合于秦，因以塞鄳隘为楚罪。
现代文：魏国抛弃盟国与秦国联合，于是秦国又把封锁黾塞定为楚国的罪过。
English: Wei abandoned its allies and united with Qin, so Qin also regarded the blockade as a crime of Chu.

古文： 兵困于林中，重燕、赵，以胶东委于燕，以济西委于赵。
现代文： 秦国军队在林中被围困，秦壬才想到尊重燕、赵两国，把胶东交给燕国，把济西交给赵国。
English: When the Qin army was besieged in the forest, Qin Ren thought of respecting Yan and Zhao, and gave Jiaodong to Yan and Jixi to Zhao.

古文：赵得讲于魏，至公子延，因犀首属行而攻赵。
现代文：同魏国讲和后，秦国把公子延送去做人质，随魏将公孙衍连续不断地发兵攻赵。
English: After making peace with Wei, Qin sent his son Yan as a hostage, while Wei sent his son Sunyan to attack Zhao.

古文：兵伤于离石，遇败于马陵，而重魏，则以叶、蔡委于魏。
现代文：军队在离石受挫，在马陵遭到失败，就更加尊重魏国，把叶、蔡两地交给魏国。
English: The army suffered a setback in Liushi and a defeat in Maling, so they respected Wei even more and handed Ye and Cai over to Wei.

古文：已得讲于赵，则劫魏，魏不为割。困则使太后、穰侯为和，赢则兼欺舅与母。
现代文：同赵国讲和后，便开始威迫魏国，魏国没有给它割让土地，可见秦王在秦国陷入困境时就诖太后、穰侯去讲和，在秦国打胜时就欺骗舅父和母亲。
English: After making peace with Zhao, he began to intimidate Wei, who did not cede land to him. It can be seen that when Qin was in trouble, Qin King sent his empress dowager and prince to make peace, and when Qin was victorious, he deceived his uncle and mother.

古文：适燕者曰： 以胶东。 适赵者曰： 以济西。 适魏者曰： 以叶、蔡。 适楚者曰： 以塞鄳隘。 适齐者曰： 以宋。 
现代文：用占领胶东的事谴责燕国，用占领济西的事谴责赵国，用占领叶、蔡两地的事谴责魏国，用阻断黾塞的事谴责楚国，用占领宋地的事谴责齐国，这样一定会使秦王的话像反复循环一样，无休无止。
English: Condemning Yan with the occupation of Jiaodong, condemning Zhao with the occupation of Jixi, condemning Wei with the occupation of Ye and Cai, condemning Chu with the occupation of Song, condemning Qi with the occupation of Song, this will surely make the words of King Qin like a repeated cycle, endless.

古文：此必令其言如循环，用兵如刺蜚绣，母不能制，舅不能约。
现代文：发动战争就像绣花一样轻松，母亲管不住他，舅父约束不了他。
English: Starting a war is as easy as embroidery. His mother can't control him, his uncle can't restrain him.

古文：龙贾之战，岸门之战，封陆之战，高商之战，赵庄之战，秦之所杀三晋之民数百万。今其生者，皆死秦之孤也。
现代文：龙贾之战，岸门之战，封陵之战，高商之战，赵庄之战，秦国所杀的三晋百姓有数百万，观在活着的，都是死在秦王手里的三晋百姓的遗孤。
English: The Battle of Longjia, the Battle of Guanmen, the Battle of Fengling, the Battle of Gaoshang, the Battle of Zhaozhuang, there are millions of Sanjin people killed by Qin. Those who are still alive are the orphans of the Sanjin people who died at the hands of Qin.

古文：西河之外、上雒之地、三川，晋国之祸，三晋之半。
现代文：西河以外、上雒之地、三川等地的争夺，晋地所受的兵祸，三晋的百姓就死了一半。
English: Apart from the West River, half of the people in Sanjin died because of the military disaster that affected the Jin region, due to the struggle for the land of Shangguan, Sanchuan and other places.

古文：秦祸如此其大，而燕、赵之秦者，皆以争事秦说其主，此臣之所大患。 
现代文：秦国的祸患如此之犬，而燕、赵两国亲近秦国的人，都争着侍奉秦国来取悦自己的君王，这是臣下最忧患的事。 
English: The scourge of Qin is such a dog, and Yan and Zhao, who are close to Qin, are competing to serve Qin to please their king. This is the most worrying thing for their subjects.

古文：燕昭王不行，苏代复重于燕。
现代文：于是燕昭王没有到秦国去。苏代在燕国重新受到尊重。
English: As a result, Yan Zhao Wang did not go to Qin. The Su Dynasty was once again respected in Yan.

古文：燕反约诸侯从亲，如苏秦时，或从或不，而天下由此宗苏氏之从约。
现代文：燕国就约定诸侯合纵，像苏秦在的时候一样，有的同意合纵，有的不同意，但是天下诸侯却从此推崇苏家的合纵之约。
English: Yan's state agreed on the conciliation of the princes, just as when Su Qin was present, some agreed to conciliation, some disagreed, but the princes of the world have since praised the conciliation of the Su family.

古文：代、厉皆以寿死，名显诸侯。
现代文：苏代、苏厉都享尽天年而终，他们在诸侯中名声显赫。
English: Both the Su Dynasty and the Su Li Dynasty lived to a ripe old age, and their fame spread throughout the various states.

