古文：礼五秦灭礼学，事多违古。
现代文：秦朝灭绝礼学，许多事违背古代制度。
English: The Qin Dynasty exterminated etiquette, and many things went against the ancient system.

古文：汉初崇简，不存改作，车服之仪，多因秦旧。
现代文：汉初崇尚简易，没有进行改作，车马衣服的仪制，大多因袭室曲。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, simplicity was advocated, and no alterations were made. The ceremonial dress of chariots and horses was mostly influenced by chamber music.

古文：至明帝始乃修复先典，司马彪《舆服志》详之矣。
现代文：到选旦困时才开始恢复古代典制，司马彪作《舆服志》有详细记载。
English: Sima Biao's "History of Clothing" has a detailed account of the restoration of the ancient ceremonial system, which only began when the emperor was in trouble.

古文：魏代唯作指南车，其余虽累有改易，不足相变。
现代文：魏朝衹制造了指南车，其余方面虽然有些小的改革，但谈不上有很大的变化。
English: The Wei Dynasty made the compass car, and although there were some minor reforms in other areas, there were no major changes.

古文：晋立服制令，辨定众仪，徐广《车服注》，略明事目，并行于今者也。
现代文：置朝建立车服制度，制定法令，考正各种仪规，徐广撰有《车服注》，辨明具体类目，一直施行到现在。
English: He established the car clothing system, enacted laws and regulations, and revised various rules and regulations. Xu Guang wrote "Car Clothing Note" to identify specific categories, which has been implemented until now.

古文：故复叙列，以通数代典事。
现代文：特撰此篇详细叙述，以通观几个朝代的车服仪制典故。
English: This article is specially written to provide a detailed description, with an allusion to the uniforms of several dynasties.

古文：上古圣人见转蓬，始为轮，轮何可载，因为舆。
现代文：上古圣人看见蓬草随风飘转，受启发创制车轮。
English: The ancient sage was inspired to create the wheel when he saw a puff of grass blowing in the wind.

古文：任重致远，流运无极。
现代文：车轮转动运行可以载重，便又制造可以坐人的车舆。
English: The wheel rotation operation can carry heavy loads, so it is also possible to manufacture a vehicle that can seat a person.

古文：后代圣人观北斗魁方杓曲携龙角，为帝车，曲其辀以便驾。《系本》云： 奚仲始作车。 
现代文：有了车轮车厢，车子便可以载重远行，流转四面八方。后代圣人观察北斗七星像酒斗之形，其中天枢、天璇、天玑、天权四星组成方形，像斗，叫斗魁，玉衡、开阳、摇光三星组成弯曲的斗柄，叫斗杓，联系东方七宿之首角宿是龙角，想象而制成帝车，并用曲木作车辕以方便驾乘。《系本》说： 墨仲创制车子。 
English: With the wheel carriage, the car can carry heavy loads and travel in all directions. Future generations of sages observed the Big Dipper seven stars like the shape of a wine barrel, of which the four stars of heaven, heaven, heaven and heaven are composed of a square, like a bucket, called the leader, and the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the four stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars

古文：案庖羲画《八卦》而为大舆，服牛乘马，以利天下。
现代文：考伏羲始画奚仲，从而制成大车，驾上牛或马，使天下人都得到好处。
English: Kofu began to draw a yakitori, thus making a cart, driving a cow or a horse, so that everyone in the world would benefit.

古文：奚仲乃夏之车正，安得始造乎？
现代文：登仲乃是夏住的车正，怎么能说是他创制车子的呢。
English: Tengzhong is a summer resident of Chezheng, so how can it be said that he created the car?

古文：《系本》之言，非也。 车服以庸 ，著在唐《典》。
现代文：《系本》的说法不对。 把车马衣服奖给有功的诸侯 ，这是《尚书尧典》的记载。
English: The statement in the "Keibon" is incorrect. The awarding of chariots, horses, and clothing to meritorious lords is recorded in the "Shoshu Shoten."

古文：夏建旌旗，以表贵贱。
现代文：从夏伐开始车子都树立旌旗，以分别贵贱等级。
English: Since the beginning of the summer vacation, the cars have all set up flags, with different levels of prestige.

古文：周有六职，百工居其一焉。
现代文：且伐有六种职事，百工是其中的一种。
English: In addition, there are six types of jobs, of which "hundreds of jobs" is one.

古文：一器而群工致其巧，车最居多。《明堂记》曰： 鸾车，有虞氏之路也。
现代文：一种器物要聚集许多工匠的巧思制作才能完成，以车为最多《礼记明堂位》记载： 鸾车，是有虞压乘的车。
English: A kind of ware requires many craftsmen's ingenious ideas to complete, with the car being the most. "The Book of Rites and Decrees" records: A rickshaw is a rickshaw with a rickshaw.

古文：大路，殷路也。
现代文：大辖，是壁天子乘的车。
English: Dazhi, the carriage of the Emperor of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：乘路，周路也。 
现代文：乘辖，是周天子乘的车。 
English: It is the carriage of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：殷有山车之瑞，谓桑根车，殷人制为大路。
现代文：殷代有山车，为天下太乎的瑞应之物，称为桑根车，殷人作为天子乘的车。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, there was a roller coaster, which was very popular in the world. It was called the Sanggen Car, and the Yin people used it as a vehicle for the heavenly son.

古文：《礼纬》曰： 山车垂句。 
现代文：《礼纬》说： 山车垂句。 
English: "Li Wei" said: The roller coaster is in full swing.

古文：句，曲也。
现代文：句，就是弯曲。
English: sentence, that is, bending.

古文：言不揉治而自曲也。
现代文：垂句是说不经揉治而自然圆曲。
English: The epilogue is to say that it is naturally rounded without kneading.

古文：周之五路，则有玉、金、象、革、木。
现代文：周代有五种铬车，分别是玉轮、金辖、象辂、革辂、木辖。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there were five kinds of chrome chariots, namely, the jade wheel, the gold chariot, the elephant chariot, the leather chariot, and the wooden chariot.

古文：五者之饰，备于《考工记》。
现代文：五种辂车的车饰，《考工记》中有很完备的记载。
English: There are very complete records of the five types of car decoration of forklift trucks in "The Record of Examinations."

古文：舆方法地，盖员象天，辐以象日月，二十八弓以象列宿。玉、金、象者，饰车诸末，因为名也。
现代文：玉辂，车辕及衡端、毂头与轭之末都用玉饰，故名玉辂。金辖用铜饰钩，故名金辂。象辖，用象牙饰车之末端，故名象辂。
English: The end of the yakitori, chariot and balance end, and the end of the shovel and shovel are all decorated with jade, hence the name yakitori. Kinju uses copper to decorate the hook, hence the name kinju. Zozo uses ivory to decorate the end of the chariot, hence the name zozo.

古文：革者漆革，木者漆木也。
现代文：革辖，用革张覆而加漆之车。
English: A car covered with leather, stretched and painted with leather.

古文：玉路，建大常以祀；金路，建大旗以宾；象路，建大赤以朝；革路，建大白以戎；木路，建大麾以田。
现代文：木辂，衹用漆加饰的车子。玉辂，车上竖立太常旗，用作祭祀；金辖，车上竖立大旗，用作会宾客；象辖，车上竖立大赤旗，用作视朝；革辂，车上竖立大白旗，用作军事；木辂，车上竖立大麾旗，用以田猎。
English: Mokko, a chariot decorated with lacquer. Tamakazura, a chariot with a Taijō flag on the top, used for religious services; Kinki, a chariot with a large flag on the top, used for entertaining guests; Shikoku, a chariot with a large red flag on the top, used for courting the emperor; Kakko, a chariot with a large white flag on the top, used for military purposes; Mokko, a chariot with a large banner on the top, used for hunting.

古文：黑色，夏所尚也。
现代文：黑色，是夏代崇尚的颜色。
English: Black is the color of summer.

古文：秦阅三代之车，独取殷制。
现代文：台考察三垡车制，惟独采用了殷代制度。
English: Taiwan investigated the three-car system, but only the Yin Dynasty system was adopted.

古文：古曰桑根车，秦曰金根车也。
现代文：殷伐称桑根车，台称为金根车。
English: The Yinba is called the Mulberry Root Car, and the Tai is called the Golden Root Car.

古文：汉氏因秦之旧，亦为乘舆，所谓乘殷之路者也。
现代文：汉朝沿袭秦代旧制，也是天子所乘的车，所以常言道乘殷代的辂车。
English: The Han Dynasty followed the old system of the Qin Dynasty, and it was also the car that the Son of Heaven rode in. Therefore, it is often said that one should ride the carriage of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：《礼论·舆驾议》曰： 周则玉辂最尊，汉之金根，亦周之玉路也。 
现代文：《礼论舆驾议》说： 周代则玉辖最尊贵，连伐的金根车，也就是周代的玉辖。 
English: "Public opinion on etiquette" said: Zhou Dynasty is the most honorable, the golden chariot of Lianfa, that is, Zhou Dynasty's etiquette.

古文：汉制乘舆金根车，轮皆硃斑，重毂两辖，飞軨。
现代文：汉代制度，天子所乘的金根车，车轮都有大红色斑，两重车毂两重车辖，车轮有飞斡饰物。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, the golden-rooted chariot ridden by the heavenly son has a large red spot on the wheel, a two-car carriage and a two-car carriage, and the wheel has flying ornaments.

古文：毂外复有毂，施辖，其外复设辖，施铜贯其中。
现代文：车毂外还有车毂，插入辖固定，外面义插入辖固定，包铜安置其中。
English: There is also a carriage outside the carriage, the insertion is fixed, the outside is fixed, and the copper is placed in it.

古文：《东京赋》曰： 重轮二辖，疏毂飞軨。 
现代文：《束京赋》写道： 两重车轮两重车辖，车毂上镂刻文饰，车轴有飞斡饰物。 
English: "Bundling Beijing Fu" wrote: Double wheels, double carriage, engraved decoration on the rim, and flying ornaments on the axle.

古文：飞軨以赤油为之，广八寸，长注地，系轴头，谓之飞軨也。
现代文：飞斡用橘红漆布做成，宽八寸，长三尺落地，画青龙白虎，系在两边车轴末端，造就称为飞斡。
English: Fei Miao is made of orange-red lacquer cloth, eight inches wide, three feet long, painted with a blue dragon and white tiger, and attached to the ends of the axles on both sides, creating what is known as Fei Miao.

古文：以金薄缪龙，为舆倚较。
现代文：车箱两旁的木板及木板上的车较，都用薄金片和交错的龙形图案装饰。车较在车箱之上。
English: The wooden boards on both sides of the box and the car on the board are decorated with thin gold and interlaced dragon patterns. The car is on top of the box.

古文：较在箱上，飐文画蕃。蕃，箱也。
现代文：用鹿头龙纹绘饰蕃。蕃，就是车箱。
English: Decorated with deer head dragon pattern., is the trunk.

古文：文虎伏轼，龙首衔轭，鸾雀立衡，飐文画辕，翠羽盖黄裹，所谓黄屋也。
现代文：车轼画有猛虎，蹲伏在车箱之前，车轭则如蛟龙昂首。鸾乌站在车衡之上。车辕上也画有鹿头龙身的神兽。翠羽为盖，黄缯为裹，这就是所谓黄屋，即帝王之车。
English: The chariot is painted with a fierce tiger, crouching in front of the chariot box, the chariot is like a dragon with its head held high. Zhou Wu stands on the scales. The chariot is also painted with a divine beast in the shape of a deer's head. Covered with green feathers and wrapped in yellow cocoons, this is the so-called Huangya, the emperor's chariot.

古文：金华施末，建太常十二旒，画日月升龙，驾六黑马，施十二鸾，金为叉髦，插以翟尾。
现代文：金花安在盖弓末端，车上树立太常旗，有十二旒，旗上画有曰月飞龙，用六匹黑马驾车，系有十二只铜铃，马鬃用金装饰，并插上雉尾。
English: The gold flower is attached to the end of the cover bow, and the Taizheng flag is set up on the car, with twelve chevrons, the flag is painted with the "moon flying dragon," the car is driven by six black horses, there are twelve bronze bells, the stirrups are decorated with gold, and the appendix is inserted.

古文：又加牦牛尾，大如斗，置左騑马轭上，所谓左纛舆也。
现代文：在最后左腓马轭上，又插上牦牛尾，大如斗，造就是所谓左纛舆。
English: At the end of the left bridle, the yakitori is inserted, large as a bucket, creating the so-called left bridle.

古文：路如周玉路之制。
现代文：荡伐辖车车制同且伐玉辂一样。
English: The system of logging vehicles is the same as that of logging carts.

古文：应劭《汉官卤簿图》，乘舆大驾，则御凤皇车，以金根为副。又五色安车、五色立车各五乘。
现代文：应劭《汉官卤簿图》载，天子出行，则坐凤凰车，以金根车为副车又有五乘五色安车、五乘五色立车随行。
English: According to the "Han Guanzhong Book Map," when the emperor traveled, he took the phoenix car, with the golden root car as the second car, and the five-passenger five-color car and the five-passenger five-color standing car.

古文：建龙旗，驾四马，施八鸾，余如金根之制，犹周金路也。
现代文：车上树立龙旗，用四马驾车，系八只铜钤，其余如同金根车车制，就像周代金辐一样。
English: A dragon flag was set up on the car, and it was driven by four horses, consisting of eight bronze gongs, and the rest were made of gold, just like the gold spokes of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：其车各如方色，所谓五时副车，俗谓为 五帝车 也。
现代文：五色安车、五色立车的五色分别与所在五方相应，造就是所谓五时副车，俗称 五帝车 。
English: The five colors of the five-colored trolley and the five-colored trolley correspond to the five directions respectively. They are the so-called five-hour trolley, commonly known as the five-day trolley.

古文：江左则阙矣。
现代文：束晋没有这种车。
English: Sokjin doesn't have such a car.

古文：白马者，硃其鬣，安车者，坐乘。
现代文：驾五色车的白马，把马鬃染成朱红色。安车，是可以坐乘的车。
English: A white horse driving a five-colored carriage, with its bridle dyed vermilion. An car is a car you can ride in.

古文：又有建华盖九重。
现代文：有时车上安有九重华盖。
English: Sometimes there is a nine-tiered flower canopy on the car.

古文：甘泉卤簿者，道车五乘，游车九乘，在乘舆车前。又有象车，最在前，试桥道。
现代文：甘泉卤簿，是西汉皇帝郊祀祭天出行的仪仗队，在皇帝主车的前面，有五乘道车，九乘游车。在最前面还有象车，试行桥梁道路。
English: Ganquan halo book is the honor guard of the Western Han Dynasty emperor's suburb worship and sacrifice. In front of the emperor's main car, there are five road cars and nine pleasure cars. In the front, there is also an elephant car to test the bridge road.

古文：晋江左驾犹有之。
现代文：束晋时还有这种制度。
English: This system was still in place at the time of Sokjin.

古文：凡妇人车皆坐乘，故《周礼》王后有安车而王无也。
现代文：凡是妇女的车都是可以坐乘，所以《周礼》载王后有安车而王却没有安车。
English: All women's cars can be ridden, so "Zhou Li" carries the queen with a secure car, but the king has no secure car.

古文：汉制乘舆乃有之。
现代文：漠制天子乘的车便有安车。
English: There is a cheap car for those who want to travel by car.

古文：天子所御驾六，其余副车皆驾四。
现代文：天子所乘的车，用六匹马驾车。其余副车都用四匹马驾车。
English: The chariot in which the Son of Heaven is riding is driven by six horses, and the other chariots are driven by four horses.

古文：案《书》称朽索御六马。
现代文：案《尚书》中说朽索驾驭六匹马。
English: According to the "Shang Shu," the "Grotto Rope" is pulled by six horses.

古文：逸礼《王度记》曰： 天子驾六，诸侯驾五，卿驾四，大夫三，士二，庶人一。 
现代文：逸礼《王度记》说： 天子乘车驾六匹马，诸侯乘车驾五匹马，卿乘车驾四匹马，大夫乘车驾三匹马，士乘车驾两匹马，庶人乘车驾一匹马。 
English: The "Diary of a Young King" says: The son of heaven drives six horses in a carriage, the princes drive five horses in a carriage, the lord drives four horses in a carriage, the doctor drives three horses in a carriage, the scholar drives two horses in a carriage, and the common man drives one horse in a carriage.

古文：楚平王驾白马。
现代文：楚平王乘车驾白马。
English: King Chu Ping rides a white horse.

古文：梁惠王以安车驾三送淳于髡，大夫之仪。
现代文：梁惠王用三匹马驾安车送淳于髡，是大夫乘车礼仪。
English: Liang Hui Wang used three horses to drive a safe car to send Chun to Shun, which is the doctor's driving etiquette.

古文：《周礼》，四马为乘。
现代文：《周礼》载，一车四马叫乘。
English: According to "Zhou Li," a carriage with four horses calls for a ride.

古文：毛诗， 天子至大夫同驾四，士驾二 。
现代文：毛诗载， 天子至大夫乘车都驾四匹马，七乘车驾两匹马 。
English: According to Mao Zedong's poem, the Son of Heaven and the Great Physician rode four horses, and the Seven Riders rode two horses.

古文：袁盎谏汉文驰六飞。
现代文：袁盎劝止汉文帝乘六匹马驾的车飞奔。
English: Yuan Ang advised Emperor Hanwen to stop driving around in a six-horse carriage.

古文：魏时天子亦驾六。
现代文：魏朝时天子乘车也驾六匹马。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, Tianzi also drove six horses.

古文：晋《先蚕仪》，皇后安车驾六，以两辕安车驾五为副。
现代文：晋朝《先蚕仪》记载，皇后所乘安车驾六匹马，用两辕安车驾五匹马作副车。
English: According to the record of "The First Silkworm" in the Jin Dynasty, the empress used a stable cart to drive six horses, and used two stable carts to drive five horses as a side car.

古文：江左以来，相承无六，驾四而已。
现代文：束晋以来，相沿袭都没有用六匹马驾车，最多用四匹马而已。
English: Since Sokjin, successive dynasties have not used six horses to drive a chariot, but a maximum of four.

古文：宋孝武大明三年，使尚书左丞荀万秋造五路。
现代文：宋孝武帝左明三年，派尚书左丞苟万秋制造五种辖车。
English: In the third year of Emperor Zuo Ming, Emperor Xiaowu of Song Dynasty sent Shang Shuzo to Guo Wanqiu to manufacture five kinds of special vehicles.

古文：《礼图》，金路，通赤旗，无盖，改造依拟金根，而赤漆飐画，玉饰诸末，建青旗，十有二旒，驾玄马四，施羽葆盖，以祀。
现代文：据《礼图》，玉辂，车上竖立赤旗，没有车盖，这次改造依照金根车，而用红漆画鹿头龙纹图案，车辕及衡端、毂头与轭之末都用玉饰，车上竖立青旗，有十二旒，用四匹玄色马驾车，车卜安有以乌羽连缀为饰的羽葆盖，用作祭祀。
English: According to the "Ritual Map," the jade chariot had a red flag at the top and no cover. This time, it was remodeled according to the golden chariot, and the deer head dragon pattern was painted with red paint. The chariot and the end of the balance, the hoe and the end of the hoe were all decorated with jade. The blue flag was erected on the chariot, with twelve hoops, and four black horses were used to drive the chariot. The chariot had a feather cover decorated with black feathers, which was used for sacrifice.

古文：即以金根为金路，建大青旗，十有二旒，驾玄马四，羽葆盖，以宾。
现代文：便依照金根车制造金辖，车上竖立大青旗，有十二旒，用四匹玄色马驾车，车上安有羽葆盖，用作会宾客。
English: Then, according to the gold-rooted car, he made Jinji, and erected a large green flag on the car, with twelve hoops, drove with four black horses, and installed a feathered cover on the car, which was used as a party guest.

古文：象、革、木路，《周官》、《舆服志》、《礼图》并不载其形段，并依拟玉路，漆飐画，羽葆盖，象饰诸末，建立赤旗，十有二旒，以视朝。
现代文：象辖、革辖、木辂，《周宫》、屿服志》、《礼图》都没有记载其样式，便都依照玉辖样式，用漆画鹿头龙纹图案，车上安羽葆盖，车辕及衡端、毅头与轭之末都用象牙装饰，车上竖立赤旗，有十二旒，用作视朝。
English: There is no record of its style in the Zhou Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty, and the Sui Dynasty.

古文：革路，建赤旗，十有二旒，以即戎。
现代文：革路，车上竖立赤旗，有十二旒，用作军事。
English: There is a red flag on the vehicle, with twelve hoops, used for military purposes.

古文：木路，建赤麾，以田。
现代文：木辖，车上竖立赤麾，用作田猎。
English: It is made of wood and has a red beak on the vehicle, which is used for hunting.

古文：象、革驾玄，木驾赤，四马。
现代文：象辖、革轮用四匹玄色马驾车，木辂用四匹赤色马驾车。
English: The chariot and the chariot wheel are driven by four black horses, and the raft is driven by four red horses.

古文：旧有大事，法驾出，五路各有所主，不俱出也。
现代文：旧制，如果有重大事情，皇帝乘法驾出行，五种辂车各有专用，不全部都出行。
English: Under the old system, if there was a major event, the emperor would travel by car. Each of the five types of carriage had its own purpose, and not all of them would travel.

古文：大明中，始制五路俱出。
现代文：大明年间，始定制五种辂车全部出行。
English: During the New Year's holiday, all five types of cars will be customized.

古文：亲耕籍田，乘三盖车，一名芝车，又名耕根车，置耒耜于轼上。
现代文：皇帝前往亲耕籍田，乘坐三盖车，一名芝车，又名耕根车，在车轼上放置耒耜。
English: The emperor went to his family's farmland, took a three-deck cart, a grass cart, also known as a root cart, and placed a plow on the plow.

古文：戎车立乘，夏曰钩车，殷曰寅车，周曰元戎。
现代文：兵车人在车上站立，夏代叫钩车，殷代叫寅车，周代叫元戎。
English: The soldiers stand on the carriage. The Xia Dynasty called it the hook carriage, the Yin Dynasty called it the yang carriage, and the Zhou Dynasty called it the yang carriage.

古文：建牙麾，邪注之，载金鼓羽幢，置甲弩于轼上。
现代文：车上插有牙旗，旗杆有一定的倾斜度。车上装载金釭、鼓和以羽毛为饰的旗帜仪仗，车轼上放置钟甲和弓弩。
English: There is a tooth flag on the car, the flagpole has a certain degree of inclination. The car is loaded with gold gongs, drums and feather-decorated flags of honor, and the bell and bow are placed on the car.

古文：猎车，辋宪，轮画缪龙绕之。
现代文：猎车，车轮外挂有帷幔，车轮画有蛟龙交错环绕。
English: A hunting carriage, with draperies hanging outside the wheels and dragons interlaced around the wheels.

古文：一名蹋猪车。
现代文：一名蹋猪车。
English: A warthog pulls up.

古文：魏文帝改曰蹋虎车。
现代文：魏文帝改称蹋虎车。
English: Emperor Wei Wendi changed his name to Zanghu Cha.

古文：指南车，其始周公所作，以送荒外远使。
现代文：指南车，起初是周公制造的，用以赠送给遥远的外国使者。
English: The guide car, originally made by Zhou Gong, was used as a gift for distant foreign envoys.

古文：地域平漫，迷于东西，造立此车，使常知南北。
现代文：因为地域辽阔，漫无边际，人行于其中很容易迷失方向，便创制这种指南车，行驶时能随时分清南北方向。
English: Because the region is vast and boundless, and it is easy for pedestrians to lose their way in it, they created this guide car, which can distinguish the north-south direction at any time when driving.

古文：鬼谷子云： 郑人取玉，必载司南，为其不惑也。 
现代文：鬼谷子说： 郑国人采取玉石，一定车载司南，因为有了它不会迷失方向。 
English: Kigayako said: Zheng Guozhong people take jade, a certain car carrying the Secretary of the South, because with it will not lose their way.

古文：至于秦、汉，其制无闻。
现代文：到了秦代、汉代，指南车的车制没有人知道。
English: In the Qin and Han dynasties, no one knew the make of the compass.

古文：后汉张衡始复创造。
现代文：柬汉张衡开始重新创造。
English: Zhang Heng, a Cambodian-Chinese, began to re-create the scene.

古文：汉末丧乱，其器不存。
现代文：漠末动荡混乱，张衡制造的指南车没有流传下来。
English: In the turbulent chaos of the desert, the guide car made by Zhang Heng did not survive.

古文：魏高堂隆、秦朗，皆博闻之士，争论于朝，云无指南车，记者虚说。
现代文：魏朝高堂隆、秦朗，都是博学多闻的人，他们在朝堂上争论不休，说没有指南车，以往典籍中的记载都是虚言妄说。
English: The Wei and Qin dynasties' high-ranking courtiers, Long Long and Qin Lang, were well-read and well-informed people. They argued endlessly in the court, saying that there was no guide car, and that the records in the previous classics were all lies.

古文：明帝青龙中，令博士马钧更造之而车成。
现代文：明帝青龙年间，诏令博士马钩重新制造指南车，车制造成功了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qinglong of the Ming Dynasty, he ordered Dr. Ma Hook to remanufacture the guide car, and the car was successfully manufactured.

古文：晋乱复亡。
现代文：到晋代战乱，马钧制造的指南车又亡夫了。
English: By the time of the Jin Dynasty War, the guide car made by Ma Jun had passed away.

古文：石虎使解飞，姚兴使令狐生又造焉。
现代文：石虎、姚兴也先后派解飞、令狐生再次制造指南车。
English: Shihu and Yao Xing also successively dispatched the de-flight, and let the foxes make the guide car again.

古文：安帝义熙十三年，宋武帝平长安，始得此车。
现代文：安帝义熙十三年，宋武帝平定长安，便得到了这种指南车。
English: In the 13th year of Emperor Andei Yixi, Emperor Song Wudi conquered Chang'an and obtained this guide car.

古文：其制如鼓车，设木人于车上，举手指南。
现代文：这种车的样式如同鼓车，车上设置木人，举手指向南方。
English: This kind of car is shaped like a drum car, with wooden figures on the car, pointing to the south.

古文：车虽回转，所指不移。
现代文：车轮车身即使转弯旋转，木人举手所指的方向不变。
English: Even if the wheel body turns and rotates, the direction indicated by the wooden man's raised hand remains unchanged.

古文：大驾卤簿，最先启行。
现代文：皇帝车驾仪仗队出行，指南车最先开动，在前面引导。
English: The emperor drove the honor guard to travel, and the guide car was the first to start and guide in front.

古文：此车戎狄所制，机数不精，虽曰指南，多不审正。
现代文：这种指南车是戎狄制造的，机械设计不精密，虽然说是指南，但实际上大多不准确。
English: This kind of guide car is made by Rong Di, the mechanical design is not precise. Although it is said to be a guide, it is actually mostly inaccurate.

古文：回曲步骤，犹须人功正之。
现代文：车子旋转拐弯，或是行驶慢一点快一点，所指方向尚须人工校正。
English: The car spins around a corner, or drives a little slower or faster, and the indicated direction still needs to be manually corrected.

古文：范阳人祖冲之，有巧思，常谓宜更构造。
现代文：范阳人祖冲之，思维灵活巧妙，常常说指南车应当重新构造。
English: Fan Yangren Zuchong, thinking flexibly and cleverly, often said that the guide car should be reconstructed.

古文：宋顺帝升明末，齐王为相，命造之焉。
现代文：宋顺帝升明末年，齐王担任宰相，命令祖冲之制造指南车。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne at the end of the Ming Dynasty, King Qi served as prime minister and ordered Zu Chong to build a guide car.

古文：车成，使抚军丹阳尹王僧虔、御史中丞刘休试之。
现代文：指南车制造完成后，派抚军丹阳尹王僧虔、御史中丞刘休试验行驶。
English: After the production of the guide car was completed, Danyang Yin Wang Zengqian and Mishi Zhongzheng Liu Xiu were sent to test drive.

古文：其制甚精，百屈千回，未尝移变。
现代文：祖冲之制造的指南车机理非常精密灵巧，车子即使千百次拐弯千百次旋转，所指方向没有移动改变。
English: The mechanism of the guide car made by Zu Chong is very precise and dexterous. Even if the car makes thousands of turns and rotates thousands of times, the direction it points to does not move or change.

古文：晋代又有指南舟。
现代文：晋代又有人制造了指南舟。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, someone else made a compass boat.

古文：索虏拓跋焘使工人郭善明造指南车，弥年不就。
现代文：索虏拓跋焘派工匠郭善明制造指南车，经过很多年都没有制成。
English: Sorup Tuoba sent craftsman Guo Zhenming to make a guide car, but it was not made for many years.

古文：扶风人马岳又造，垂成，善明鸩杀之。
现代文：扶风人马岳又制造指南车，快要完成，善明用毒酒杀害了他。
English: Fengren Ma Yue also made a guide car, which was about to be completed, and Zengming killed him with poisoned wine.

古文：记里车，未详所由来，亦高祖定三秦所获。
现代文：记里车，不清楚是何时何人开始制造的，衹知道是高祖平定三秦时获得的。
English: When it comes to rickshaws, it is not clear when and by whom they began to be manufactured, but it is known that they were acquired by Gaozhu when he conquered Sanqin.

古文：制如指南，其上有鼓，车行一里，木人辄击一槌。
现代文：记里车的样式如同指南车，车上有鼓，车行驶一里路程，木人就用木槌击一下鼓。
English: The style of the car is like a guide car. There is a drum on the car. When the car travels one mile, the wooden man hits the drum with a mallet.

古文：大驾卤簿，以次指南。
现代文：皇帝车驾仪仗队出行，记里车在指南车后面行驶。
English: The emperor drove the honor guard, and the car drove behind the guide car.

古文：辇车，《周礼》王后五路之卑者也。
现代文：辇车，是《周礼》所载王后五种辂车中低等的车。
English: The carriage is one of the five types of carriage described in "Weekly Rituals."

古文：后宫中从容所乘，非王车也。
现代文：皇后居宫中游宴时所乘的车，不是王车。
English: The car used for the banquet in the middle of the Empress's residence is not the royal car.

古文：汉制乘舆御之，或使人挽，或驾果下马。
现代文：汉伐制度皇帝乘辇车，或者用人挽行，或者用矮小的果下马驾车。
English: Under the Hanfa system, the emperor rode in a carriage, or was pulled by a man, or rode in a horse-drawn carriage pulled by a dwarf.

古文：汉成帝欲与班婕妤同辇是也。
现代文：汉成帝想与班婕妤同乘一辆辇车的就是这种车。
English: This is the kind of car that Han Chengdi wanted to ride in a carriage with Ban Qi.

古文：后汉阴就外戚骄贵，亦辇。
现代文：束汉阴就因为是外戚骄奢贵显，也乘辇车。
English: Bunch of Han Yin because it is a relative of the proud and luxurious, but also by car.

古文：井丹讥之曰： 昔桀乘人车，岂此邪！ 
现代文：井丹讥笑他说： 从前夏桀乘人拉的车，岂不就是这种车吗! 
English: Yidan scoffed and said, "Isn't this the kind of car that used to be pulled by people in the summer?"

古文：然则辇夏后氏末代所造也。
现代文：那么辇车就是夏丘区末代制造的。
English: Then, the carriage was made by the last generation in Xiaqiu District.

古文：井丹讥阴就乘人，而不云僭上，岂贵臣亦得乘之乎？
现代文：一：蛆讥笑蝗铋乘人拉的车，而不说他僭越，难道汉代贵臣也可以乘辇车吗?
English: One: He ridiculed the locusts for riding in a car pulled by a man, but did not say that he was going to cross the river. Could the Han Dynasty dignitaries also ride in a horse-drawn carriage?

古文：未知何代去其轮。
现代文：不知道什么朝代辇车去掉了车轮。
English: I don't know what dynasties removed the wheels from the carriage.

古文：《傅玄子》曰： 夏曰余车，殷曰胡奴，周曰辎车。 
现代文：《傅玄子》说： 星丝称为余车，殷丛称为胡奴，周代称为辎车。 
English: "Fu Xuan Zi" said: "Star silk is called yo-cha, yin-gong is called hu-nu, and Zhou dynasty is called yang-cha.

古文：辎车，即辇也。
现代文：辎车，就是辇车。
English: A tuk tuk is a tuk tuk.

古文：魏、晋御小出，常乘马，亦多乘舆车。
现代文：魏、晋时帝王有时一般出宫，时常骑马，也常乘舆车。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, emperors sometimes went out of the palace, often rode horses, and often took public buses.

古文：舆车，今之小舆。
现代文：舆车，就是现在的小舆：
English: The public carriage, that is, the current small public carriage:

古文：犊车，軿车之流也。
现代文：犊车，是耕车一类的车。
English: A plough is a type of agricultural vehicle.

古文：汉诸侯贫者乃乘之，其后转见贵。
现代文：漠代诸侯当中贫困者才乘这种车，以后逐渐有富贵者乘这种车。
English: It was only the poor among the princes of the Mongol Empire who used this type of car, but gradually the wealthy began to use this type of car.

古文：孙权云 车中八牛 ，即犊车也。
现代文：孙权说 车中八牛 ，就是犊车。
English: Sun Quan said that there are eight cows in the car, that is, the carriage.

古文：江左御出，又载储偫之物。
现代文：束晋车驾出宫，又用犊车装载储备物品。
English: Sokjin drove the car out of the palace, and loaded the reserve items with a forklift.

古文：汉代贱轺车而贵辎軿，魏晋贱辎軿而贵轺车。
现代文：汉代以轺车为贱，而以辎车耕车为贵，翘、晋时代则以辎车耕车为贱而以韬车为贵。
English: In the Han Dynasty, a ploughshare was cheap, but a ploughshare with a ploughshare was expensive. In the Zhou and Jin Dynasties, a ploughshare with a ploughshare was cheap, but a ploughshare with a ploughshare was expensive.

古文：又有追锋车，去小平盖，加通幔，如轺车，而驾马。
现代文：另外还有追锋车，去掉小平盖，加上通幔，如同韬车，而用马驾车。
English: In addition, there is a chaser, remove the small flat cover, plus the chaser, like a carriage, and drive with a horse.

古文：又以云母饰犊车，谓之云母车，臣下不得乘，时以赐王公。晋氏又有四望车，今制亦存。
现代文：又用云母装饰犊车，称为云母车，臣下不能乘，有时用以赏赐给王公一置优又有四望车，现车制也有这种车。
English: Mica was also used to decorate the chariot, known as the mica chariot, which could not be ridden by the vassals. Sometimes it was used to reward the prince with a superior position and a four-eyed chariot. The current chariot system also has such a chariot.

古文：又汉制，唯贾人不得乘马车，其余皆乘之矣。
现代文：又连伐制度，衹有商人不能乘马车，其余的人都乘马车。
English: There was also the company system, in which some merchants were not allowed to ride in horse-drawn carriages, while the rest of the people rode in horse-drawn carriages.

古文：除吏赤盖杠，余则青盖杠云。
现代文：拜官授职乘车是赤盖杠，其余情况是青盖杠。
English: It's a red-flag to travel by car for the investiture ceremony, but it's a green-flag for the rest.

古文：《周礼》，王后亦有五路，重翟、厌翟、安车、翟车、辇车，凡五也。
现代文：《周礼》载，王后也有五种辖车，就是重翟、厌翟、安车、翟车、辇车，共五种。
English: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the queen also has five kinds of chariots, that is, heavy chariot, loathsome chariot, safe chariot, dirty chariot, filthy chariot, a total of five kinds.

古文：汉制，太皇太后、皇太后、皇后法驾乘重翟羽盖金根车，驾青交路，青帷裳，云飐画辕，黄金涂五末，盖爪施金华，驾三马，左右騑。
现代文：汉代制度，太皇太后、皇太后、皇后法驾乘重翟羽盖金根车，驾青交络，青帷裳，车辕画云纹，用黄金涂饰车辕及衡端、毂头与轭之末，盖弓末端安上金花，用三匹马驾车，左右两旁为腓马。
English: In the Han Dynasty system, the great empress dowager, the empress dowager, and the empress dowager drove a golden-rooted car covered with heavy ploughshare feathers, drove a blue crossover, a blue drapery, a cloud pattern was painted on the wheel rim, the wheel rim and the balance end, the head of the plough and the end of the plough were painted with gold, a gold flower was attached to the end of the cover bow, and three horses were used to drive the car, with white horses on both sides.

古文：其法驾则紫罽軿车。
现代文：非法驾，则乘紫局耕车。
English: If you drive illegally, you will have to take a taxi from the Purple Bureau.

古文：按《字林》，軿车有衣蔽，无后辕。
现代文：据《字林》解释，耕车有屏蔽，没有后辕。
English: According to the "Zhilin" explanation, the cultivator is shielded and does not have a rear hoist.

古文：其有后辕者谓之辎。
现代文：有后辕的车称为辎车。
English: A car with a rear brake is called a brake car.

古文：应劭《汉官》，明帝永平七年，光烈阴皇后葬，魂车，鸾路青羽盖，驾驷马，龙旗九旒，前有方相。
现代文：应劭《汉宫》载，汉明帝永平七年，光烈阴皇后出殡安葬，灵车是鸾辂青羽盖，用四匹马驾车，车上竖立龙旗，有九旒，车前有驱疫避邪的开路神方相。
English: According to the "Han Palace," Emperor Han Ming was Yongping for seven years, and the Empress Guang Liangyin was given a funeral and buried. The hearse was covered with indigo feathers, driven by four horses, with a dragon flag erected on the car, with nine swords, and a path to drive away evil in front of the car.

古文：凤皇车，大将军妻参乘，太仆妻、御女骑夹毂，此前汉旧制也。
现代文：凤凰车，大将军妻在车右陪乘，太仆妻、御女骑马在车轮两边，这是西汉旧制。
English: In the phoenix car, the general's wife rides on the right side of the car, and the servant's wife and daughter ride on both sides of the wheel. This is the old system of the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：晋《先蚕仪注》，皇后乘油画云母安车，驾六騩马。
现代文：置《先蚕仪注》载，皇后乘坐用油彩涂绘的云母安车，用六匹馈马驾车。
English: According to "Xian Silkworm Instrument Note," the empress rode in a mica chariot painted with oil paints and was driven by six horses.

古文：騩，浅黑色也。
现代文：骁，就是浅黑色。
English: , that is, light black.

古文：油画两辕安车，驾五騩马为副。
现代文：副车是用油彩涂绘的两辕安车，用五匹驰马驾车。
English: The sidecar is a two-horse chariot painted in oil, driven by five galloping horses.

古文：公主油画安车，驾三。
现代文：公主乘坐用油彩涂绘的安车，用三匹貌马驾车。
English: The princess rides in an oil-painted carriage, driven by three handsome horses.

古文：三夫人青交路安车，驾三。
现代文：三人人乘坐青交络安车，用三匹驰马驾车。
English: All three of them took the Blue Cross cheap car and drove with three horses.

古文：皆以紫绛罽軿车，驾三为副。
现代文：都用紫绛蜀耕车作副车，用三匹馈马驾车。
English: All of them used the Ziyang Shu cultivator as a secondary vehicle, and drove with three feed horses.

古文：九嫔世妇軿车，驾二。
现代文：九嫔世妇乘坐耕车，用两匹骁马驾车。
English: Nine generations of women took a ploughing cart and drove it with two horses.

古文：宫入辎车，驾一。
现代文：宫人乘坐辎车，用一匹骁马驾车。
English: The courtiers rode in a carriage pulled by a horse.

古文：王妃、公侯特进夫人、封君皁交路安车，驾三。
现代文：工妃、公侯特进夫人、封君乘坐黑交络安车，用三匹馈马驾车。
English: Gongfei, the wife of Prince Tejin, and Fongjun rode in a cheap black car and drove with three horses.

古文：汉制，贵人、公主、王妃、封君油軿皆驾二，右騑而已。
现代文：汉代制度，贵人、公主、王妃、封君都乘坐用油彩涂绘的耕车，用两匹马驾车，腓马在右边。
English: In the Han Dynasty system, nobles, princesses, queens, and princes all rode in a cart painted with oil paints and driven by two horses, the white horse on the right.

古文：汉制，太子、皇子皆安车，硃斑轮，倚虎较，伏鹿轼，黑飐文画蕃，青盖，金华施末，黑飐文画辕，金涂五末。
现代文：选佳制度，太子、皇子都乘坐安车，车轮有朱斑文饰，车较上画倚虎，车轼上画伏鹿，车箱上有黑色鹿头龙纹图饰，青色车盖，盖弓末端安上金花，车辕饰有黑色鹿头龙纹图案用黄金涂饰车辕及衡端、毂头与轭之末。
English: Selection of the best system, the prince and the prince are riding in the chariot, the wheels are decorated with scarlet spots, the car is painted with a tiger on the top, the deer is painted on the rim, the box has a black deer head dragon pattern decoration, the blue car cover, the end of the cover bow is mounted with gold flowers, the rim is decorated with a black deer head dragon pattern, and the rim and the end of the balance, the head and the end of the rim are painted with gold.

古文：皇子为王，锡以此乘，故曰王青盖车。
现代文：皇子为王，赐给这种车，所以称为王青盖车。
English: The prince is the king, and he gives this kind of car, so it is called the Wang Qinghai car.

古文：皆左右騑驾，五旗，旗九飐，画降龙。
现代文：都是用三匹马驾车，朝马在左右两边，车上竖立五旗，旗有九旒，画有降龙。
English: They are all driven by three horses, with the morning horse on the right and left sides, and five flags are erected on the car, with nine chevrons and a descending dragon.

古文：皇孙乘绿车，亦驾三。
现代文：皇孙乘坐绿盖车，也是用三匹马驾车。
English: The crown prince rode in a green covered carriage, which was also driven by three horses.

古文：魏、晋之制，太子及诸王皆驾四。
现代文：魏、晋时期的制度，太子及诸王乘车都用四匹马驾车。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, princes and kings rode four-horse chariots.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年，太子释奠。
现代文：晋元帝左兴三年，太子祭奠先圣先师。
English: In the third year of Emperor Zuoxing of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, the crown prince held a ceremony to pay tribute to the holy forerunner.

古文：诏曰： 未有高车，可乘安车。 
现代文：下诏说： 没有高车，可以乘坐安车。 
English: The next edict said: There are no high-speed trains, so you can take a low-speed train.

古文：高车，即立乘车也。
现代文：高车，就是人在车上站立的车。
English: A high-wheeled vehicle is a vehicle with a person standing on it.

古文：公及列侯安车，硃斑轮、倚鹿较、伏熊轼、黑蕃者谓之轩，皁缯盖，驾二，右騑。
现代文：公及列侯乘坐安车，车轮有朱斑文饰、车较上画倚鹿、车轼上画伏熊、车箱上有黑色文饰的叫轩车，黑缯车盖，用两匹马驾车，腓马在右边。
English: The prince and the vassal ride in an armored car, the wheels are decorated with vermilion spots, the top of the car is decorated with a deer, a bear is painted on the rim of the car, the car has a black decoration on the box, the cover is black, and it is driven by two horses, the horse is on the right.

古文：王公旗八旒，侯七旒，卿五旒，皆降龙。
现代文：王公乘车竖立旌旗有八旒，侯乘车竖立旌旗有七旒，卿乘车竖立旌旗有五旒，旌旗上都画有降龙。
English: There are eight chevrons on the banner raised by Wang Gong, seven chevrons on the banner raised by Hou Rong, and five chevrons on the banner raised by Xing, all of which are painted with descending dragons.

古文：公卿中二千石二千石郊陵法驾出，皆大车立乘，驾四。
现代文：公卿、中二千石、二千石官员郊祀谒陵随法驾出行，都乘大车站立在车上，用四匹马驾车。
English: Court nobles, middle-ranking officials of 2,000 koku, and officials of 2,000 koku from the suburb of Fuling travel by law, and they all take the big station to stand on the car and drive with four horses.

古文：后导从大车，驾二，右騑。
现代文：后面导从大车，用两匹马驾车，朝 马在右边。
English: In the back is a cart driven by two horses, with the morning horse on the right.

古文：他出乘安车。
现代文：其他情况下出行乘坐安车。
English: In other cases, travel by cheap car.

古文：其去位致仕，皆赐安车四马。
现代文：这些官员去职退休，都赐给安车和四匹马。
English: When these officials retired, they were given a horse-drawn carriage and four horses.

古文：中二千石皆皁盖、硃蕃，铜五末，驾二，右騑。
现代文：傅畅《故事》记载，三公乘坐安车，用三匹马驾车。
English: Fu Chang's "Story" records that the three princes rode in a horse-drawn carriage and drove with three horses.

古文：《晋令》，王公之世子摄命治国者，安车，驾三，旗七旒，其侯世子，五旒。傅暢《故事》，三公安车，驾三；特进驾二；卿一。
现代文：特进用两匹马驾车。
English: The Sonderkommando drove with two horses.

古文：汉制，公、列侯、中二千石、二千石夫人会庙及蚕，各乘其夫之安车，右騑，加皁交路，帷裳。
现代文：卿用一匹马驾车。制度，公、列侯、中二千石、二千石官员夫人到庙中参拜，以及到蚕室祭蚕神，各自乘坐丈夫的安车，骈马在右边，车上加饰黑色交络，帷裳都是黑色。
English: The system is that the prince, the vassal lord, the middle-ranking official of 2,000 koku and the wife of an official of 2,000 koku go to the temple to worship, and to the silkworm room to celebrate the silkworm god, and they each take their husband's car, the horse is on the right, the car is decorated with black interlacing, and the curtains are black.

古文：非公会，则乘漆布辎軿，铜五末。
现代文：不是正式场合，便乘坐漆布辎车耕车，用铜涂饰车辕及衡端、毂头与轭之末。
English: If it's not a formal occasion, they'll take a lacquer wagon to plough the field, and use copper to decorate the wagon and the end of the balance, the hoe and the end of the plough.

古文：晋武帝太康四年，诏依汉故事，给九卿朝车驾及安车各一乘。
现代文：晋武童左壁四年，诏令依照龇旧例，赐给九卿上朝车驾和安车各一乘。
English: In the fourth year of Jin Wudong's reign, the imperial edict, in accordance with the old practice, gave the nine nobles a ride on the morning train and a ride on the afternoon train.

古文：傅暢《故事》，尚书令轺车，黑耳后户。
现代文：傅畅《故事》记载，尚书令乘辍车，黑色车耳，车门在后。
English: Fu Chang's "Story" records that Shang Shuling rode in a black car, with the doors at the back.

古文：仆射但后户无耳。
现代文：仆射乘轺车衹是车门在后，没有车耳。
English: The door of the car is behind, there is no door handle.

古文：中书监令如仆射。
现代文：中书监、中书令乘车与仆射相同。
English: It is the same for the Censors and the Censors to ride in the same carriage as the Footmen.

古文：汉制，乘舆御大驾，公卿奉引，太仆、大将军参乘，备千乘万骑，属车八十一乘。
现代文：荡伐制度，皇帝乘大驾出行，公卿在前面引导，太仆驾车，大将军陪乘，车队千乘万骑。属车有八十一乘，成三行在后行驶。
English: According to the wandering system, the emperor travels in a large vehicle, the nobles lead in the front, the servants drive, the general accompanies, and the motorcade has thousands of riders. There are eighty-one vehicles, and they travel in three lines behind.

古文：古者诸侯贰车九乘，秦灭九国，兼其车服，故八十一乘也。
现代文：古时候诸侯有贰车九乘，秦灭了九国，兼并其车服，所以属车八十一乘。
English: In ancient times, there were nine carriages for lords, but the Qin Dynasty destroyed nine countries and annexed their carriages, so there are eighty-one carriages.

古文：汉遵弗改。
现代文：遵行童制没有改变。
English: Adherence to the child-rearing system has not changed.

古文：汉都长安时，祠天于甘泉用之。
现代文：西汉以长安为都城时，到苴星祭天用大驾仪仗。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, when Chang'an was the capital city, it was customary to make a grand entrance into the city for the Star Festival.

古文：都洛阳，上原陵，又用之，大丧又用之。
现代文：塞汉以洛阳为都城，皇帝上原陆用大驾仪仗，大丧也用大驾仪仗。
English: Saihan had Luoyang as its capital city. Emperor Shangyuan used a large carriage for ceremonial purposes, and the great funeral also used a large carriage for ceremonial purposes.

古文：法驾则河南尹、洛阳令奉引，奉车郎御，侍中参乘，属车三十六乘。
现代文：皇帝乘法驾出行，则河南尹、洛阳令在前面引导，奉车郎驾车，侍中陪乘。属车有三十六乘。
English: When the emperor traveled by carriage, Henan Yin and Luoyang Ling led the way in the front, the chauffeur drove, and the attendants accompanied him. There were thirty-six carriages.

古文：凡属车皆皁盖赤里。
现代文：凡是属车都是黑色车盖，车襄是红色。
English: All of the cars have black bonnets, with red side panels.

古文：后汉祠天郊用法驾，祠宗庙用小驾。
现代文：东汉郊祀天地用法驾，祭祀宗庙用小驾。
English: The Eastern Han suburb worshiped heaven and earth with the use of a chariot, and the temple worshiped with a chariot.

古文：小驾，减损副车也。
现代文：小驾，比法驾要减少剐车。
English: If you drive a small car, you should drive less carelessly than if you drive legally.

古文：前驱有九游云罕，皮轩鸾旗，车皆大夫载之。
现代文：前驱有九脾云罕，皮轩鸾旗，车都是大夫乘坐。
English: The forerunner has nine spleens, skin and skin, and the car is ridden by a doctor.

古文：鸾旗者，编羽旄列系幛傍也。
现代文：鸾旗，就是编排羽旗固定在车上帷幕旁边。
English: 旗, is the arrangement of feather flags fixed on the car next to the curtain.

古文：金钲黄钺，黄门鼓车，乘舆之后有属车，尚书、御史载之。
现代文：接着是金钮乐器黄铁大斧仪仗，还有黄门鼓车，在皇帝乘舆后面有属车，尚书、御史乘坐。
English: Next is the ceremonial battle of the golden knob musical instrument Huang Tie Da Axe, as well as the Yellow Gate Drum Car. Behind the emperor's carriage, there is a carriage belonging to him, in which Shang Shu and Gu Shi ride.

古文：最后一车悬豹尾。
现代文：最后一乘车悬挂豹尾，侍御史乘坐。
English: The last ride is on the Leopard's Tail, with the Grand Chamberlain taking the ride.

古文：豹尾以前，比于省中。
现代文：豹尾之前，比于宫省之中。
English: Before the leopard's tail, compared to the middle of the palace.

古文：每出警跸清道，建五旗。
现代文：每当皇帝出行称警跸，左右侍卫，止人清道，竖立五旗。
English: Whenever the emperor travels, guards are posted on the left and right to keep the roads clear, and five flags are raised.

古文：太仆奉驾条上卤簿，尚书郎侍御史令史皆执注以督整车骑，所谓护驾也。
现代文：太仆奉侍圣驾报告车驾仪仗次第，尚书郎、侍御史、令史都根据次第规定督察整顿车马队列，称为护驾。
English: The eunuch serving the sacred chariot reported the status of the chariot ceremony, and Shang Shuro, the attendant, and the historian all inspected and rectified the chariot and horse queue according to the regulations, known as the escort.

古文：春秋上陵，尤省于小驾。
现代文：春秋上陵，用小驾特别减省人员。
English: Spring and autumn up the mausoleum, with a small car special reduction personnel.

古文：直事尚书一人从，其余令史以下皆从行，所谓先置也。
现代文：值事尚书一人从驾，其余令史以下都从行，称为先置。
English: One person on duty, Shang Shu, will drive the car, and the rest of the order history and below will follow, which is called pre-positioning.

古文：薛综《东京赋》注以云罕九游为旌旗别名，亦不辨其形。
现代文：薛综《东京赋》注解释云罕九脖是旌旗别名，也不分辨其形制。
English: Xue Zimin's "Tokyo Fu" commentary explains that "Yunhan Jiu Jie" is another name for the banner, and it is not possible to distinguish its shape.

古文：案魏命晋王建天子旌旗，置旄头云罕。是知云罕非旌旗也。徐广《车服注》以为九游，游车九乘。
现代文：考魏朝命晋王竖立天子旌旗，配置旄头骑云罕，由此可知云罕不是旌旗徐广《车服注》认为，九杵，就是牌车九乘。
English: The Wei and Wei dynasties ordered the Jin king to erect the Tianzi banner, and placed the Shantou to ride the Yunhan. From this, it can be seen that the Yunhan is not a banner. Xu Guang's "Car Note" believes that the Jiuzhaigou is the brand car Jiuzhen.

古文：云罕疑是璟罕。
现代文：云罕疑当是单罕。
English: When in doubt, err on the side of caution.

古文：《诗叙》曰： 齐侯田猎璟弋，百姓苦之。 
现代文：《诗叙》说： 齐侯田猎单弋，百姓深受其苦。 
English: "Poetic Narrative" said: Qihotian hunted lone wolves, and the people suffered from it.

古文：璟罕勣施游猎，遂为行饰乎？
现代文：睾罕原本用于打猎，是不是后来就成为车驾出行的一种装饰呢?
English: Originally, testicles were used for hunting, but did they later become a kind of decoration for driving?

古文：潘岳《籍田赋》先叙五路九旗，次言琼璟云罕。
现代文：潘岳《籍田赋》文中先叙述五辖九旗，接着就谈琼钹云罕。
English: In Pan Yue's "Kenedan Fu," he first describes the Five Jurisdictions and Nine Banners, and then talks about Qiong Yao and Yun Han.

古文：若罕为旗，则岳不应频句于九旗之下。
现代文：如果云罕是旗的话，那么潘岳就不应在九旗一句之后，又写一句讲云罕。
English: If Yunhan is a banner, then Pan Yue should not write another sentence about Yunhan after the nine banners.

古文：又以其物匹璟戟，宜是今毕网明矣。
现代文：潘岳文中又把云罕与钣戟并列在一起，云罕应当是现在所说的睾纲，这一点是很明显的。
English: Pan Yue's text also juxtaposed yunkan with gong, and it is clear that yunkan should be the testis mentioned now.

古文：此说为得之。皮轩，以虎皮为轩也。
现代文：这样解释是正确的。皮轩，就是用虎皮为饰的轩车。
English: This explanation is correct. Pihuan is a car decorated with tiger skins.

古文：徐又引《淮南子》 军正执豹皮以制正其众。 
现代文：俭尘又引《淮南子》 军正手执豹皮来控制兵众 。
English: Jian Chen also cited "Huainanzi" as an example, in which the army used leopard skins to control the soldiers.

古文：《礼记》 前月士师，则载虎皮 。
现代文：《礼记》 前面有军队，就在旗杆上挂起虎皮 。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" There was an army in front of me, so I hung a tiger skin on the flagpole.

古文：乘舆豹尾，亦其义类乎？
现代文：皇帝车驾最后一乘属车悬挂豹尾，也是这类用意吗?
English: Was the emperor's last ride in a chariot with a leopard's tail also a preparation of this kind?

古文：五旗者，五色各一旗，以木牛承其下。徐又云 木牛，盖取其负重而安稳也。 
现代文：五旗，就是五种颜色的旗子各一面，用木牛在下面固定徐广又说： 用木牛，是取意它能负重物而且安全稳固。 
English: The five flags, that is, the flags of five colors, are hoisted on each side, and fixed with wooden oxen below. Xu Guang also said: The use of wooden oxen is to take advantage of the fact that it can carry heavy objects and is safe and stable.

古文：五旗缠竿，即《礼记》德车结旌不尽饰也。戎事乃散之。
现代文：五旗缠竿，就是《礼记》所载德车要把旌旗缠结起来，车饰简略，遇有兵事便把缠结的旌旗散开。
English: The Five Flags Wrapping Pole, that is, the virtuous chariot contained in the "Rituals" is to wrap the banner, the car decoration is simple, and in the event of war, the tangled banner will be scattered.

古文：又武车绥旌，垂舒之也。
现代文：《礼记》又载武车绥旌，就是要让旌旗散开任其舒展。
English: "The Book of Rites" also carries the chariot banner, which is to let the banner spread out and stretch.

古文：史臣案：今结旌绥旌同，而德车武车之所不建。
现代文：史臣案：现在结旌绥旌的情况相同，但是德车武车的制度没有建立。
English: Scissors case: the situation is the same now, but the system of German cars and chariots has not been established.

古文：又木牛之义，亦未灼然可晓。
现代文：另外关于木牛的含义，并未明白通晓。
English: In addition, the meaning of "wooden ox" is not well understood.

古文：又案《周礼》辨载法物，莫不详究，然无相风、璟网、旄头之属，此非古制明矣。
现代文：又案《周礼》分辨记载帝王车驾仪仗所用器物，无不详备，然而却没有相风、单网、旄头之类，很显然这些器物不属于古代制度。
English: In addition, "Zhou Li" distinguished and recorded the objects used in the imperial chariot driving ceremony, all of which are detailed, but there is no phaon, single net, steamed bread and the like. It is clear that these objects do not belong to the ancient system.

古文：何承天谓战国并争，师旅数出，悬乌之设，务察风昆，宜是秦矣。
现代文：何承玉认为列国纷争，军队频繁行军交战，设置悬乌，密切观察阴阳相侵的灾祸之气，应当是童迩。
English: He Chengyu believed that the disputes between countries, the frequent marching of troops into battle, the setting of suspended sentences, and the close observation of the evil spirit of yin and yang invasion should be Tonglu.

古文：晋武尝问侍臣： 旄头何义？ 
现代文：晋武帝曾经问侍臣： 旄头足什么含义? 
English: Emperor Jinmu once asked a courtier: What is the meaning of Shantou foot?

古文：彭推对曰： 秦国有奇怪，触山截水，无不崩溃，唯畏旄头，故虎士服之，则秦制也。 
现代文：堑雄回答说： 蠢国有一种奇怪之物，触山山崩溃，截水水断流，所向无敌，惟独害怕旄头，所以虎士戴这种冠，这是秦国制度。 
English: Hao Xiong replied, "There is a strange thing in the stupid country. When the mountain collapses, the water is cut off, and the stream is cut off, it is invincible, but it is afraid of the hoe, so the tigers wear this kind of crown. This is the Qin system.

古文：张华曰： 有是言而事不经。
现代文：张华说： 有这个记载，但事情不合常理。
English: Zhang Hua said: There is this record, but things are not normal.

古文：臣谓壮士之怒，发踊冲冠，义取于此。 
现代文：臣以为壮士发怒，头发弹跳冲冠，旄头之义取于此。 
English: The vassal thought that the strong man gets angry, the hair bounces and rushes to the crown, and the righteousness of Shantou is derived from this.

古文：挚虞《决疑》无所是非也。
现代文：挚虞在《决疑》中对这些说法没有赞同也没有反对。
English: Zhengyu neither agreed nor disagreed with these statements in "The Verdict."

古文：徐爰曰： 彭、张之说，各言意义，无所承据。
现代文：徐爰认为： 彭推、张华两人的说法，各自谈旄头的意义，没有什么依据。
English: Xu Wei believes: Peng Du and Zhang Hua's two statements, each talking about the meaning of the gimmick, have no basis.

古文：案天文毕昴之中谓之天街，故车驾以璟罕前引，毕方昴员，因其象。《星经》，昴一名旄头，故使执之者冠皮毛之冠也。 
现代文：考天文二十八宿毕宿、昴宿之间称为天街，因此皇帝车驾以单罕在前引导，毕方形昴圆形，形象相应《星经》载，昴又名旄头，所以让拿着它的人戴毛皮冠。 
English: The area between the 28th, the 2nd, and the 3rd was known as the Heavenly Street. Therefore, the emperor drove his chariot with a single horse-drawn carriage in front of him. The horse-drawn carriage was square and the horse-drawn carriage was round. The image of the horse-drawn carriage was recorded in the "Starry Book." The horse-drawn carriage was also known as the horse-drawn carriage, so the person holding it had to wear a fur cap.

古文：轻车，古之战车也。
现代文：轻车，是占代一种冲锋陷阵的兵车。
English: The light vehicle is a kind of military vehicle used in the Charge of the Light Brigade.

古文：轮舆洞硃，不巾不盖，建矛戟幢麾，置弩于轼上，驾二。
现代文：车轮车箱通体朱红色，没有帷裳没有车盖，车上竖立矛戟、旗帜仪仗，车轼上置放弓弩，用两匹马驾车。
English: The whole body of the wheeled carriage is vermilion red, there is no drapery, there is no cover, there are spearheads and flags of honor on the carriage, bows and arrows are placed on the carriages, and the carriage is driven by two horses.

古文：射声校尉司马吏士载，以次属车。
现代文：射声校尉司马吏士乘轻车，在属车之后。
English: Lieutenant Sima Li, who shot the sound, took a light car and left after his own car.

古文：《汉仪》曰： 出称警，入称跸。 
现代文：《汉仪》说： 出称警，入称跸。 
English: "Hanyi" said: "If you call the police, you will be arrested."

古文：说者云，车驾出则应称警，入则应称跸也，而今俱唱之。
现代文：有人解释说，这是说皇帝车驾出行则应称警，从外而入应称跸，而现在出入都称警跸。
English: Someone explained that this meant that when the emperor traveled by car, the police should be called, and when he entered from outside, the police should be called, but now when he enters and leaves, the police should be called.

古文：史臣以为警者，警戒也；跸者，止行也。
现代文：史臣认为，警，就是警戒。跸，就是禁止通行。
English: According to Shichen, "Police" means "warning," and "no trespassing" means "no entry."

古文：今从乘舆而出者，并警戒以备非常也。
现代文：现随从皇帝车驾出行，都要加强警戒以防备意外。
English: Now, when traveling with the emperor by car, we must strengthen our vigilance to prevent accidents.

古文：从外而入乘舆相干者，跸而止之也。
现代文：从外而入对皇帝车驾有妨碍的，就要禁止通行。
English: If entering from the outside impedes the emperor's driving, it must be prohibited.

古文：董巴、司马彪云： 诸侯王遮迾出入，称警设跸。 
现代文：董巴、司马彪说： 诸侯王车驾出行和从外而入，都清道禁止行人，称警设跸。 
English: Dongba and Sima Biao said: When princes and kings travel by car and enter from the outside, they all clear the road and prohibit pedestrians, saying that the police have set up a barrier.

古文：武刚车，有巾有盖，在前为先驱。
现代文：武刚车，有帷裳有车盖，在前面为先驱。
English: Wu Gang car, with drapery and hood, is the pioneer in the front.

古文：又在轻车之后为殿也。
现代文：有时在轻车后面殿后。
English: Sometimes in the back of a pickup truck.

古文：驾一。
现代文：用一匹马驾车。
English: Drive a car with a horse.

古文：《史记》，卫青征匈奴，以武刚车为营是也。
现代文：《史记》记载，堑壹讨伐包坦，以武刚车为营帐，就是这种车。
English: "Histories" records that the first crusade against the Bataan, with the Wugang car as the camp, is this kind of car.

古文：汉制，大行载辒辌车，四轮。
现代文：选伐制度，大行皇帝待葬载辐棘车中，车子有四个车轮。
English: According to the logging selection system, the car with four wheels is among the cars carrying the emperor's coffin.

古文：其饰如金根，加施组连璧，交络，四角金龙首衔璧垂五采，析羽流苏，前后云气画帷裳，飐文画曲蕃，长与车等。太仆御，驾六白骆马，以黑药灼其身为虎文，谓之布施马。
现代文：其车饰如同金根车，加挂丝带连成的璧玉串，交叉缠绕，四角金龙翘首，含璧玉，下垂用五彩羽毛制成的编子，前后帷裳画有云气文饰，弧形车箱画有鹿头龙身图案，长度与车身相等太仆用六匹白骆马驾车，用黑药烧热在白骆马身上烙印虎纹，称为布施马。
English: Its car decoration is like a golden chariot, with a string of jade beads connected by hanging ribbons, cross-wound, four-cornered golden dragon head, containing jade beads, hanging braid made of multicolored feathers, front and rear curtains painted with cloud patterns, curved car box painted with deer head dragon body pattern, length equal to the car body, six white camel horses are used to drive the car, and tiger stripes are branded on the white camel horse with black medicine burning heat, called cloth horse.

古文：既下，马斥卖，车藏城北秘宫。
现代文：下葬以后，把马匹都卖掉，辊棘车收藏到城北秘宫中。
English: After the burial, the horses were sold, and the rickshaws were stored in a secret palace north of the city.

古文：今则马不虎文，不斥卖；车则毁也。
现代文：现在则是驾车的马不烧烙虎纹，也不卖掉；而辊棘车便毁掉。
English: Now the chariot horse is neither burnt nor sold, but the chariot of thorns is destroyed.

古文：自汉霍光、晋安平、齐王、贾充、王导、谢安、宋江夏王葬以殊礼者，皆大辂黄屋，载纻辌车。
现代文：从莲伐霍光、晋伐宣王、齐王、贾兖、王墓、谢壁，到塞朝江夏王等以殊礼安葬者，都用大路黄色车盖送葬，用辊棘车载丧。
English: From Lianfa Huoguang, Jinfa Xuan Wang, Qi Wang, Jia Rong, Wang Tomb, Xie Bi, to Xie Chaojiang Xia Wang and others who were buried with honors, they were buried with a yellow road cover and mourned with a thorny car.

古文：《晋令》曰： 乘传出使，遭丧以上，即自表闻，听得白服乘骡车，到副使摄事。 
现代文：《晋令》规定： 乘驿车出使，遇有丧事，便自己上表章奏报朝廷，允许穿白色丧服乘骡车，到达后由副使代理其事。 
English: "Jinling" stipulates: If you are dispatched by stagecoach, in the event of a funeral, you will report to the imperial court by yourself, and you are allowed to wear a white funeral dress and take a stagecoach. After arrival, the deputy envoy will act on your behalf.

古文：徐广《车服注》： 传闻骡车者，犊车装而马车辕也。 
现代文：徐广《车服注》： 乘驿车听到报丧改乘骡车，车装是牛车而车辕是马车车辕。 
English: Xu Guang's "Car Clothing Note": When you hear the news of a funeral, you should take a horse-drawn carriage instead of a carriage. A horse-drawn carriage is a horse-drawn carriage and a horse-drawn carriage is a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：又车无盖者曰科车。
现代文：另外，没有车盖的车叫科车。
English: In addition, a car without a hood is called a science car.

古文：晋武帝时，护军将军羊琇乘羊车，司隶校尉刘毅奏弹之。
现代文：晋武帝时，护军将军羊瑶乘坐羊车，司隶校尉刘毅上奏弹劾他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the general of the imperial guard, Yang Jie, rode in a sheep cart. Liu Yi, a lieutenant of the imperial guard, went to impeach him.

古文：诏曰： 羊车虽无制，犹非素者所服。 
现代文：下诏说： 羊车虽然是以往车制中所无，还不是一般人乘坐的。 
English: The next edict said: Although the sheep car is unprecedented in the previous car system, it is not yet used by ordinary people.

古文：江左来无禁也。
现代文：东晋以来就不禁止了。
English: It has not been prohibited since the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：旧有充庭之制，临轩大会，陈乘舆车辇旌鼓于殿庭。
现代文：以往有充庭的制度，皇帝至殿前会群臣，在殿廷陈列天子乘舆车辇旗鼓。
English: In the past, there was a system of court attendance, and the emperor would bring a group of ministers to the front of the hall, and they would display the son of heaven in the hall, riding a chariot and beating a drum.

古文：张衡《东京赋》云： 龙路充庭，鸾旗拂霓。 晋江左废绝。
现代文：张衡《束京赋》写道： 龙路充庭，鸾旗拂霓 东晋废止了这种制度。
English: Zhang Heng wrote in "Shu Keifu": "The East Jin Dynasty abolished this system.

古文：宋孝武大明中修复。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明年间恢复。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu restored it in the middle of the following year.

古文：上古寝处皮毛，未有制度。
现代文：上古时人居住在洞穴之中，生活在野外，用树叶兽皮遮蔽身体，还没有冠服制度。
English: In ancient times, people lived in caves, lived in the open, covered their bodies with animal skins from leaves, and there was no cap and gown system.

古文：后代圣人见鸟兽毛羽及其文章与草木华采之色，因染丝彩以作衣裳，为玄黄之服，以法乾坤上下之仪：观鸟兽冠胡之形，制冠冕缨蕤之饰。
现代文：后代圣人看见鸟类羽毛野兽毛皮的花纹五彩斑烂，又看见草木百花色彩纷呈，便染彩色丝织物制作衣裳，上衣玄色，下裳黄色，以效法乾坤上下天地玄黄的仪制；观察乌兽冠角颈下垂肉的形状，制作冠冕，并用丝带系于冠，卷结冠者颔下，又散而下垂为饰。
English: Later generations of sages saw the multicolored patterns of birds' feathers and beasts' fur, and also saw the colorful flowers of plants and trees. They dyed colored silk fabric to make clothes, the upper garment was black, and the lower garment was yellow, in imitation of the ceremonial system of heaven and earth. They observed the shape of the hanging flesh under the neck of the black beast's crown, made a crown, and tied it to the crown with a ribbon. If the crown was rolled up, it would hang loose under the armpit.

古文：虞氏作缋，采章弥文，夏后崇约，犹美黻冕。
现代文：虞氏作画，色彩更加艳丽。夏禹崇尚简约，尚且把祭祀时的礼服礼冠做得极华美。
English: Yu's painting, the colors are more colorful. Xia Yu's paintings are simple, yet the ceremonial dress for the ritual is very beautiful.

古文：咎繇陈《谟》，则称五服五章。
现代文：在《尚书皋陶谟》中，皋陶陈述按五等爵位配备五种花纹的礼服。
English: In "Shang Shuxuan Tao Mu," Shuntao stated that the dress with five patterns was equipped according to the fifth grade.

古文：皆后王所不得异也。
现代文：这些都是后王所不能改变的。
English: These are things the Empress Dowager cannot change.

古文：周监二代，典制详密，故弁师掌六冕，司服掌六服，设拟等差，各有其序。
现代文：周借鉴夏代、商代，典章制度详尽严密，所以有弁师掌理六冕，司服掌理六服，设立等级差别各有一定的次序。
English: Zhou drew lessons from the Xia and Shang dynasties. The award system was detailed and strict. Therefore, there were six crowns administered by benshi, and six awards administered by sifu. There was a certain order in which the different ranks were established.

古文：《礼记·冠义》曰： 冠者礼之始，事之重者也。 
现代文：《礼记冠义》说： 冠礼是礼的开始，是嘉礼中最重要的礼。 
English: "Li Ji Guan Yi" said: Guan Li is the beginning of the ceremony, it is the most important ceremony in the ceremony.

古文：太古布冠，齐则缁之。
现代文：太古时戴白布冠，祭祀斋戒，则染成黑色。
English: In ancient times, they wore white cloth crowns, and if they were fasting, they were dyed black.

古文：夏曰毋追，殷曰章甫，周曰委貌，此皆三代常所□□周之祭冕，缫采备饰，故夫子曰 服周之冕 ，以尽美称之。
现代文：夏代的冠叫毋追，殷代的冠叫章甫，周代的冠叫委貌，这些都是三代常所口口周代的祭冕，用五彩丝绳作脖，一共十二脾，每拧连缀十二粒的五彩玉，其形制饰物完备，所以孔夫子说 服遇代之冕 ，称赞它完美。
English: The crown of the Xia Dynasty is called "Zhao Zhao," the crown of the Yin Dynasty is called "Zhang Fu," and the crown of the Zhou Dynasty is called "Zhou Guan." These are the three generations of the crowns of the Zhou Dynasty, with a neck made of multicolored silk cords, a total of twelve spleens, and twelve multicolored beads per screw. The shape of the jewelry is complete, so Confucius said "serve the crown of the generation" and praised it as perfect.

古文：至秦以战国即天子位，灭去古制，郊祭之服，皆以袀玄。
现代文：至童由毁国七雄而一统天下，始皇帝即天子位，废除古代礼制，祭服上下都是黑色。
English: The first emperor was the first son of heaven, the ancient ritual system was abolished, and the ceremonial dress was black from top to bottom.

古文：至汉明帝始采《周官》、《礼记》、《尚书》诸儒说，还备衮冕之服。
现代文：到汉明帝时才采用《周官》、《礼记》、《尚书》等儒书论说，重新完备衮冕服制。
English: It was not until the time of Emperor Han Ming that the theory of Confucian books such as "Zhou Guan," "Li Ji" and "Shang Shu" was adopted, and the crowned robe system was completed anew.

古文：魏明帝以公卿衮衣黼黻之文，拟于至尊，复损略之。
现代文：魏明帝认为公卿衮衣上绘绣的花纹与天子礼服等同，又减少了衮衣上的文饰。
English: Wei Mingdi believed that the embroidered patterns on the court nobles' robes were equivalent to the emperor's robes, and reduced the decoration on the robes.

古文：晋以来无改更也。
现代文：置伐以来便没有更改了。
English: It hasn't changed since it was planted.

古文：天子礼郊庙，则黑介帻，平冕，今所谓平顶冠也。
现代文：天子祭祀天地宗庙，则戴黑介帧，平冕，就是现在所说的平天冠。
English: When the heavenly sons and daughters offered sacrifices to the heaven and earth ancestral temple, they wore black cassocks and flat crowns, which are now called flat crowns.

古文：皁表硃绿里，广七寸，长尺二寸，垂珠十二旒。
现代文：冠外表黑色，裹衬红色绿色，横宽七寸，纵长一尺二寸，垂珠十二旒。
English: The outer surface of the crown is black, the lining is red and green, the width is seven inches, the length is one foot two inches, and the hanging beads are twelve.

古文：以组为缨，衣皁上绛下，前三幅，后四幅，衣画而裳绣，为日、月、星辰、山、龙、华、虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻之象，凡十二章也。素带广四寸，硃里，以硃缘裨饰其侧。
现代文：用朱红色丝带作冠缨。衣上面黑色下面深红色，前面三幅，后面四幅。上衣圆饰是画的，下裳图饰是绣的，为曰、月、星辰、山、龙、花、虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻等形象，共十二种。素带宽四寸，裹衬朱红色，带面两侧加朱红色缘边为饰。
English: Crowned with scarlet ribbon. The top of the dress is black, the bottom is crimson, the front is three, and the back is four. The upper dress circle is painted, and the lower dress is embroidered, with twelve kinds of images such as the sun, moon, stars, mountains, dragons, flowers, insects, algae, fire, powdered rice, dragonflies, and dragonflies. The plain band is four inches wide, lined with scarlet, and both sides of the band are decorated with scarlet edges.

古文：中衣以绛缘其领袖，赤皮蔽膝。
现代文：中衣领口袖用深红色缘边。红色皮蔽膝。
English: The sleeves of the neckline of the midi dress have a deep red border. Red leather covers the knees.

古文：蔽膝，古之韨也。
现代文：蔽膝，就是古代的赣。
English: Covering the knees is an ancient custom.

古文：绛袴，绛袜，赤幹。未元服者，空顶介帻。
现代文：深红裤，深红袜，赤舄没有加冠者，衹在髻覆介帧。
English: Crimson trousers, crimson socks, crimson bonnets without a crown, the crotch in the crotch covering the middle frame.

古文：其释奠先圣，则皁纱裙，绛缘中衣，绛袴袜，黑幹。
现代文：若是祭奠先圣，则穿黑纱裙深红色缘边的中衣，深红色裤袜，黑舄。
English: If it is a celebration of the first saint, then wear a black gauze skirt with a crimson border, crimson tights, and black socks.

古文：其临轩亦衮冕也。
现代文：若是到殿前也服衮冕。
English: If you come to the hall, you will also be crowned.

古文：其朝服，通天冠，高九寸，金博山颜，黑介帻，绛纱裙，皁缘中衣。
现代文：上朝礼服，戴通天冠，高九寸，金博山颜，黑介帧，穿深红纱裙，黑色缘边中衣。
English: In the morning dress, wearing a crown, nine inches tall, golden hair, black frame, wearing a crimson dress, black lace blouse.

古文：其拜陵，黑介帻，緌单衣。其杂服，有青赤黄白缃黑色介帻，五色纱裙，五梁进贤冠，远游冠，平上帻，武冠。
现代文：若是拜祭陵寝，戴黑介帧，穿蔓单衣杂服，有青色、赤色、黄色、白色、浅黄色、黑色介帧，五色纱裙，五梁进贤冠，远游冠，平上帧，武冠。
English: If it is to worship the mausoleum, wear a black frame, wear a single garment, wear blue, red, yellow, white, light yellow, black frames, five-colored gauze skirts, five-beam crowns, long-distance crowns, flat frames, military crowns.

古文：其素服，白夹单衣。《汉仪》，立秋日猎服缃帻。
现代文：素服，戴白蛤便帽，穿单衣《汉仪》记载，立秋曰田猎戴浅黄愤。
English: Plainclothes, wearing a white skullcap, wearing a singlet, "Hanyi" records, the beginning of autumn is said to be the time to hunt and wear light yellow.

古文：晋哀帝初，博士曹弘之等议： 立秋御读令，不应缃帻，求改用素。 
现代文：晋哀帝初年，博士曹弘之等人建议： 立秋时进呈月令，皇帝不应当戴浅黄帧，请求改用白愤。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Jin's reign, Dr. Cao Hongzhi and others suggested: At the beginning of autumn, when the lunar calendar is advanced, the emperor should not wear light yellow frames, and request to use white anger instead.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: He complied.

古文：宋文帝元嘉六年，奉朝请徐道娱表： 不应素帻。 
现代文：宋文帝元嘉六年，奉朝请拴道娱上表说： 不应当戴白帧。 
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Songwen's reign, Emperor Yuanjia said, "You should not wear white frames.

古文：诏门下详议，帝执宜如旧，遂不改。
现代文：诏令门下省详细讨论，皇帝执意宜如旧制。于是没有更改。
English: The imperial edict was discussed in detail by the subordinate provinces, and the emperor insisted that the old system should remain. Therefore, there was no change.

古文：进贤冠，前高七寸，后高三寸，长八寸，梁数随贵贱，古之缁布冠也。
现代文：进贤冠，前高七寸，后高三寸，长八寸，冠梁的多少随其贵贱而定，是古代缁布冠的遣制。
English: Jinxian crown, the front height is seven inches, the back height is three inches, the length is eight inches, and the number of crown beams depends on its nobility. It is a kind of ancient embroidered crown.

古文：文儒者之所服。
现代文：是儒生所戴之冠。
English: It is the crown worn by Confucianism.

古文：上公、卿助祭于郊庙，皆平冕，王公八旒，卿七旒，以组为缨，色如其绶。
现代文：上公、卿在祭祀天地祭祀宗庙时助祭，都戴平冕，王公八旒，卿七旒，用丝带作冠缨，冠缨颜色与绶带颜色相同。
English: When the high lords and nobles officiate at the sacrificial rites of heaven and earth and the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple, they all wear flat crowns. The king wears eight crowns and the nobles seven crowns. The crowns are made of ribbons, and the color of the crowns is the same as that of the ribbons.

古文：王公衣山龙以下，九章也；卿衣华虫以下，七章也。
现代文：王公上衣图饰画山、龙、花、虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻等形象，共九种，卿上衣图饰画花、虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻等形象，共七种。
English: There are a total of nine types of Wang Gong Tops decorated with images of mountains, dragons, flowers, insects, algae, fire, powdered rice, dragonflies and dragonflies, and seven types of Qing Tops decorated with images of flowers, insects, algae, fire, powdered rice, dragonflies and dragonflies.

古文：行乡射礼，则公卿委貌冠，以皁绢为之，形如覆杯，与皮弁同制。
现代文：行乡射礼，公卿戴委貌冠，是用黑色缯绢制作的，形状如同覆在桌上的杯子，样式大小与皮弁相同。
English: It is made of black enamel, shaped like a cup on a table, and is the same size as a leather flap.

古文：长七寸，高四寸。
现代文：长七寸，高四寸。
English: Seven inches long, four inches high.

古文：衣黑而裳素。其中衣以皁缘领袖；其执事之人皮弁，以鹿皮为之。
现代文：穿黑色上衣白色下裳中衣领袖口饰黑色缘边乡射礼执事之人戴皮弁，是用鹿皮做的。
English: Wearing a black tunic, white underclothes, a leader's tunic, a mouth ornament in black, a person from a border town, a deacon, wearing a leather flap, is made of deer skin.

古文：武冠，昔惠文冠，本赵服也，一名大冠。
现代文：武冠，即古代的 惠文冠 ，本来是赵国人戴的冠，又名大冠。
English: Wu Guan, that is, the ancient Huiwen Guan, was originally a crown worn by the people of Zhao, also known as the Great Crown.

古文：凡侍臣则加貂蝉。
现代文：凡侍臣冠前加黄金瑺，附以金蝉，并插貂尾为饰。
English: All the attendant crowns were adorned with a golden scepter in front, a golden cicada, and an appendage.

古文：应劭《汉官》曰： 说者以金取坚刚，百炼不耗；蝉居高食洁，口在腋下；貂内劲悍而外温润。 
现代文：应劭《汉宫》说： 谈论的人认为，用金取其坚硬刚强，百炼不损；蝉则在高树之上，饮洁净的露水，口在腋下；貂内性强悍而外表温润。 
English: "The Han Palace" said: "People who talk about it think that it is hard and strong to take it with gold, and it does not damage the hundred refinements; the cicada is on top of a tall tree, drinking clean dew, and its mouth is under the armpit; it is strong inside and warm on the outside.

古文：此因物生义，非其实也。
现代文：这是就其物而附会出的一些说法，并不符合实际。
English: These are some of the claims that have been made about it, and they do not correspond to reality.

古文：其实赵武灵王变胡，而秦灭赵，以其君冠赐侍臣，故秦、汉以来，侍臣有貂蝉也。
现代文：其实趟武灵王改用胡服，后来秦国灭了赵国，把赵国国君的冠赐给侍臣，所以秦、汉以来，侍臣戴的冠有貂蝉。
English: In fact, King Wuling changed to Hu clothing, and later Qin State destroyed Zhao State and gave the crown of the king of Zhao State to his attendants. Therefore, since the Qin and Han dynasties, the crown worn by attendants has been the cicada.

古文：徐广《车服注》称其意曰： 北土寒凉，本以貂皮暖额，附施于冠，因遂变成首饰乎？ 
现代文：徐广《车服注》阐述用貂尾的缘由： 北方一带气候寒冷，原本就用貂皮在头上保暖，后来加在冠上作饰物，是不是因此就变成了首饰呢? 
English: Xu Guang's "Car Clothing Note" elaborates on the reason for the use of appendages: The climate in the northern region is cold. Originally, mink fur was used to keep the head warm, and later it was added to the crown as an ornament. Is this why it became jewelry?

古文：侍中左貂，常侍右貂。
现代文：侍中冠左边插貂尾，常侍冠右边插貂尾。
English: The left side of the middle attendant crown is pierced with an appendix, and the right side of the regular attendant crown is pierced with an appendix.

古文：法冠，本楚服也。
现代文：法冠，本来是楚国人戴的冠。
English: The legal crown was originally a crown worn by the people of Chu.

古文：一名柱后，一名獬豸。
现代文：它有一个名称叫柱后冠，还有一个名称叫獬豸冠。
English: It has a name called the post crown, and another name called the beak crown.

古文：说者云： 獬豸兽知曲直，以角触不正者也。 
现代文：谈论的人说： 獬豸是神羊，能辨曲直，见人斗便用独角触邪恶者。 
English: Those who talk about it say: The baboon is a divine sheep, able to distinguish right from wrong, and when it sees a fight, it touches the evil one with its horn.

古文：秦灭楚，以其君冠赐法官。
现代文：秦国灭亡楚国，把楚国国君的獬豸冠赐给法官。
English: After the fall of Qin and the destruction of Chu, the crown of the king of Chu was given to the judge.

古文：谒者高山冠，本齐服也。一名侧注冠。
现代文：谒者高山冠，本来是齐国人戴的冠，又名侧注冠。
English: Gaoshan crown, originally a crown worn by the people of Qi, also known as the side-injection crown.

古文：秦灭齐，以其君冠赐谒者。
现代文：秦国灭亡齐国，把齐国国君的冠赐给谒者。
English: Qin State destroyed Qi State and gave the crown of the sovereign of Qi State to the loser.

古文：魏明帝以其形似通天、远游，乃毁变之。
现代文：魏明帝因为高山冠的形制与通天冠、远游冠相似，便废除了这种冠。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei abolished the alpine crown because its shape was similar to the crown of the heavens and the crown of distant travel.

古文：樊哙冠，广九寸，制似平冕，殿门卫士服之。
现代文：樊啥冠，宽九寸，形制近似平冕，是殿门卫士戴的冠。
English: The crown, which is nine inches wide and shaped like a crown, is the crown worn by the guardian of the temple gate.

古文：汉将樊哙常持铁盾。
现代文：汉王将领樊啥经常手持铁盾牌。
English: Han dynasty generals often carried iron shields.

古文：鸿门之会，项羽欲害汉王，乃裂裳以苞盾，戴入见羽。
现代文：鸿门宴上，型垩想杀害选王刘邦，樊堕便撕开下裳包裹盾牌，戴在头上进去见项羽。
English: At the Hongmen banquet, the dragonfly wanted to kill the king-elect Liu Bang, so the dragonfly tore off the cloak and shield, put it on his head and went in to see Xiang Yu.

古文：汉承秦制，冠有十三种。魏、晋以来，不尽施用。
现代文：汉朝承袭秦朝制度，有十三种冠，从魏、晋以来，没有完全戴用。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty, and there are thirteen kinds of crowns. Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, the crowns have not been worn completely.

古文：今志其施用者也。
现代文：现在记载的是实际戴用的几种。
English: What is recorded now is the actual number of rings worn.

古文：帻者，古贱人不冠者之服也。
现代文：愤，是古代卑贱不戴冠的人的覆髻之巾，要盖到额头。
English: It was worn in ancient times by people of lowly status who did not wear crowns.

古文：汉元帝额有壮发，始引帻服之。
现代文：汉元帝额上有浓发，才开始采用戴愤。
English: Han Wudong had coarse hair on his forehead before he started to frame it.

古文：王莽顶秃，又加其屋也。
现代文：王莽秃顶，又把帧巾加高做成房屋之屋面形。
English: If the king is bald, he will grow taller and become a house.

古文：《汉注》曰： 冠进贤者宜长耳，今介帻也；冠惠文者宜短耳，今平中帻也。
现代文：《漠注》说： 戴进贤冠的话，帧巾宜加长耳，造就是现在的介帻。戴惠文冠的话，帧巾宜加短耳，这就是现在的平上帧。
English: "Ambiguous Note" said: If you wear a virtuous crown, the frame width should be increased and the ears should be long, which is the current middle ear. If you wear a benevolent crown, the frame width should be increased and the ears should be short, which is the current flat frame.

古文：知时各随所宜，后遂因冠为别。 
现代文：可知当时各随所宜，后来便因不同的冠而用不同的帧巾。 
English: It can be seen that at that time each did as he pleased, and later they used different frame cloths for different crowns.

古文：介帻服文吏，平上服武官也。
现代文：文吏戴介帧，武官戴平上帧。
English: The clerks wore medial frames, and the military attachés wore flat upper frames.

古文：童子帻无屋者，示未成人也。
现代文：童子帧没有帧屋，表示不是成年人。
English: The boy's frame does not have a frame house, indicating that he is not an adult.

古文：又有纳言帻，后收，又一重，方三寸。
现代文：又有纳言帧，后面是收，又一重，三寸见方。
English: There is also a Nagan frame, behind it is a close-up, and another heavy, three inches square.

古文：又有赤帻，骑吏、武史、乘舆鼓吹所服。
现代文：还有赤帧，是骑吏、武吏、皇帝车驾出行时的鼓吹乐队所戴。
English: There is also a red frame, which is worn by cavalry officers, military officers, and the emperor's car-driving propaganda band.

古文：救日蚀，文武官皆免冠，著赤帻，对朝服，示威武也。
现代文：出现日食时进行祈祷，文武官员都免冠，戴赤帧，配上朝服，显示威武。
English: When there is a solar eclipse, prayers are held, and civil and military officials do not wear crowns, wear red frames, and wear imperial robes to show their power.

古文：宋乘舆鼓吹，黑帻武冠。
现代文：宋时皇帝车驾鼓吹乐队戴黑帧武冠。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the emperor drove a car to preach the band wearing a black-framed crown.

古文：汉制，祀事五郊，天子与执事所服各如方色；百官不执事者，自服常服以从。
现代文：遂伐制度，祭祀五郊，天子与参与祭祀事务的人，所穿祭服的颜色分别与五方的代表色相应；百官当中不参与祭祀事务的人，各自穿常服跟从。
English: According to the subjugation system, the color of the ceremonial robes worn by the Five Suburbs, the Heavenly Sons, and the people who participated in the ritual affairs respectively corresponded to the representative colors of the five parties; the people who did not participate in the ritual affairs among the hundred officials respectively wore ordinary clothes to follow.

古文：常服，绛衣也。
现代文：常服，就是绛衣。
English: Regular clothes, that is.

古文：魏秘书监秦静曰： 汉氏承秦，改六冕之制，俱玄冠绛衣而已。 
现代文：魏秘书监秦静说： 汉朝承袭秦朝，改革六冕制度，统一服玄冠绛衣。 
English: Wei secretary Qin Jing said: The Han Dynasty inherited the Qin Dynasty, reformed the six-crown system, and unified the uniform of the black crown and robe.

古文：晋名曰五时朝服；有四时朝服，又有朝服。
现代文：置伐称为五时朝服，有四时朝服，又有朝服
English: The setting is called five o'clock morning dress, there are four o'clock morning dress, and there are morning dress

古文：凡兵事，总谓之戎。
现代文：凡是军事，总称为戎。
English: Anything military is called eunos.

古文：《尚书》云： 一戎衣而天下定。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 一着戎衣一次交战就平定了天下。 
English: "Shangshu" said: One uniform, one battle, and the whole world is pacified.

古文：《周礼》： 革路以即戎。 
现代文：《周礼》： 革辖用于戎事。 
English: "Zhou Li": Leather is used for military purposes.

古文：又曰： 兵事韦弁服。 
现代文：又说： 有兵事穿戴韦弁服。 
English: He also said: There are soldiers who wear Dai Wei Ben clothing.

古文：以韎韦为弁，又以为衣裳。
现代文：用浅红色熟皮作弁，又作衣裳。
English: They use the light red mature leather as a valve and for clothing.

古文：《春秋左传》： 戎服将事。 
现代文：《春秋左传》说： 身穿戎服处理事情。 
English: "Shunqiu Zuo Zhen" said: Wearing a military uniform to deal with things.

古文：又云： 晋郤至衣韎韦之跗。 注，先儒云： 韎，绛色。 
现代文：又说： 晋国将领却至身穿浅红色熟皮戎服。 先儒说： 秣，绛色。 
English: He also said that the generals of the Jin Dynasty wore light red military uniforms made of full-grain leather.

古文：今时伍伯衣。
现代文：现在伍伯穿这样的衣服。
English: Now Wubel wears clothes like this.

古文：说者云，五霸兵战，犹有绶绂、冠缨、漫胡，则戎服非袴褶之制，未详所起。
现代文：论者认为，春秋五霸用兵作战，尚且有绶绂、冠缨、漫胡，那么当时戎服还不是上衣下裤的裤褶之制，裤褶起于何时还不能确知。
English: The commentator believes that the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties used soldiers to fight, and they still had a beard, a crown, and a moustache. At that time, the military uniform was not yet a system of trouser crotches for the jacket and trousers, and it was not certain when the crotch would rise.

古文：近代车驾亲戎中外戒严之服，无定色，冠黑帽，缀紫褾。
现代文：近世皇帝临阵、内外戒严穿这种服装，服装颜色不固定，戴黑帽，用紫标缀边为饰。
English: In modern times, emperors wore this kind of clothing when they were at war or under martial law at home and abroad. The color of the clothing was not fixed. They wore black hats and decorated the edges with purple markings.

古文：褾以缯为之，长四寸，广一寸。
现代文：标是用绢帛做的，长四寸，宽一寸。
English: The standard is made of rattan, four inches long and one inch wide.

古文：腰有络带，以代鞶革。中官紫褾。外官绛褾。
现代文：腰间系络带，以代替皮带中官紫裸，外官绛标。
English: A sash is tied around the waist to replace the belt, with the mid-officer naked and the outer-officer wearing a badge.

古文：又有纂严戎服，而不缀褾。
现代文：还有纂严戎服，不缀标为饰。
English: There are also strict military uniforms, with no insignia as decoration.

古文：行留文武悉同。
现代文：出行留守文官武官都相同。
English: The departing civilian officials and military attachés are all the same.

古文：其畋猎巡幸，则唯从官戎服，带鞶革；文官不下缨，武官脱冠。
现代文：如果是出行田猎，或是到某处巡察，则衹有侍从官着戎服，束皮带；文官不解冠缨，武官要脱冠。
English: If it is a trip to go hunting in the fields, or to inspect a certain place, there will be attendants wearing official uniforms and a bunch of belts; civil servants do not wear crowns, and military attachés have to take off their crowns.

古文：宋文帝元嘉中，巡幸搜狩皆如之；救宫庙水火，亦如之。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉年问，皇帝巡察各地或是出行田猎，服制都是这样；宫廷宗庙有水火之灾祈祷攘除，也是这种服制。
English: Song Emperor Qianyuan asked, the emperor inspected all over the country or went hunting, the dress code is like this; the palace ancestral temple has water and fire disasters, and it is also this dress code.

古文：汉制，太后入庙祭神服，绀上皁下；亲蚕，青上缥下，皆深衣。
现代文：汉代制度，太后进入庙堂祭神的服装，上衣天青色，下裳黑色。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, the empress dowager entered the temple to offer sacrifices to the gods, wearing a sky-blue upper garment and a black lower garment.

古文：深衣，即单衣也。首饰剪牦帼。
现代文：亲自祭祀蚕神时的服装，上衣青色，下裳淡青色，都足衣与裳相连的深衣。深衣，就是单衣。以剪牦帼为首饰。
English: The clothing worn when personally worshipping the silkworm god, with a blue upper garment, a light blue lower garment, and a dark garment that is connected to both the lower garment and the outer garment. The dark garment is a single garment. The jewelry is made of scissors.

古文：汉制，皇后谒庙服，绀上皁下；亲蚕，青上缥下。
现代文：莲伐制度，皇后谒庙的服装，上衣天青色，下裳黑色。
English: The lotus felling system, the dress of the Empress Dowager's Temple, the blouse sky blue, the petticoat black.

古文：首饰，假髻，步摇，八雀，九华，加以翡翠。
现代文：亲自祭祀蚕神时的服装，上衣青色，下裳淡青色。
English: The upper garment is blue, and the lower garment is light blue.

古文：晋《先蚕仪注》，皇后十二钅奠，步摇，大手髻，衣纯青之衣，带绶佩。
现代文：首饰是：假髻、步摇、八雀、九花，加上翡翠晋《先蚕仪注》记载，皇后首饰有十二钿、步摇、大手髻，穿纯青色衣，系绶带佩玉。
English: The jewelry consisted of: a false beak, a walking stick, eight sparrows, and nine flowers, plus a jade jin, as recorded in the "Annotation of the First Silkworm." The queen's jewelry included twelve beaks, a walking stick, and a large beak, and she wore a pure blue dress with a beaded ribbon.

古文：今皇后谒庙服袿襡大衣，谓之袆衣。
现代文：现在皇后谒庙穿桂褐大衣，称为伟衣。
English: Nowadays, the empress dowager wears a cinnamon brown overcoat, known as a greatcoat.

古文：公主三夫人大手髻，七钅奠蔽髻。
现代文：公士、三夫人首饰是大手髻、七钿、蔽髻。
English: The jewelry of court nobles and the three queens consists of large bracelets, seven bracelets, and necklaces.

古文：九嫔及公夫人五钅奠。
现代文：九嫔及公夫人首饰为五钿。
English: Nine bracelets and the princess's jewelry are five bracelets.

古文：世妇三钅奠。公主会见，大手髻。
现代文：世妇首饰为三钿公主在会见场合，首饰发型是大手髻。
English: The lady's jewelry is a three-pronged princess on the occasion of meeting, and the jewelry hairstyle is a big bracelet.

古文：其长公主得有步摇。公主封君以上皆带绶，以采组为绲带，各如其绶色。公特进列侯夫人、卿校世妇、二千石命妇年长者，绀缯帼。
现代文：如果是长公主应当有步摇，公主封君以上都系绶带，用彩色丝带编织成绲带缘边，绲边与绶带用相同颜色公、特进、列侯夫人，卿、校世妇，二千石命妇中年长的，首饰是天青色缯帼。
English: In the case of the eldest princess, there should be a step-shaking, the princess, the prince and above all wear an umbilical cord, with colored ribbons woven into the edge of the umbilical cord, the fringe and the umbilical cord use the same color, the prince, the special envoy, the vassal lady, the lord, the school mistress, the older of the two thousand stone women, the jewelry is sky-blue satin.

古文：佐祭则皁绢上下；助蚕则青绢上下。
现代文：佐祭时穿黑绢上衣下裳。助祭蚕神时穿青绢上衣下裳。
English: At the Sa Festival, women wear a black silk blouse and petticoat. At the Serpent Festival, women wear a blue silk blouse and petticoat.

古文：自皇后至二千石命妇，皆以蚕衣为朝服。
现代文：从皇后到二千石命妇，都以祭祀蚕神时的礼服为朝服。
English: From the empress to the 2,000-koku dame, the ceremonial dress worn during the worship of the silkworm god was the morning dress.

古文：刘向曰： 古者天子至于士，王后至于命妇，必佩玉，尊卑各有其制。 
现代文：刘向说： 占时候从天子到士，从王后到命妇，都要佩带玉，尊卑各有不同的制度规定 《礼记》说： 天子佩带白玉，而系以玄色的绶带。
English: Liu Xiang said: From the son of heaven to the priest, from the queen to the widow, all must wear jade, and there are different systems for the high and low. "Rituals" said: The son of heaven wears white jade, and is tied with a black ribbon.

古文：《礼记》曰： 天子佩白玉而玄组绶，公侯山玄玉而硃组绶，卿大夫水苍玉而缁组绶，士佩瓀玟而缊组绶。 缊，赤黄色。
现代文：公侯佩带青黑如山色的玉，而系以红色的绶带。
English: The prince is wearing a blue-black, mountain-coloured bead, tied with a red ribbon.

古文：绶者，所贯佩相承受也。上下施韨如蔽膝，贵贱亦各有殊。
现代文：斋戒时要把佩玉上的绶带挽结起来，并使原来下垂的佩玉屈折向上，而系上绂，如现时的蔽膝，其形制也有不同的贵贱等级。
English: When fasting, the umbilical cord on the peyote should be knotted, and the originally sagging peyote should be bent upwards, and the upper collar, such as the current knee cover, has different noble and low grades.

古文：五霸之后，战兵不息，佩非兵器，韨非战仪，于是解去佩韨，留其系襚而已。秦乃以采组连结于襚，转相结受，谓之绶。
现代文：春秋五霸之后，战争连年不止，王佩不是兵器，绂也不是战旗，于是解去玉佩和轼，衹留下系玉的丝带而已秦便用彩色丝带与之连结，相缀而成，称之为绶。
English: After the Five Dynasties of Spring and Autumn, the war continued year after year. Wang Pei was not a weapon, nor was the scepter a battle flag. Therefore, the jade scepter and the scepter were removed, and the scepter was left with a ribbon of jade. Qin then used colored ribbons to connect and embellish it, calling it a scepter.

古文：汉承用之。
现代文：汉代承袭而施用。
English: It was inherited and applied during the Han Dynasty.

古文：至明帝始复制佩，而汉末又亡绝。
现代文：到汉明帝时才又制玉佩，但到汉朝未年又失传。
English: It wasn't until the time of Emperor Han Ming that jade cloths were made again, but they were lost again in the last years of the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏侍中王粲识其形，乃复造焉。
现代文：魏朝侍中王塞记得其形制，便重新制造。
English: Wang Xie, a courtier of the Wei Dynasty, remembered its shape and remade it.

古文：今之佩，粲所制也。
现代文：现在的玉佩，就是王垦重新制造的。
English: The current Jade Pendant is a re-creation of the original.

古文：皇后至命妇所佩，古制不存，今与外同制，秦组绶，仍又施之。
现代文：皇后至命妇的玉佩，古代的形制没有留存下来，现在与外间形制相同，仍采用秦时创制的绶带。
English: The jade bracelet worn by the empress dowager did not retain its ancient shape. It is now the same shape as the outer bracelet and still uses the ribbon created by Qin Shi.

古文：汉制，自天子至于百官，无不佩刀。
现代文：汉代制度，从天子到百官，没有不佩带刀剑的。
English: In the Han Dynasty system, there was no one who did not wear a sword from the Son of Heaven to a hundred officials.

古文：司马彪志具有其制。
现代文：旦：区壁《续汉书志》记载丁佩刀制度。
English: Dang: The Ding Saber System is recorded in Gu Wei's "Continuation of Han History."

古文：汉高祖为泗水亭长，拔剑斩白蛇。
现代文：汉高担当回生亭长时，拔出佩剑斩杀白蛇。
English: When Henkel was in charge of the Revival Pavilion, he pulled out his sword to kill the white snake.

古文：隽不疑云： 剑者，君子武备。 
现代文：隽不疑说： 剑，足君子防身武器。 
English: Zou said without hesitation, "The sword is a gentleman's weapon for self-defense.

古文：张衡《东京赋》 纡黄组，腰干将。 
现代文：张衡《束京赋》写道， 系着绶带，腰间佩带干将宝剑 。
English: Zhang Heng wrote "Bundle of Beijing Fu," wearing an umbilical cord and a sword around his waist.

古文：然则自人君至士人，又带剑也。
现代文：这样看来，从皇帝直到一般士人，都佩带剑。
English: In this way, from the emperor to the ordinary scholar, all wear swords.

古文：自晋代以来，始以木剑代刃剑。
现代文：从晋代以后，才用木剑代替铁刃剑作佩剑。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, wooden swords were used instead of iron swords for sabers.

古文：乘舆六玺，秦制也。
现代文：皇帝有六玺，这是秦制。
English: The emperor has six emperors, which is the system of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：《汉旧仪》曰： 皇帝行玺，皇帝之玺，皇帝信玺，天子行玺，天子之玺，天子信玺。 
现代文：据《漠旧仪》记载有 皇帝行玺 、 皇帝之玺 、 皇帝信玺 、 天子行玺 、 天子之玺 、 天子信玺 六种。
English: According to the "Muddy Old Ritual," there are six kinds of imperial seal, emperor's seal, emperor's letter seal, heavenly son's seal, heavenly son's seal, heavenly son's letter seal.

古文：此则汉遵秦也。
现代文：这是选承袭蠢制。
English: It's a stupid system.

古文：初，高祖入关，得秦始皇蓝田玉玺，螭虎纽，文曰 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 。
现代文：当初产担入函谷关，得到了塞绐皇的蓝墨玉玺，螭虎印纽，印文是 受天之命，皇帝寿昌 。
English: At the beginning, the production was carried to Hantuguan, and the blue-and-ink jade bowl of Emperor Jie was obtained, the tiger seal was printed, the seal was ordered by heaven, and the emperor was Shuchang.

古文：高祖佩之，后代名曰传国玺，与斩白蛇剑俱为乘舆所宝。
现代文：汉高祖即佩此玺，后代称为传国玺。这枚玉玺和选壶姐斩白蛇的宝剑都成为天子的宝物。
English: The ancestor of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, wore this scepter, and his descendants called it the "Imperial Scepter." This jade scepter and the sword with which Zeng Juxie cut the white snake have both become the treasures of the Son of Heaven.

古文：传国玺，魏、晋至今不废；斩白蛇剑，晋惠帝武库火烧之，今亡。
现代文：传国玺，历经魏朝、晋朝直到现在还存留下来了；斩白蛇的宝剑，晋惠帝时武库失火烧毁了，现已不存。
English: The imperial scepter, which has been passed down through the Wei and Jin dynasties, has survived until now; the sword for cutting off the white snake, whose arsenal was destroyed by fire during the reign of Emperor Jinhui, no longer exists.

古文：晋怀帝没胡，传国玺没于刘聪，后又属石勒。
现代文：晋怀帝被胡人俘虏，传国玺流落到刘聪手中，后来又转归石勒。
English: Emperor Jinhuai was captured by the Hu people, and the succession of the country fell into the hands of Liu Cong, and later it was transferred to Shile.

古文：及石勒弟石虎死，胡乱，晋穆帝代，乃还天府。
现代文：及至石勒的弟弟石虎死后，胡人大乱，晋穆帝继康帝即帝位，传国玺才回到朝廷府库。
English: It was not until the death of Shile's younger brother, Shihu, and the Hu people's rebellion, that Jinmu Emperor succeeded Emperor Kang to the throne, and the imperial scepter returned to the imperial treasury.

古文：虞喜《志林》曰： 传国玺，自在六玺之外，天子凡七玺也。 
现代文：虞喜《志林》说： 传国玺，自然在六枚玺印之外，天子共有七枚玺印。 
English: Yuxi "Zhilin" said: According to the national seal, naturally, in addition to the six seals, the emperor has a total of seven seals.

古文：《汉注》曰： 玺，印也。
现代文：《漠注》说： 玺，就是印。
English: "Muzhu" said:, is the seal.

古文：自秦以前，臣下皆以金玉为印，龙虎纽，唯所好。
现代文：秦朝以前，臣下部用金或玉做印，龙虎印纽，随各人爱好而有不同。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, the lower part of the vassal was stamped with gold or jade, and the dragon and tiger were stamped with ink, which varied according to each person's preference.

古文：秦以来，以玺为称，又独以玉，臣下莫得用。 
现代文：秦朝以后，称为玺，又惟独用玉做，臣下不能用。 
English: After the Qin Dynasty, it was known as the jade wreath, and it was only made of jade, so it could not be used by vassals.

古文：汉制，皇帝黄赤绶，四采，黄、赤、缥、绀。
现代文：漠代制度，皇帝黄赤色印绶，四种彩色花纹：黄色、赤色、淡青色、天青色。
English: The desert system, the emperor's yellow and red seal, four kinds of color patterns: yellow, red, light blue, sky blue.

古文：皇后金玺，绶亦如之。
现代文：皇后金玺印绶与皇帝相同。
English: The queen's gold seal is the same as the emperor's.

古文：于礼，士绶之色如此，后代变古也。
现代文：按礼制来说，士的印绶颜色像这样，是后代改变了古代的制度。
English: According to the etiquette, the color of the seal of the priest is like this. It is the descendants who have changed the ancient system.

古文：吴无刻玉工，以金为玺。
现代文：吴国没有刻玉的丁匠，便用金做玺。
English: In the State of Wu, there were no carvers to carve the jade, so they used gold to make the ingots.

古文：孙皓造金玺六枚是也。
现代文：孙皓就制造了六枚金玺。
English: Sun Yat-sen produced six gold ingots.

古文：又有麟凤龟龙玺，驼马鸭头杂印，今代则阙也。
现代文：还有麟凤龟龙玺，驼马鸭头杂印，现在没有留存了。
English: There are also Lin Feng, Turtle, Dragon, Camel, Horse and Duck mixed prints, which are no longer extant.

古文：皇太子，金玺，龟纽，纁硃绶，四采，赤、黄、缥、绀。
现代文：皇太子，佩金玺，龟形印纽，缍朱色绶带，四种彩色花纹：赤色、黄色、淡青色、天青色。
English: Crown prince, gold-plated brooch, tortoise-shaped clasp, scarlet ribbon, four color patterns: red, yellow, light blue, sky blue.

古文：给五时朝服，远游冠，亦有三梁进贤冠，佩瑜玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴远游冠，也有三梁进贤冠。佩带瑜玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a royal robe, a crown for long-distance travel, and a crown for three-beam advancement. He wore a yu-dama.

古文：诸王，金玺，龟纽，纁硃绶，四采，赤、黄、缥、绀。给五时朝服，远游冠，亦有三梁进贤冠，佩山玄玉。
现代文：诸王，佩金玺，龟形印纽，缜朱色绶带，四种彩色花纹：赤色、黄色、淡青色、天青色、赐给五时朝服，戴远游冠，也有三梁进贤冠。佩带青黑如山色的玉。
English: Kings, gold brooches, tortoise-shaped cufflinks, scarlet ribbons, four kinds of color patterns: red, yellow, light blue, sky blue, five-hour morning dress, long-distance crown, and three-beam crown. Wearing blue-black like mountain jade.

古文：郡公，金章，玄硃绶。
现代文：郡公，佩金章，玄朱色绶带。
English: County magistrate, gold-plated badge, dark red ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤三梁冠，佩山玄玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤三梁冠，佩带青黑如山色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given the imperial robe, crowned with the three-beam crown, and wearing a blue-black jade bracelet.

古文：太宰、太傅、太保、丞相、司徒、司空，金章，紫绶，给五时朝服，进贤三梁冠，佩山玄玉。
现代文：太宰、太傅、太保、丞相、司徒、司空，佩金章，紫色绶带。赐给五时朝服，戴进贤三梁冠。佩带青黑如山色的玉。
English: Dazai, Taifu, Taibo, Josho, Satoru, Siku, gold-plated, purple ribbon. At five o'clock, they are given a morning suit and crowned with the crown of the three wise men. They wear blue-black, like mountain-colored jade.

古文：相国则绿綟绶，三采，绿、紫、绀。
现代文：相国则绿线色绶带，三种彩色花纹：绿色、紫色、天青色。
English: The partner country has a green ribbon with three color patterns: green, purple and sky blue.

古文：綟，草名也，其色绿。
现代文：艘，草名，染物为绿色。
English: Nave, grass name, stain is green.

古文：大司马、大将军、太尉、凡将军位从公者，金章，紫绶，给五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：大司马、大将军、太尉、秩位从公的将军，佩金章，紫色绶带。赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。
English: The grand steward, the general, the lieutenant, the general with the rank of public servant, the gold medal, the purple ribbon. At five o'clock, he was given a royal robe and a military crown.

古文：佩山玄玉。
现代文：佩带青黑如山色的玉。
English: Wearing a blue-black, mountain-colored bead.

古文：郡侯，金章，青硃绶，给五时朝服，进贤三梁冠。
现代文：郡侯，佩金章，青朱色绶带。赐给五时朝服，戴进贤三梁冠。
English: County magistrate, Pei Jinzhang, blue and red ribbon. Five o'clock was given a royal robe and crowned with the three-beam crown.

古文：佩水苍玉。
现代文：佩带苍黑如水色的玉
English: Wearing a pale black as light blue ball.

古文：骠骑、车骑将军，凡诸将军加大者，征、镇、安、平、中军、镇军、抚军、前、左、右、后将军、征虏、冠军、辅国、龙骧将军，金章，紫绶。
现代文：骠骑将军、车骑将军、各种名号的将军加称大者，征将军、镇将军、安将军、平将军、中军将军、镇军将军、抚军将军、前将军、左将军、右将军、后将军，征虏将军、冠军将军、辅国将军、龙骧将军，佩金章，紫色绶带。
English: General of cavalry, general of chariots and cavalry, generals of various names and titles, general of conscription, general of the town, general of security, general of peace, general of the Chinese army, general of the town army, general of the army of support, former general, general of the left, general of the right, general of the rear, general of conscription, general of the champion, general of the auxiliary country, general of the dragon, gold medal, purple ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，武冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a court dress, a military crown, and a pair of pale black and light-colored beads.

古文：贵嫔、夫人、贵人，金章，文曰贵嫔、夫人、贵人之章。
现代文：贵嫔、夫人、贵人，佩金章，印文分别是 贵嫔之章 、 夫人之章 、 贵人之章 。
English: Noble, Lady, and Noble, each with a gold badge. The inscriptions are Noble, Lady, and Noble, respectively.

古文：紫绶，佩于阗玉。
现代文：都是紫色绶带。佩带于阗玉。
English: They are all purple ribbons. Worn with an emerald.

古文：淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华，银印，文曰淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕妤、容华、充华之印。
现代文：淑妃、淑媛、淑仪、修华、修容、修仪、婕奸、容华、充华，佩银印，印文分别是 淑妃之印 、 淑媛之印 、 淑仪之印 、 修华之印 、 修容之印 、 修仪之印 、 婕妤之印 、 容华之印 、 充华之印 。
English: Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei, Shuhei,

古文：青绶。
现代文：都是青色绶带。
English: They're all blue ribbons.

古文：佩五采琼玉。
现代文：佩带五彩琼玉。
English: Worn with multicolored agate.

古文：皇太子妃，金玺，龟纽，纁硃绶。
现代文：皇太子妃，佩金玺，龟形印纽，缍朱色绶带。
English: Crown Princess, gold-plated brooch, tortoise-shaped clasp, enameled vermilion ribbon.

古文：佩瑜玉。
现代文：佩带瑜玉。
English: Wearing Yu Yu.

古文：诸王太妃、诸长公主、公主、封君，金印，紫绶，佩山玄玉。
现代文：诸王太妃、妃、诸长公丰、公主、封君。佩金印，紫色绶带。佩带青黑如山色的玉。
English: Princes and queens, princes and princesses, princes and princesses, princes and princesses, princes and princesses, princes and queens, princes and princesses, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and princesses, princes and queens, princes and queens.

古文：诸王世子，金印，紫绶。
现代文：诸士世子，佩金印，紫色绶带。
English: The descendants of all generations, the Pei gold seal, the purple ribbon.

古文：五时朝服，进贤两梁冠，佩山玄玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。佩带青黑如山色的王。
English: At five o'clock, the imperial robe was given to him, and he was crowned with the crown of two beams.

古文：郡公侯太夫人，银印，青绶，佩水苍玉。
现代文：郡公侯太夫人、夫人，佩银印，青色绶带。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: The Dowager Countess and the Dowager Countess wear a silver seal, a blue ribbon, and a pale black and light jade bracelet.

古文：郡公侯太子，银印，青绶。
现代文：郡公侯世子，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: The heir of the county prince, wearing a silver seal and a blue ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤两梁冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, imperial robes were given to him, and he was given a crown with two beams: he wore a pale black and light-colored bead.

古文：侍中、散骑常侍及中常侍，给五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：侍中、散骑常侍及中常侍，赐绐五时朝服，戴武冠。
English: At five o'clock, the chamberlains, knights-errant and chamberlains-in-waiting were given the imperial robes and crowns.

古文：貂蝉，侍中左，右常侍，皆佩水苍玉。
现代文：其冠附以金蝉，并插貂尾为饰，侍中插在冠左边，常侍插在冠右边。都佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: Its crown is adorned with a golden cicada and a cormorant's tail. The middle attendant is inserted on the left side of the crown, and the regular attendant is inserted on the right side of the crown. Both wear pale black as light blue beads.

古文：尚书令、仆射，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：尚书令、尚书仆射，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling's servant, wearing a bronze seal and a black ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，纳言帻，进贤两梁冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴纳言帧、进贤两梁冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a royal robe, a crown with the words "Dainagon" and "Jinxian" inscribed on it. He was wearing a pale black and light-colored bead.

古文：尚书，给五时朝服，纳言帻，进贤两梁冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：尚书，赐给五时朝服，戴纳言帻、进贤两梁冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: Shangshu, bestowed the five o'clock imperial robe, the two-beam crown of Daina, Jinxian. Wearing a pale black as light-colored jade.

古文：中书监令、秘书监，铜印，墨綟绶。
现代文：中书监、中书令、秘书监，佩铜印，墨縯色绶带。
English: The Chinese book supervisor, the Chinese book order, and the secretary supervisor wear a bronze seal and a dark blue ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: At five o'clock, imperial robes were given to him, and he was given a crown with two beams.

古文：佩水苍玉。
现代文：佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: Wearing a pale black as light blue ball.

古文：光禄大夫、卿、尹、太子保、傅、大长秋、太子詹事，银章，青绶。
现代文：光禄大夫、卿、尹、太子保、傅、大长秋、太子詹事，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: Dr. Guanglu, Sir, Yin, Prince Bao, Fu, Great Changqiu, Prince Zhanji, wearing silver badges, blue ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤两梁冠。佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a royal robe, and he wore a crown with two beams and wore a crown with a pale black and light-colored jewel.

古文：卫尉，则武冠。
现代文：卫尉，则戴武冠。
English: The captain of the guard wears the military crown.

古文：卫尉，江左不置。
现代文：卫尉，塞置未置此官。
English: Lieutenant of the guard, this position has not yet been filled.

古文：宋孝武孝建初始置，不检晋服制，止以九卿皆文冠及进贤两梁冠，非旧也。
现代文：塞茎逮壶圣建初年始置卫尉，没有查考晋朝冠服制度，衹规定九卿都戴文冠及进贤两梁冠，这不是旧有的冠服制度。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Sheng Jian, there was no examination of the Jin Dynasty crown-wearing system, and it was stipulated that the nine nobles should all wear the crown and the crown. This was not the old crown-wearing system.

古文：司隶校尉、武尉、左右卫、中坚、中垒、骁骑、游击、前军、左军、右军、后军、宁朔、建威、振威、奋威、扬威、广威、建武、振武、奋武、扬武、广武、左右积弩、强弩诸将军、监军，银章，青绶。
现代文：司隶校尉、武尉、左右卫将军、中坚将军、中垒将军、骁骑将军、游击将军、前军将军、左军将军、右军将军、后军将军、宁朔将军、建威将军、振威将军、奋威将军、扬威将军、广威将军、建武将军、振武将军、奋武将军、扬武将军、广武将军、左右积弩将军、强弩将军、监军，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: Sili schoolmaster, military lieutenant, left and right guard generals, core generals, middle base generals, cavalry generals, guerrilla generals, front army generals, left army generals, right army generals, rear army generals, Ningshuo generals, Jianwei generals, Zhenwei generals, Tengwei generals, Yangwei generals, Guangwei generals, Jianwu generals, Zhenwu generals, Tengwu generals, Yangwu generals, Guangwu generals, left and right pile generals, strong pile generals, supervisors, wear silver badges, blue ribbons.

古文：给五时朝服，武冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉
English: At five o'clock, he was given a court dress, a military crown, and a pair of pale black and light-colored beads.

古文：领军、护军、城门五营校尉、东南西北中郎将，银印，青绶。
现代文：领军、护军、城门五营校尉、东南西北中郎将，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: The leader of the army, the escort, the captain of the five battalions at the city gate, and the southeast-northwest middle commander wear silver seals and blue ribbons.

古文：给五时朝服，武冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, he was given a court dress, a military crown, and a pair of pale black and light-colored beads.

古文：县、乡、亭侯，金印，紫绶。
现代文：县侯、乡侯、亭侯，佩金印，紫色绶带。
English: County magistrate, township magistrate, pavilion magistrate, gold stamp, purple ribbon.

古文：朝服，进贤三梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤三梁冠。
English: Wearing a morning suit, wearing a crown of three beams.

古文：鹰扬、折冲、轻车、扬烈、威远、宁远、虎威、材官、伏波、凌江诸将军，银章，青绶。
现代文：鹰扬将军、折冲将军、轻车将军、扬烈将军、威远将军、宁远将军、虎威将军、材官将军、伏波将军、凌江将军，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: General Ying Yang, General Renchong, General Liang Che, General Yang Li, General Wei Yuan, General Ning Yuan, General Hu Wei, General Zhaikang, General Fubao, General Lingjiang, wearing silver badges and blue ribbons.

古文：给五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。
English: At five o'clock, imperial robes and a military crown were given to him.

古文：奋武护军、安夷抚军、护军、军州郡国都尉、奉车、驸马、骑都尉、诸护军将兵助郡都尉、水衡、典虞、牧官、典牧都尉、度支中郎将、校尉、都尉、司监都尉、材官校尉、王国中尉、宜和伊吾都尉、监淮南津都尉，银印，青绶。
现代文：奋武护军、安夷抚军、护军、军州郡国都尉、奉车都尉、驸马都尉、骑都尉、诸护军将兵助郡都尉、水衡都尉、典虞都尉、牧官都尉、典牧都尉、度支中郎将、校尉、都尉、司盐都尉、材官校尉、王国中尉、宜禾伊吾都尉、监淮南律都尉，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: Tengwu Protectorate Army, Anyifo Army, Protectorate Army, Junzhou County and Province Captain, Fengche County and Province Captain, Xingma County and Province Captain, Cavalry Captain, Zhou Protectorate Army, Hefei County and Province Captain, Shuiheng County and Province Captain, Tenyu County and Province Captain, Pastoral Officer and Province Captain, Duozhi County and Province Captain, School Captain and Province Captain, Siyan County and Province Captain, Liaocheng County and Province Captain, Guozhou County and Province Captain, Fengche County and Province Captain, Fengche County and Province Captain, Fengche County and Province Captain, Fengche County and Province Captain,

古文：五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：着五时朝服，戴武冠
English: Wearing a five o'clock morning suit, wearing a military crown

古文：州刺史，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：州刺史，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: State engraved history, wearing a bronze seal, black ribbon.

古文：给绛朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：赐给深红色朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: He was given a crimson imperial robe and crowned with the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：御史中丞、都水使者，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：御史中丞、都水使者，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: Gishi Chujo, the messenger of the capital water, wearing a bronze seal and a black ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤两梁冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠：佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At five o'clock, imperial robes were given to him, and he was given a crown with two beams: he wore a pale black and light-colored bead.

古文：谒者仆射，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：谒者仆射，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: He wears a bronze seal and a black sash.

古文：给四时朝服，高山冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：赐给四时朝服，戴高山冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: At four o'clock, he was given a court dress, a high mountain crown, and a pair of pale black and light-colored beads.

古文：诸军司马，银章，青绶。
现代文：诸车司马，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: The chariot horses are decorated with silver badges and blue ribbons.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：给事中、黄门侍郎、散骑侍郎、太子中庶子、庶子，给五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：给事中、黄门侍郎、散骑侍郎、太子中庶子、太子庶子，赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。
English: During the ceremony, the Yellow Gate attendant, the horseback rider attendant, the prince's middle child, and the prince's child, were given a five o'clock morning dress and a military crown.

古文：中书侍郎，给五时朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：中书侍郎，赐给五时朝服，戴进贤一梁冠
English: The attendant of the second secretary, gave the five o'clock court dress, wore the crown of the crown

古文：冗从仆射、太子卫率，铜印，墨绶。给五时朝服，武冠。
现代文：冗从仆射、太子卫率，佩铜印，黑色绶带赐给五时朝服，戴武冠。
English: He is a dutiful servant, a prince, wearing a bronze seal, a black sash, a five o'clock imperial robe, and a warrior's crown.

古文：虎贲中郎将、羽林监，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：虎贲中郎将、羽林监，佩钢印，黑色印绶。
English: The tiger cub's middle brother will be a forest ranger, wearing a steel seal and a black seal.

古文：给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: At four o'clock, imperial robes and military crowns were bestowed.

古文：其在陛列及备卤簿，鹖尾，绛纱谷单衣。
现代文：若在陛侧侍卫以及在皇帝出行仪仗队之中，冠上加双鹃尾，身穿深红色纱谷单衣。
English: If you are in the guard of honor on His Majesty's side or in the honor guard of the emperor's travel, you will add double appendages to the crown and wear a crimson gauze singlet.

古文：鹖鸟似鸡，出上党。
现代文：鵾乌即鸥鸡，出自上党郡。
English: Jiu Wu, also known as Jiu Chicken, is from Shangdang County.

古文：为鸟强猛，斗不死不止。
现代文：其性强悍勇猛，相斗不死不停止。
English: Their nature is strong and brave, and they never stop fighting.

古文：复著鹖尾。
现代文：冠上加着鹧尾取象其勇猛。
English: The crest is topped with an appendix to symbolize its bravery.

古文：北军中侯、殿中监，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：北军中候、殿中监，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: The middle-ranking officer of the Northern Army and the middle-ranking inspector of the palace, wearing a bronze seal and a black ribbon.

古文：给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: At four o'clock, imperial robes and military crowns were bestowed.

古文：护匈奴中郎将、护羌夷戎蛮越乌丸西域戊己校尉，铜印，青绶。
现代文：护匈奴中郎将、护羌夷戎蛮越乌丸西域戊己校尉，佩铜印，青色绶带。
English: Captain of the Xiongnu Protection Squadron, Captain of the Xiongnu Protection Squadron, Captain of the Xiongnu Protection Squadron, Captain of the Xiongnu Protection Squadron, Captain of the Xiongnu Protection Squadron, wearing a bronze seal and a blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：郡国太守、相、内史，银章，青绶。
现代文：郡国太守、相、内史，用银章，青色印绶。
English: The governor of the county, the provincial governor, and the minister of internal affairs are depicted with silver seals and blue seals.

古文：朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：江左止单衣帻。
现代文：柬晋时衹着单衣。戴帧。
English: Sokujin is wearing a singlet and a headband.

古文：其加中二千石者，依卿、尹。
现代文：秩位加中二千石者，冠服比照卿、尹。
English: Those with the highest rank and 2,000 koku were given the highest crowns, such as Hizoryo-kyo and Yin.

古文：牙门将，银章，青绶。
现代文：牙门将，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: Tooth keeper, wearing a silver badge, blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：骑都督、守，银印，青绶。
现代文：骑都督、守，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: Riding the governor, guard, wearing a silver seal, blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：尚书左右丞、秘书丞，铜印，黄绶。
现代文：尚书左右丞、秘书丞，佩铜印，黄色绶带。
English: Shangshu Zuozhu Rong, Secretary Rong, wearing a bronze seal, yellow ribbon.

古文：朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing a crown.

古文：尚书秘书郎、太子中舍人、洗马、舍人，朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：尚书秘书郎、太子中舍人、太子洗马、太子舍人，着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Prince Shangshu's secretary, the prince's junior attendant, the prince's groom, and the prince's attendant, wearing imperial robes and crowns.

古文：黄沙治书侍御史，银印，墨绶。
现代文：黄沙治书侍御史，佩银印，黑色绶带。
English: Huang Sha Zhi Shu attendant of history, wearing a silver seal, black ribbon.

古文：朝服，法冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴法冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a crown.

古文：侍御史，朝服，法冠。
现代文：侍御史，着朝服，戴法冠。
English: Attendant to the Emperor, wearing imperial robes and a crown.

古文：关内、关中名号侯，金印，紫绶。
现代文：关内、关中名号侯，佩金印，紫色绶带。
English: Guanzhong and Guanzhong surnames, gold seal, purple ribbon.

古文：朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：诸博士，给皁朝服，进贤两梁冠，佩水苍玉。
现代文：诸博士，赐给黑色朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。佩带苍黑如水色的玉。
English: The eminent scholars were given black imperial robes, and crowned with the crown of virtue and virtue. They wore pale black and light-colored beads.

古文：公府长史、诸卿尹丞、诸县署令秩千石者，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：公府长史、诸卿尹丞、诸县署令秩禄千石者，佩铜印，黑色印绶。
English: The governors of public offices, lords, and county magistrates, who were worth thousands of koku, wore a bronze seal and a black seal.

古文：朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：江左公府长史无朝服，县令止单衣帻。
现代文：塞置公府长史没有朝服，县令衹着单衣，戴帧。
English: Seti Kofu's chancellor did not wear a court uniform, while the prefectural governor wore a singlet and a frame.

古文：宋后废帝元徽四年，司徒右长史王俭议公府长史应服朝服，曰： 《春秋国语》云： 貌者情之华，服者心之文。 
现代文：塞壁座壶互銮四年，司徒右长史王俭上奏议认为公府长史应当服朝服。他说： 《春秋国谢云： 外貌是情感的显露，冠服是心灵的表述。
English: After four years of back-and-forth, Wang Jian, the right-hand man of the governor of Szeto, made a report that the governor should wear a court dress. He said: "Spring and Autumn Kingdom Xieyun: Appearance is the manifestation of emotion, crown dress is the expression of the soul.

古文：岩廊盛礼，衣冠为大。
现代文：庙堂之中，朝廷之上，各种盛大的礼仪，以衣冠最为重要。
English: Among the temples, above the imperial court, all kinds of grand etiquette, with clothes and crowns being the most important.

古文：是故军国异容，内外殊序。
现代文：因此文官武将各有不同的服饰装束，朝廷内外等级次第分明。
English: As a result, civil officers and military commanders each had a different costume, and there was a clear hierarchy within and outside the imperial court.

古文：而自顷承用，每有乖违。
现代文：然而近年袭用冠服制度，常常有所背离。
English: However, in recent years, the crown-cloth system has been used, and there are often deviations.

古文：府职掌人，教四方是则。
现代文：司徒府主管民事，以教导四方民众为主。
English: The Civil Affairs Division of the Office of the Chief Magistrate is in charge of civil affairs, focusing on educating the public in the four regions.

古文：臣居毗佐，志在当官，永言先典，载怀夕惕。
现代文：臣官为司徒辅佐，志在司徒府职事，牢记先代典制，终日勤勉谨慎，不敢懈怠。
English: The vassal is the assistant of the preceptor, aspires to the post of the preceptor, keeps in mind the previous system, is diligent and cautious all day long, and does not dare to slack off.

古文：按晋令，公府长史，官品第六，铜印，墨绶，朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：查考晋《令》，公府长史，官位第六品，佩铜印，黑色印绶，着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Chakao Jin "Order," the head of the government, the official rank of the sixth grade, wearing a bronze seal, a black seal, wearing a court dress, wearing a Jinxian crown.

古文：掾、属，官品第七，朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：公府掾、属，官位第七品，着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: He is a public official, a subordinate, the seventh grade of official rank, wearing a court uniform, and wearing a crown.

古文：晋官表注，亦与《令》同。
现代文：晋职官表注，也与《令》相同。
English: The note on the promotion of officials is also the same as the "Order."

古文：而今长史、掾、属，但著硃服而已，此则公违明文，积习成谬。
现代文：然而现在长史、掾、属，都衹着朱服，这是公然违背明文记载，相沿成习谬误至今。
English: However, at present, Changshi, Zou, and Zhen are all wearing red uniforms, which is a flagrant violation of the explicit records, and has become a habitual fallacy to this day.

古文：谓宜依旧制，长史两梁冠，掾、属一梁冠，并同备朝服。
现代文：我认为应当依照旧有制度，长史戴进贤两梁冠，掾、属戴进贤一梁冠，并且都配备朝服。
English: I think that it should be in accordance with the old system, the long history wearing Jinxian two-beam crown,, belongs to wear Jinxian one-beam crown, and are equipped with imperial robes.

古文：中单韦幹，率由旧章。若所上蒙允，并请班司徒二府及诸仪同三府，通为永准。
现代文：中衣、单衣、革带和舄的穿用，都依照旧有规章所奏如蒙批准，请一并颁发给司徒二府以及诸仪同三府，共同作为永久标准。
English: If approval is granted for the wearing of the tunic, singlet, leather belt and corset, all in accordance with the old regulations, please issue them together to the two prefectures of Szczecin and the three prefectures of Szczecin, together as a permanent standard.

古文：又寻旧事，司徒公府领步兵者，职僚悉同降朝不领兵者。
现代文：另外，考寻旧例，司徒公府统领步兵者的僚属，与降朝不领兵者相同。
English: In addition, according to the old example, the subordinates of those who led the infantry in the Stukongfu were the same as those who did not lead the soldiers in the downfall.

古文：主簿祭酒，中单韦幹并备，令史以下，唯著玄衣。
现代文：主簿祭酒，中衣、单衣、革带和舄都齐备，令史以下僚属，衹着玄衣。
English: The main book, the sacrificial wine, the tunic, the singlet, the leather belt and the scarf are all ready, so that the following members of the history, wearing the black dress.

古文：今府既开公，谨遵此制。
现代文：现三公、将军等开府辟置僚属，应严格遵守这项规定。
English: This regulation should be strictly observed by the three princes, generals and other subordinates who set up the government and set up subordinates.

古文：其或有署台位者，玄服为宜。
现代文：其中如果有人署任禁省官职，是否应当着玄服呢?
English: Among them, if someone is appointed to a forbidden provincial official post, should they wear a black dress?

古文：按《令》称诸有兼官，皆从重官之例。
现代文：考晋《令》说各种本官之外有兼官，其冠服等级依从重官之例。
English: The "Order" of Cao Jin said that in addition to various officials, there are concurrent officials, and their crown dress grades follow the example of senior officials.

古文：寻内官为重，其署台位者，悉宜著位之服，不在玄服之例。
现代文：很显然内官为重官，因此署任禁省官职的人，都应当着禁省职官朝服，不在衹着玄服的规定范围之内。
English: It is clear that the inner official is a high-ranking official. Therefore, the person who signs the ban on provincial officials should wear the ban on provincial officials' morning dress, and is not within the scope of the ban on wearing formal dress.

古文：若署诸卿寺位兼府职者，虽三品，而卿寺为卑，则宜依公府玄衣之制。
现代文：如果是署任诸卿寺官职而兼任府职者，即使是三品官位，但卿寺官为卑官，那么就应当依从公府僚属令史以下衹着玄衣的规定。
English: If a person is appointed to the post of a temple official and concurrently serves as a prefectural official, even if it is a third-rank official, but the temple official is a lower-ranking official, then he should follow the rules of wearing a black coat following the history of public officials.

古文：服章事重，礼仪所先，请台详服。 
现代文：冠服等级事关重大，是礼仪制度的重点，敬请台署详察。 
English: The level of ceremonial dress is of great importance and is the focus of the etiquette system. We respectfully request the Taiwan Affairs Office to investigate in detail.

古文：议曹郎中沈俣之议曰： 制珪象德，损替因时；裁服象功，施用随代。
现代文：仪曹郎中沈俣之认为： 古代制作珪璋等六种玉器，作为祭祀天地四方的礼器，其形状分别象征天地四方之德，大小变化因四时而不同；《尧典》载把车马衣服奖给有功的诸侯，其具体实施随时代而变化。
English: According to Shen Matazhi, a scholar of etiquette: Six kinds of jade objects, such as gongs, were made in ancient times as ceremonial instruments for the worship of the four directions of heaven and earth. Their shapes respectively symbolize the virtue of the four directions of heaven and earth, and their sizes vary according to the time of the year. The "Gongs" contained awards for chariots, horses, and clothing for meritorious princes, and their specific implementation varied with the times.

古文：车旗变于商、周，冠佩革于秦、汉，岂必殊代袭容，改尚沿物哉。
现代文：车马旌旗在直伐、厘代发生变革，冠冕玉佩在秦朝、汉朝又有创新，难道一定要不同时代都袭用同一个模式，有所改变也要亦步亦趋吗?
English: The chariot, horse and banner were reformed in the Tang and Jin dynasties, and the crown and jade were innovated in the Qin and Han dynasties. Is it necessary to use the same model in different eras, and is it necessary to change?

古文：夫边貂假幸侍之首，贱帻登尊极之颜，一适时用，便隆后制。
现代文：武冠插貂尾，起初为趟武灵王仿效胡服而制，后来袭用，为武官或侍从近臣所戴；帧本为卑贱而不能戴冠者覆髻之巾，后来皇帝大臣也纷纷戴帧，一旦合于时俗，便风行成为后代遵循的制度。
English: At first, the crown of arms was made to emulate the robe of Wu Ling Wang, and later it was worn by military officers or attendants of close ministers; the frame was originally a scarf for those who were too lowly to wear a crown, and later the emperor's ministers also wore frames. Once it was in line with the customs of the time, the custom became a system followed by future generations.

古文：况硃裳以朝，缅倾百祀，韦幹不加，浩然惟旧。
现代文：况且现在长生、掾、属衹着朱服，已远远超过百年，不加用革带和舄，也相沿成旧俗。
English: Moreover, it has been far more than a hundred years since people in Changsheng, Handan and Zhentong wore Zhu clothing, without adding leather straps and cuffs, and it has also become an old custom.

古文：服为定章，事成永则。
现代文：冠服有一定的规章，实际事例也可以成为永久法则。
English: There are certain rules for crown clothing, and actual cases can also become permanent rules.

古文：其俭之所秉，会非古训。
现代文：至于王俭的主张，并非圣贤占训。
English: As far as Wang Jian's claim is concerned, it is not a wise man's opinion.

古文：青素相因，代有损益，何事弃盛宋之兴法，追往晋之颓典。
现代文：青素色彩相因相应，但每个时代都有增减变化，为什么要抛弃正在兴盛之中的大宋新兴制度，而追踪已成过去的晋朝的废典呢。
English: The color of the blue pigment varies according to the situation, but each era has its own increase and decrease. Why should we abandon the emerging system of the Great Song Dynasty, which is flourishing, and pursue the waste books of the Jin Dynasty, which has become a thing of the past?

古文：变改空烦，谓不宜革。 
现代文：他所提出的变改方案空疏烦碎，我认为不应当改革。 
English: The reform plan he has proposed is too vague and cumbersome, and I don't think it should be reformed.

古文：俭又上议曰： 自顷服章多阙，有违前准。近议依令文，被报不宜改革，又称左丞刘议， 按令文，凡有朝服，今多阙亡。
现代文：王俭又上奏议说： 近年冠服制度多有阙失，违背了以前的标准，前不久建议依照晋《令》进行变改，收到答覆说不应当改革，又称引刘左丞的意见， 按照晋《令》记载，所有朝服，现在大多阙失。
English: Wang Jian also made a report, saying: In recent years, the crowned robe system has mostly failed, violating the previous standards. Not long ago, it was proposed to make changes in accordance with the Jin "Order," and received a reply that it should not be reformed, also known as citing Liu Zuoxiao's opinion. According to the records of the Jin "Order," all imperial robes are now mostly lost.

古文：然则文存服损，非唯铉佐，用舍既久，即为旧章 。
现代文：然而文字记载留存下来了，但实际着服减少丁，这种情况不仅仅是三公僚佐存在，使用时间长了，有所取舍，有些记载衹能作为过去的规章，便下旨回覆了我。
English: However, the written records have been preserved, but the actual number has been reduced. This situation is not just the existence of three public officials, the use time is long, there are trade-offs, some records can be used as past regulations, and they replied to me.

古文：如下旨，伏寻皇宋受终，每因晋旧制，律令条章，同规在昔。
现代文：我想皇宋受禅建国，大多沿袭晋朝旧制，律令规章，同以往一样。
English: I think most of the emperors and emperors of the Song Dynasty followed the old system of the Jin Dynasty, and the laws and regulations were the same as before.

古文：若事有宜，必合惩改，则当上关诏书，下由朝议，县诸日月，垂则后昆。
现代文：如果有些地方一定要改，那么就应当由皇上发布诏书，由大臣合议，着为令典，传诸后世。
English: If there are some places that must be changed, then the Emperor should issue an imperial edict, and the ministers should discuss it, and it should be passed down to future generations as an edict.

古文：岂得因外府之乖谬，以为盛宋之兴典；用晋氏之律令，而谓其仪为颓法哉！
现代文：怎么能够因为外府的错误观点，而认为新兴左塞采用置朝律令就一定是不当之法呢?
English: How can it be because of the erroneous view of the foreign government that the adoption of the imperial edict by the newly-emerging Lhasa must be an improper law?

古文：顺违从失，非所望于高议；申明旧典，何改革之可论。
现代文：就以为取舍不当，有失众望；既沿袭旧章，便不宜改革。
English: It was thought that the choice was improper and would lose the public's hope; since it followed the old chapter, it was not appropriate to reform it.

古文：又左丞引令史之阙服，以为铉佐之明比。夫名位不同，礼数异等，令史从省，或有权宜；达官简略，为失弥重。
现代文：另外，刘左丞称置《令》所载朝服，现在大多阙失，作为三公僚佐服制不全的明证实际职名秩位不同，礼仪制度便有不同等级，令史服制简省，或许可以因时制宜通权达变；而达官服制过于简略，应当是更重大的失误。
English: In addition, Liu Zu Rong said that most of the court uniforms listed in the "Order" have been lost. As a clear proof that the three civil servants assistant service system is incomplete, the actual job titles and ranks are different, and the etiquette system has different levels. If the historical service system is simplified, it may be possible to make changes according to the time system; and if the official service system is too simple, it should be a more serious mistake.

古文：又主簿、祭酒，备服于王庭，长史、掾、属，硃衣以就列。
现代文：再则，主簿、祭酒，都朝服齐备立于朝廷，而长史、掾、属，衹着朱衣列于班位之中。
English: In addition, the main book and the sacrificial wine are all prepared in the imperial court, while the long history, the eunuch, the vassal, and the eunuch wearing the red robe are ranked in the ranks.

古文：于是伦比，自成矛盾。
现代文：同类相比而自相矛盾。
English: Comparing like with like is self-contradictory.

古文：此而可忍，孰不可安！
现代文：这样的事如果可以容忍，那还有什么事不可以心安呢。
English: If such a thing can be tolerated, then what else is there to worry about?

古文：将引令以遵旧，台据失以为例，研详符旨，良所未譬。
现代文：我是想引述资《令》遵循旧制，台议根据有所阙失的近事作例证，拟定丁回覆主旨，这是我很不明白的。
English: I wanted to quote from the "Order" to follow the old system, and the platform proposed to draw up the theme of Ding's reply on the basis of some recent examples, which I did not understand.

古文：当官而行，何强之有，制令昭然，守以无贰。 
现代文：我按本官职事行事，哪裹是要强争胜，典制律令记载清清楚楚，应当遵循不要背离。 
English: I act according to my official duties, which is to strive for victory, and the regulations are clearly recorded, and should be followed and not deviated from.

古文：俣之又议： 云火从物，沿损异仪，帝乐五殊，王礼三变，岂独大宋造命，必咸仍于晋旧哉！
现代文：选俣之又上奏议说： 冕服十二章花纹，画有山，取其能云雨，画有火，取其有光明，而历代沿袭，有所损益，仪制并不完全相同，所谓五帝不同乐，三代不同礼，难道惟独大塞受命，一定要完全承袭晋朝旧制吗!
English: "The coronation robe has twelve patterns, with mountains in the background, and clouds and rain in the foreground, and fire in the background, and light in the foreground. However, it has been passed down through the ages, with some losses and gains, and the ceremonial system is not completely the same. The so-called five emperors have different music, and the three generations have different rituals. Is it only the emperor who was ordered to completely inherit the old system of the Jin Dynasty?

古文：夫宗社疑文，庭庙阙典，或上降制书，下协朝议，何乃铉府佐属裳黻，稍改白虎之诏，断宣室之畴咨乎。
现代文：国家律令制度或有疑义阙失，可以由皇上降下制书，朝廷大巨商议予以解决，为什么三公府佐属衣裳上黑青相问的黻纹，逐渐改变了东漠章帝诏定《白虎通义》中的规定，而又中断了西汉孝文帝于宣室殿见买谊进行咨询的传统呢。
English: The national ritsuryo system may have lost its legitimacy, which can be resolved by the emperor downgrading the book-making system and the imperial court's great deliberation. Why did the crimson-and-black stripes on the robes of the three public offices of the Sa clan gradually change the provisions of the "White Tiger Communication" issued by Emperor Zhang of the East, and break the tradition of Emperor Xiaowen of the Western Han Dynasty meeting and consulting friends at the Imperial Court?

古文：又许令史之从省，咎达官之简略。
现代文：方面同意令史服制简省，或可权宜；另一方面又怪罪达官服制过于简略，认为是重大失误。
English: On the one hand, they agree that it may be expedient to simplify the historical service system; on the other hand, they blame the official service system for being too simple and consider it to be a major mistake.

古文：律苟可遵，固无辨于贵贱；规若必等，亦何关于权宜。
现代文：律令如果必须遵守的话，应当是不分贵贱；规制如果同等要求的话，又怎么牵涉到权宜之计呢。
English: If the ritsuryo must be obeyed, there should be no distinction between high and low; if the regulation requires the same, how can it involve a stopgap measure?

古文：一用一舍，弥增其滞。
现代文：一用一舍厚此薄彼，更使事情疑滞难解。
English: To use one and discard the other makes the matter even more difficult to solve.

古文：且佐非韦幹之职，吏本朝服之官，凡在班列，罔不如一，此盖前令违而遂改，今制允而长用也。
现代文：况且僚佐之职服制不应革带和舄齐备，主簿、祭酒本是着朝服之官，凡在朝班之十，无不统，这就是过去律令不合宜便进行了改革，现在制度合理而能长久适用的例证。
English: In addition, the dress code for courtier-assistants should not include leather belts and coats, and the ledger and sacrificial wine should be the official dress of the court, and there should be no irregularities in the tenth of the morning shift. This is an example of reforming the inappropriate laws and regulations in the past, and the current system is reasonable and can be applied for a long time.

古文：爵异服殊，宁会矛盾之譬；讨论疑制，焉取强弱之辨。
现代文：官爵不同服制不同，怎么能说白相矛盾；服制有疑难讨论各抒己见，又何必说谁强谁弱呢。
English: How can it be said to be a contradiction when the officials and nobles have different dress codes? It is difficult to discuss the different dress codes, so why say who is strong and who is weak?

古文：府执既革之余文，台据永行之成典，良有期于无固，非所望于行迷。 
现代文：司徒府拘守已经变革的晋《令》售文，台署依据现行适合的成典，我希望不要固执己见，不要陷入迷途。 
English: I hope that Szeto Prefecture will stick to the already reformed Jin "Order" for the sale of documents, and the Taiwan Affairs Office will follow the current suitable code. I hope that you will not be stubborn and not get lost.

古文：参详并同俭，议遂寝。
现代文：经过参酌详审，都赞同王俭的意见争议便停止了。
English: After detailed examination, all agreed with Wang Jian's opinion and the dispute was stopped.

古文：诸军长史、诸卿尹丞、狱丞、太子保傅詹事丞、郡国太守相内史、丞、长史、诸县署令长相、关谷长、王公侯诸署令、长、司理、治书、公主家仆，铜印，墨绶。朝服，进贤一梁冠。江左太子保傅卿尹詹事丞，皁朝服。
现代文：诸军长史、诸卿尹丞、狱丞、太子保傅詹事丞、郡国太守相内史、丞、长史、诸县署令长相、关芥长、王公侯诸署令、长、司理、治书、公主家仆，佩铜印，黑色绶带、着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠处置太于保傅卿尹詹事丞，着黑色朝服。
English: The army chiefs, the generals, the prison chiefs, the prince Bao Fu Zhan Zhi Zheng, the county governors, the county magistrates, the county commissioners, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistrates, the county magistr

古文：郡丞、县令长，止单衣帻。
现代文：郡丞、县令长，衹着单衣。
English: The county magistrate and the county magistrate, wearing a singlet.

古文：公车司马、太史、太医、太官、御府、内省令、太子诸署令、仆、门大夫、陵令，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：戴帧。公车司马、太史、太医、太官、御府、内省令、太厂诸苫令、仆、门人人、陵令，佩钢印，黑色绶带？
English: Wearing a frame. Bus Sima, Taishi, Taishi, Taikan, Gofu, Naisho Rei, Taifang Zhuyu Rei, servant, doorkeeper, mausoleum, wearing a steel seal, black ribbon?

古文：朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing a crown.

古文：太子率更、家令、仆，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：太子率更、家令、仆，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: The crown prince, household servants, and servants wear a bronze seal and a black ribbon.

古文：给五时朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：赐给五时朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: At five o'clock, imperial robes were given to him, and he was given a crown with two beams.

古文：黄门诸署令、仆、长，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：黄门诸署令、仆、长，佩钢印，黑色绶带。
English: At the Yellow Gate, all the officials, servants, and officials wear steel seals and black ribbons.

古文：四时朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：着四时朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Wearing a four o'clock morning suit, wearing a crown of merit.

古文：黄门冗从仆射监、太子寺人监，铜印，墨绶。给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：黄门冗从仆射监、太广寺人监，佩铜印，黑色绶带、赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: Huangmenzhuang subordinate to the servant-shooting supervisor, Taiguang Temple personnel supervisor, wearing a bronze seal, black ribbon, given a four-time imperial robe, wearing a military crown.

古文：公府司马、诸军城门五营校尉司马、护匈奴中郎将护羌戎夷蛮越乌丸戊己校尉长史、司马，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：公府司马、诸军城门五营校尉司马、护匈奴中郎将护羌戎夷蛮越乌丸戊己校尉长史、司马、佩钢印，黑色绶带。
English: Sima of the public office, Sima of the 5th battalion of the castle gate of the army, Sima of the guard of the Xiongnu, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army, Sima of the guard of the imperial army,

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：江左公府司马无朝服，余止单衣帻。
现代文：柬晋公府司马没有朝服，其余衹着翠衣，戴帧
English: Sima from the Cambodian-Jin Dynasty government did not wear a royal robe, while the others wore a green dress and a frame

古文：廷尉正、监、平，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：廷尉正、监、平，佩钢印，黑色绶带。
English: The imperial lieutenant is in the middle, the superintendent is in the middle, and the general is in the middle, wearing a steel seal and a black ribbon.

古文：给皁零辟朝服，法冠。
现代文：赐给黑色零辟朝服，戴法冠。
English: He was given a black Zilpai imperial robe and wore a legal crown.

古文：王郡公侯郎中令、大农，铜印，青绶。
现代文：王郡公侯郎中令、大农，佩钢印，青色绶带。
English: Prince Wang County's second-in-command, a big farmer, wearing a steel seal and a blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：北军中候丞，铜印，黄绶。朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：北军中候丞，佩钢印，黄色绶带着朝服戴进贤一梁冠。
English: The middle-ranking officer of the Northern Army, wearing a steel seal, a yellow sash with a morning suit and a crown.

古文：太子常从虎贲督、校督、司马虎贲督，铜印，墨绶。朝服，武冠。
现代文：太子常从虎贲督、千人督、校督、司马虎贲督，佩铜印，黑色绶带着朝服，戴武冠。
English: The prince often wears a bronze seal, a black sash with a royal robe, and a military crown from the ranks of viceroy, viceroy of a thousand men, viceroy of a school, and viceroy of Sima Hu.

古文：殿中将军，银章，青绶。
现代文：殿中将军，佩银章，青色绶带。
English: A general in the palace, wearing a silver badge and a blue ribbon.

古文：四时朝服，武冠。宋末不复给章绶。
现代文：着四时朝服，戴武冠、宋末不再给银章、绶带。
English: Wearing the four o'clock court dress, wearing the military crown, the late Song Dynasty no longer gave the silver badge and ribbon.

古文：水衡、典虞、牧官、典牧、材官、州郡国都尉、司马，铜印，墨绶。朝服，武冠。
现代文：水衡、典虞、牧官、典牧、材官、州郡国都尉、司马，佩钢印，黑色绶带着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Shui Heng, Ting Yu, Pastoral Officer, Ting Mu, Material Officer, State County and Country Captain, Sima, wearing steel seals, black coats with imperial robes, wearing military crowns.

古文：诸谒者，朝服，高山冠。
现代文：诸谒者，着朝服，戴高山冠。
English: People from all walks of life, dressed in imperial robes, wearing alpine crowns.

古文：门下中书通事舍人令史、门下主事令史，给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：门下中軎通事舍人令史、门下主事令史，赐给四时朝服戴武冠。
English: At four o'clock in the morning, the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：尚书典事、都水使者参事、散骑集书中书尚书令史、门下散骑中书尚书令史、录尚书中书监令仆省事史、秘书著作治书、主书、主玺、主谱令史、兰台殿中兰台谒者都水使者令史、书令史，朝服，进贤一梁冠。江左凡令史无朝服。
现代文：尚书典事、都水使者参事、散骑集书中书尚书令史、门下散骑中书尚书令史、录尚书中书监令仆省事史、秘书著作治书、主书、主玺、主谱令史、兰台殿中兰台谒者都水使者令史、书令史，着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠束晋凡是令史都没有朝服
English: Shangshu's official record, the councillor of the emissaries of the capital and water, the history of Shangshu's official record in the collection of books, the history of Shangshu's official record in the collection of books, the history of Shangshu's official record in the collection of books, the history of the provincial governor's official record in the collection of books, the history of the provincial governor's official record in the collection of books, the history of the secretary's official record in the collection of books, the history of the master's official record in the collection of books, the history of the master's official record in the collection of books

古文：节骑郎，朝服，武冠。
现代文：节骑郎，着朝服，戴武冠。
English: A knight of the equestrian festival, wearing a court dress and a military crown.

古文：其在陛列及备卤簿，著鹖尾、绛纱縠单衣。
现代文：若在陛侧侍卫以及在皇帝出行仪仗队之中，冠上加双鹃尾，身穿深红色纱谷单衣。
English: If you are in the guard of honor on His Majesty's side or in the honor guard of the emperor's travel, you will add double appendages to the crown and wear a crimson gauze singlet.

古文：殿中中郎将校尉、都尉、黄门中郎将校尉、殿中太医校尉、都尉，银印，青绶。
现代文：殿中中郎将校尉、都尉、黄门中郎将校尉、殿中太医校尉、都尉，佩银印，青色印绶。
English: Middle-rank officers in the palace were captains and lieutenants, middle-rank officers in the yellow gate were captains and lieutenants, middle-rank officers in the palace were captains and lieutenants, wearing silver seals and blue seals.

古文：四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：着四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: In four o'clock morning dress, wearing a military crown.

古文：关外侯，银印，青绶。
现代文：关外侯，佩银印，青色印绶。
English: Guan Wai Hou, wearing a silver seal, blue seal.

古文：朝服，进贤两梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing the Jinxian two-beam crown.

古文：左右都候、阊阖司马、城门候，铜印，墨绶朝服，武冠。
现代文：左右都候、盟国司马、城门候，佩铜印，黑色印绶。着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Both left and right are waiting, the allies Sima and Chengmen are waiting, wearing bronze seals, black seals. Wearing imperial robes, wearing military crowns.

古文：王郡公侯中尉，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：王郡公侯中尉，佩铜印，黑色印绶。
English: Lieutenant of the Prince of Wang County, with a bronze seal and a black seal.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：部曲督护、司马史、部曲将，铜印。
现代文：部曲督护、司马史、部曲将，佩铜印。
English: The director of the orchestra, Sima Shi, and the conductor of the orchestra wear bronze seals.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：司马史，假墨绶。
现代文：司马史，给予黑色绶带。
English: Sima Shi, given a black ribbon.

古文：太中中散谏议大夫、议郎、郎中、舍人，朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：太中中散谏议大夫、议郎、郎中、舍人，着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Taichung Middle School students dressed in imperial robes and crowned with the crowns of Jingxian and Liang.

古文：秩千石者，两梁。
现代文：秩禄千石者，戴进贤两梁冠。
English: Chichiroku thousand stone person, wearing Jinxian double crown.

古文：城门令史，朝服，武冠。
现代文：城门令史，着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Shingon Reiji, wearing imperial robes and a warrior's crown.

古文：江左凡令史无朝服。
现代文：柬晋凡是令史没有朝服。
English: In the history of Cambodia and Jin Dynasty, there was no court dress.

古文：诸门仆射佐史、东宫门吏，皁零辟朝服。
现代文：诸门仆射佐史、束宫门吏，着黑色零辟朝服。
English: The servants at the gates, Shasashi and Sokuji, the gatekeepers of the palace, are dressed in black Zippi imperial robes.

古文：仆射东宫门吏，却非冠。
现代文：仆射束宫门吏，戴却非冠。
English: Servant shoots a bunch of palace gatekeepers, but wears no crown.

古文：佐史，进贤冠。
现代文：佐史，戴进贤冠。
English: Sashi, wearing the crown of merit.

古文：宫内游徼、亭长，皁零辟朝服，武冠。
现代文：宫内游徼、亭长，着黑色零辟朝服，戴武冠。
English: The imperial concubine, the chief of the palace, dressed in a black, short-sleeved imperial robe and crowned with a military crown.

古文：太医校尉、都尉、总章协律中郎将校尉、都尉，银印，青绶。
现代文：太医校尉、都尉、总章协律中郎将校尉、都尉，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: Lieutenant, captain, captain, lieutenant, captain, captain, captain, captain, captain, captain, silver seal, blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：小黄门，给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：小黄门，赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: Xiao Huangmen, given the four o'clock dress, wearing a military crown.

古文：黄门谒者，给四时朝服，进贤一梁冠。朝贺通谒时，著高山冠。
现代文：黄门谒者，赐给四时朝服，戴进贤一梁冠朝贺引见宾客、赞导受事的时候，戴高山冠。
English: The person with the yellow door lintel is given a four o'clock court dress, and wears a virtuous crown to welcome guests, and a high mountain crown when receiving praise and guidance.

古文：黄门诸署史，给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：黄门诸署史，赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: Huangmen all the history, given to the four o'clock in the morning, wearing military crown.

古文：中黄门黄门诸署从官寺人，给四时科单衣，武冠。
现代文：中黄门黄门诸署从官寺人，赐给四时科单衣，戴武冠。
English: In the middle of the Yellow Gate, the Yellow Gate authorities from the official temple people, gave the four-time science single clothes, wearing military crowns.

古文：殿中司马、及守陵者、殿中太医司马，铜印，墨绶。给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：殿中司马、及守陵者、殿中太医司马，佩铜印，黑色绶带赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: The steward of the hall, and the keeper of the mausoleum, the steward of the hall, wear a bronze seal, a black ribbon is given to the four o'clock morning dress, and wear a military crown.

古文：太医司马，铜印。
现代文：太医司马，佩铜印。
English: Tai He Sima, wearing a bronze seal.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：总章监鼓吹监司律司马，铜印，墨绶。
现代文：总章监鼓吹监司律司马，佩铜印，黑色绶带。
English: The general chairman, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor, the supervisor.

古文：朝服。
现代文：着朝服。
English: Dressed in a morning suit.

古文：鼓吹监总章协律司马，武冠。总章监司律司马，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：鼓吹监总章协律司马，戴武冠总章监司律司马，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Advocacy Supervisor of the General Chapter of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Dai Wu Guan, Supervisor of the General Chapter of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Dai Jin Xian Yiliang Guan.

古文：诸县署丞、太子诸署丞、王公侯诸署及公主家丞，铜印，黄绶。朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：诸县署丞、太子诸署丞、王公侯诸署及公主家丞，佩钢印，黄色绶带着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: The county magistrate, the prince magistrate, the prince and princess magistrate, and the princess and princess magistrate wear the seal of steel, the yellow sash with the morning dress, and the crown of the emperor.

古文：太医丞，铜印。
现代文：太医丞，佩铜印。
English: Tai I cheng, wearing a bronze seal.

古文：朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing a crown.

古文：黄门诸署丞，铜印，黄绶。
现代文：黄门诸署丞，佩铜印，黄色绶带。
English: Huangmen zhu zhen zheng, wearing a bronze seal, yellow ribbon.

古文：给四时朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：赐给四时朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: At four o'clock, he was given a royal robe and crowned with a crown.

古文：黄门称长、园监，铜印，黄绶。
现代文：黄门称长、园监，佩钢印，黄色绶带。
English: Yellow gate weighmaster, garden supervisor, wearing steel stamp, yellow ribbon.

古文：给四时朝服，武冠。
现代文：赐给四时朝服，戴武冠。
English: At four o'clock, imperial robes and military crowns were bestowed.

古文：诸县尉、关谷塞护道尉，铜印，黄绶。朝服，武冠。
现代文：诸县尉、关谷塞护道尉，佩钢印，黄色绶带着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Zhuxian lieutenant, Guanyi sepong road lieutenant, wearing steel seal, yellow sash with imperial robe, wearing military crown.

古文：江左止单衣帻。
现代文：束晋祇着单衣，戴帧。
English: Sokujin is wearing a singlet and a headband.

古文：洛阳卿有秩，铜印，青绶。
现代文：洛阳乡有秩，佩铜印，青色绶带。
English: Luoyang Township has a rank, a bronze seal and a blue ribbon.

古文：朝服，进贤一梁冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴进贤一梁冠。
English: Dressed in a court uniform, wearing a crown.

古文：宣威将军以下至裨将军，铜印。
现代文：宣威将军以下至裨将军，佩铜印。
English: From General Xuan Wei down to General Tuo, wear the bronze seal.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：其以此官为刺史、郡守、若万人司马虎贲督以上、及司马史者，皆假青绶。
现代文：如果以此官出任刺史、郡守、或者万人司马虎贲督以上、及司马史者，都给予青色绶带
English: A blue ribbon is given to the person who serves as the chief magistrate, the county governor, or the chief magistrate above 10,000 people, and the chief magistrate

古文：平虏武猛中郎将、校尉、都尉，银印。
现代文：乎虏武猛中郎将、校尉、都尉，佩银印。
English: Almost all of them were generals, lieutenants, captains, and wore the silver seal.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：其以此官为千人司马虎贲督以上、及司马史者，皆假青绶。
现代文：如果以此官出任干人司马虎贲督以上、及司马史者，都给子青色绶带。
English: If this officer is a cadre of Sima Hu and above, and Sima Shi, they will all be given a blue ribbon.

古文：别部司马、军假司马，银印。
现代文：别部司马、军假司马，佩银印。
English: Other departments Sima, military fake Sima, wearing a silver seal.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：图像都匠行水中郎将、校尉、都尉，银印，青绶。
现代文：圆像都匠行水中郎将、校尉、都尉，佩银印，青色绶带。
English: The round statues of the master of the capital, the vice-commander, the captain, and the captain, wear silver seals and blue ribbons.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：若非以工伎巧能特加此官者，羽林长郎，佩武猛都尉以上印者，假青绶。
现代文：如果不是因为百工技艺高超特加此官者，不加给绶带。羽林郎、羽林长郎，佩挂武猛都尉以上官印者，给子青色绶带。
English: If it is not because of the superb skills of the hundred craftsmen, the ribbon will not be added. Urinro and Urin chōro, who wear the official seal of Captain Takematsu or higher, will give their children a blue ribbon.

古文：别部司马以下，假墨绶。
现代文：别部司马以下，给予黑色绶带。
English: The lower part of the horse is given a black ribbon.

古文：朝服，武冠。
现代文：着朝服，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a morning suit, wearing a military crown.

古文：其长郎壮士，武弁冠。
现代文：其中长郎壮士，戴武弁冠。
English: Among them, the eldest son, Daiwubenkan, was crowned.

古文：在陛列及卤簿，服绛縠单衣。
现代文：如果在陛侧侍卫以及在皇帝出行仪仗队之中，身穿深红色纱谷单衣。
English: If you are in the bodyguards on His Majesty's side or in the honor guard of the emperor's travel, wear a crimson red gauze singlet.

古文：陛下甲仆射主事吏将骑、廷上五牛旗假使虎贲，在陛列及备卤簿，服锦文衣，武冠，鹖尾。
现代文：陛下甲仆射主事吏将骑、廷卜五牛旗假使虎贲，如果在陛侧侍卫及在皇帝出行仪仗队之中，身穿锦文衣，戴武冠，冠上加双朗尾。
English: His majesty's ace servant shoots the main official will ride, Thimphu five-cow flag pretends to be a vise, if in the side guard of his majesty and in the honor guard of the emperor's travel, wearing brocade clothes, wearing a military crown, crowned with a double long tail.

古文：陛长，假铜印，墨绶，旄头。
现代文：陛长，给予钢印，黑色印绶。戴旄头冠。
English: Your Majesty, give me a steel seal, a black seal, and a skull and crossbones crown.

古文：羽林在陛列及备卤簿，服绛科单衣，上著韦画要襦，假旄头。
现代文：羽林军充御前侍卫及在皇帝出行的仪仗队之中，着绛科单衣，上身加皮画腰襦戴旄头冠。
English: The Uebayashi troops served as guards in front of the emperor and in the honor guard of the emperor's travel. They wore a single-breasted kimono, with a leather upper body, a loincloth and a skull cap.

古文：举辇迹禽前驱由基强弩司马、守陵虎贲，佩武猛都尉以上印者，假青绶。别部司马以下，假墨绶。
现代文：举辇迹禽前驱由基强弩司马、守陵虎贲，佩挂武猛都尉以上官印者，给予青色绶带别部司马以下，给予黑色绶带。
English: Those who wore the official seal of Captain Wu Meng and above were given a blue ribbon, while those who wore the official seal of other departments and below were given a black ribbon.

古文：守陵虎贲，给绛科单衣，武冠。
现代文：守陵虎贲，赐给绛科单衣，戴武冠。
English: Guarding the tomb of the tiger, he gave him a single garment and a military crown.

古文：殿中冗从虎贲、殿中虎贲、及守陵者持鈒戟冗从虎贲，佩武猛都尉以下印者，假青绶。
现代文：殿中冗从虎贲、殿中虎贲、及守陵者持钹戟冗从虎贲，佩挂武猛都尉以下官印者，给予青色绶带。
English: Those in the hall who follow the tiger's roar, those in the hall who follow the tiger's roar, and those guarding the tombs who hold the roar and follow the tiger's roar, and those who wear the official seal below Captain Wu Meng, will be given a blue ribbon.

古文：别部司马以下，假墨绶。
现代文：别部司马以下，给予黑色绶带。
English: The lower part of the horse is given a black ribbon.

古文：绛科单衣，武冠。
现代文：着绛科单衣，戴武冠。
English: Dressed in a military uniform, wearing a military crown.

古文：持椎斧武骑虎贲、五骑传诏虎贲、殿中羽林及守陵者太官尚食虎贲、称饭宰人、诸官尚食虎贲，佩武猛都尉以上印者，假青绶。
现代文：持椎斧武骑虎贲、五骑传诏虎贲、殿中羽林及守陵者太官尚食虎贲、称饭宰人、诸宫尚食虎贲，佩挂武猛都尉以上官印者，给予青色绶带。
English: The eunuchs who hold the battle axe and ride the chariot, the five horsemen who deliver the edict and ride the chariot, the eunuchs in the palace and the guardians of the tombs who still eat the chariot, the chefs who serve the meal, the courtiers who still eat the chariot, and those who wear the official seal of Captain Wu Meng or above will be given a blue ribbon.

古文：别部司马以下，假墨绶。
现代文：别部司马以下，给予黑色绶带。
English: The lower part of the horse is given a black ribbon.

古文：给绛蠙，武冠。其在陛列及备卤簿，五骑虎贲，服锦文衣，鹖尾。
现代文：赐给绛讲，戴武冠如果在御前侍卫及在皇帝出行仪仗队之中，五骑虎贲着锦文衣，冠上插双曷岛尾。
English: According to the legend, if you wear the military crown in front of the imperial guards and in the honor guard of the emperor's travel, you will be riding a tiger wearing a brocade robe, and the crown will be inserted with two braided island tails.

古文：宰人服离支衣。
现代文：宰人着离支衣。
English: The executioner is wearing a loin cloth.

古文：黄门鼓吹、及钉官仆射、黄门鼓吹史主事、诸官鼓吹、尚书廊下都坐门下守皞、殿中威仪驺、虎贲常直殿黄云龙门者、门下左右部虎贲羽林驺、给传事者诸导驺、门下中书守皞，给绛蠙，武冠。
现代文：黄门鼓吹、及钉官仆射、黄门鼓吹史主事、诸官鼓吹、尚书廊下都坐门下守合、殿中威仪绉、虎贲常直殿黄云龙门者、门下左右部虎贲羽林绉、给传事者诸导骁、门下中书守合，赐给绛构，戴武冠。
English: The Yellow Gate propagandist, and the nailing official's minions, the Yellow Gate propagandist of history, the various officials' propagandists, and the Shang Library corridor all sit under the door to guard the gate, the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of the hall of

古文：南书门下虎贲羽林驺、兰台五曹节藏射廊下守皞、威仪、发符驺、都水使者黄沙廊下守皞、谒者、录事、威仪驺、河堤谒者驺、诸官谒者驺，绛蠙，武冠。
现代文：南书门下虎贲羽林骄、兰台五曹节藏射廊下守合、威仪、发符鞠、都水使者黄沙廊下守合、谒者、绿事、威仪骗、河堤谒者绉、诸宫谒者绉，着绛讲，戴武冠。
English: Nanshumen under the tiger's beak, feather forest under the tiger's beak, Lantai Five Immortals Festival under the shooting gallery, Shouhe, majesty, Hafei, Shouhe, the messenger of the capital water, the yellow sand corridor, Shouhe, green things, majesty, river embankment, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace.

古文：给其衣服，自如故事。大谁士皁科单衣，樊哙冠。
现代文：按照旧例赐给他们衣服。大谁士着皂科单衣，戴樊啥冠。
English: In accordance with the old custom, they were given clothes. All of them were dressed in single-breasted soaps, with a crown of thorns.

古文：卫士墨布皞，却敌冠。
现代文：卫士着墨布构，戴却敌冠。
English: The guard is dressed in black cloth, but wears the enemy's crown.

古文：凡此前众职，江左多不备，又多阙朝服。
现代文：以上各种职官，束晋大多未置，又大多没有朝服。
English: Most of the above-mentioned officials were not placed in Sokjin, and most of them did not wear imperial robes.

古文：诸应给朝服佩玉，而不在京都者，给朝服；非护乌丸羌夷戎蛮诸校尉以上及刺史、西域戊己校尉，皆不给佩玉。
现代文：所有应赐给朝服佩玉的职官，如果不在京都者赐给朝服，非护乌丸羌夷戎蛮诸校尉以上及刺史、西域戊己校尉，都不给佩玉。
English: All officials who should be given the court dress badge, if they are not in Kyoto, they will be given the court dress badge, but if they are not from Kyoto, they will not be given the badge if they are not from Kyoto, and if they are not from Kyoto, they will not be given the court dress badge if they are not from Kyoto, and if they are not from Kyoto, they will not be given the badge if they are not from Kyoto.

古文：其来朝会，权时假给，会罢输还。凡应朝服者，而官不给，听自具之。
现代文：如果来京朝会，暂时给予佩玉，朝会结束后交还，凡是应着朝服的官员，如果官府不发给，便听其自备。
English: If you come to the imperial court in Beijing, you will be temporarily given the pearl necklace, and it will be returned after the imperial court is over. If the government does not issue it, all officials who should wear the imperial robe will make their own arrangements.

古文：诸假印绶而官不给鞶囊者，得自具作。
现代文：各类给予印绶而官府不给肇囊的官员，都应自备。
English: All types of officials who are given stamps but are not given bags by the government should bring their own.

古文：其但假印不假绶者，不得佩绶。
现代文：如果是衹给官印而不给绶带的官员，不能佩扦绶带。
English: If it is an official who gives the official seal but not the sash, he cannot wear the sash.

古文：鞶，古制也。
现代文：擎，是古代的一种服制。
English: "Qing" is an ancient form of dress.

古文：汉代著鞶囊者，侧在腰间。
现代文：汉代把蟹囊佩挂在腰的。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the crab-capsule was worn around the waist.

古文：或谓之傍囊，或谓之绶囊。
现代文：或是称为旁囊，或是称为绶囊。
English: Either it is called the collateral sac, or it is called the temporal sac.

古文：然则以此囊盛绶也。
现代文：由此可见是用这蟹囊装印绶。
English: From this, it can be seen that the crab bag was used to hold the printing roller.

古文：或盛或散，各有其时乎。
现代文：有时装印绶，有时不装印绶，各有不同的时尚吧。
English: Sometimes with a badge, sometimes without a badge, each with a different fashion.

古文：朝服一具，冠帻各一，绛绯袍、皁缘中单衣领袖各一领，革带袷裤各一，幹、袜各一量，簪导饷自副。
现代文：朝服一具包括：冠帧各一顶，绛绯袍、领袖用黑色缘边的中单衣各一套，革带一条，夹裤各一套，舄、袜各一双，簪导饷白副。
English: A morning suit includes: a crown frame, a cassock, a leader's tunic with a black border, a leather belt, a pair of pants, a pair of socks, and a white pair of socks.

古文：四时朝服者，加绛绢黄绯青绯皁绯袍单衣各一领；五时朝服者，加给白绢袍单衣一领。
现代文：四时朝服，就是加上绛绢黄绯青绯皂绯袍单衣各一套；五时朝服，就是再加给白绢袍单衣一套。
English: At four o'clock, the morning dress is to add a single dress to each of the yellow, blue and white silk robes; at five o'clock, the morning dress is to add a single dress to the white silk robe.

古文：诸受朝服，单衣七丈二尺，科单衣及皞五丈二尺，中衣绢五丈，缘皁一丈八尺，领袖练一匹一尺，绢七尺五寸。
现代文：各类官员领受朝服，单衣是七丈二尺，科单衣及构五丈二尺，中衣绢五丈，黑色缘边用料一丈八尺，领袖用白色熟绢一匹一尺，绢七尺五寸。
English: Officials of all kinds receive the imperial robes. The single robe is seven joys and two shaku, the scientific single robe and the structure are five joys and two shaku, the middle robe is five joys, the black border material is one joys and eight shaku, the leader uses a white ruffled one joys and one shaku, and the collar is seven joys and five shaku.

古文：给裤练一丈四尺，缣二丈。
现代文：给裤用白色熟绢一丈四尺，黄色细绢二丈。
English: Trousers are trimmed with white, four-feet long, and yellow, two-feet long.

古文：袜布三尺。
现代文：袜布三尺。
English: Three feet of hosiery.

古文：单衣及皞袷带，缣各一段，长七尺。
现代文：单衣带及构带夹带，用黄色细绢各一段，长七尺。
English: The single garment belt and the structured belt entanglement, each with a yellow ribbon, are seven feet long.

古文：江左止给绢各有差。
现代文：塞置衹给多少不等的绢。
English: The number of baits given to the setter varies.

古文：宋元嘉末，断不复给，至今。
现代文：宋元嘉末年，中断了没有再给，一直到现在。
English: At the end of Song Yuan Jia's life, it was discontinued and has not been given again, until now.

古文：山鹿、豽、柱豽白豽、施毛狐白领、黄豹、斑白鼲子、渠搜裘、步摇、八钅奠、蔽结、多服蝉、明中、欋白，又诸织成衣帽、锦帐、纯金银器、云母从广一寸以上物者，皆为禁物。
现代文：山鹿皮衣、纳皮衣、柱钠皮衣、白纳皮衣、施毛狐白领皮衣、黄豹皮衣、斑白鳃子皮衣、渠搜皮衣、步摇、八钿、蔽结、多服蝉、明中、棹白等饰品，另外各种织成的衣帽、锦帐、纯金器纯银器、以及云母长宽超过一寸的物品，都列为禁用物品。
English: Deer skins, napkin skins, columnar sodium skins, white napkin skins, fox-furred white collar skins, yellow leopard skins, speckled white satin skins, canal search skins, wobbly skins, yakitori, covered knots, multi-layered cicadas, bright and medium, white satin, and other accessories, as well as various woven hats, brocades, pure goldware, sterling silverware, and mica items longer than one inch in length and width, are listed as prohibited items.

古文：诸在官品令第二品以上，其非禁物，皆得服之。
现代文：所有官位在宫品令第二品以上的官员，如果不是禁用物品，都可以穿用。
English: All officials above the second grade of the Imperial Household Order can wear it if it is not a prohibited item.

古文：第三品以下，加不得服三钅奠以上、蔽结、爵叉、假真珠翡翠校饰缨佩、杂采衣、杯文绮、齐绣黻、钅適离、袿袍。
现代文：官位在第三品以下的官员，除禁用物品不得穿用以外，还增加不得穿用三钿以上、蔽结、爵叉、假珍珠翡翠装饰的缨佩、杂彩衣、杯文绮、齐绣黻、缱离、桂袍等衣服、饰品。
English: Officials with official ranks below the third grade, in addition to the prohibited items that must not be worn, are also prohibited from wearing clothes and accessories such as more than three rings, cover knots, knight's forks, fake pearl and jade jewelry, miscellaneous clothing, cups and bowls, embroidered brooches, brooches, and guillotine robes.

古文：第六品以下，加不得服金钅奠、绫、锦、锦绣、七缘绮、貂豽裘、金叉环铒、及以金校饰器物、张绛帐。
现代文：官位在第六品以下的官员，再增加不得穿用金钿、绫、锦、锦绣、七缘绮、貂钠皮衣、金叉缳饵、以及用金装饰的器物、张绛帐等衣服、物品。
English: Officials with a rank lower than the sixth grade are no longer allowed to wear gold brocade, brocade, brocade, brocade embroidery, seven-edged brocade, satin leather clothing, gold fork and hoe, as well as gold-decorated utensils, clothes and items such as cheque books.

古文：第八品以下，加不得服罗、纨、绮、縠，杂色真文。
现代文：官位在第八品以下的官员，再增加不得穿罗、纨、绮、毂等丝织品，衣服不得用杂色真文。
English: Officials whose official rank is lower than the eighth grade are not allowed to wear silk fabrics such as silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk, silk.

古文：骑士卒百工人，加不得服大绛紫襈、假结、真珠珰珥、犀、玳瑁、越叠、以银饰器物、张帐、乘犊车，履色无过绿、青、白。
现代文：骑士卒百工人，再增加不得穿用大绛紫撰、假结、珍珠瑺珥、犀、玳瑁、越叠、用银装饰的器物、张帐等衣服、饰品，不得乘牛车，鞋的颜色不能超过绿色、青色、白色三种颜色。
English: A knight or a hundred workers, in addition, may not wear clothes and ornaments such as coats with embroidery, fake knots, pearl bracelets, rhinoceroses, hoops, overlapping, silver-decorated utensils, plaques, may not ride in ox carts, and the color of shoes may not exceed green, blue, and white.

古文：奴婢衣食客，加不得服白帻、茜、绛、金黄银叉、环、铃、钅適、铒，履色无过纯青。
现代文：奴婢衣食客，再增加不得戴白幢、蓓、绛、金黄银叉、缳、铃、鎺、饵，鞋的颜色衹能是纯青色。
English: In addition, diners in slave clothes are not allowed to wear white socks, socks, socks, gold and silver fork, socks, bells, socks, socks, and the color of shoes can only be pure blue.

古文：诸去官及薨卒不禄物故，家人所服，皆得从故官之例。
现代文：官员去官退职以及诸侯、大夫、士去世，家人的服制，都要依照原任官职的服制规定。
English: When an official retires from office, or when a vassal, a doctor, or a senator dies, his or her family members must follow the dress code of the former official.

古文：诸王皆不得私作禁物，及罽碧校鞍，珠玉金银错刻镂雕饰无用之物。
现代文：诸王都不得私自制作禁用物品，不得制作阂碧校鞍、珠玉金银错刻镂雕饰奢侈用品。
English: All kings are not allowed to make prohibited items on their own, and are not allowed to make luxury items such as indigo school saddles, and bejeweled gold and silver intricately carved and carved products.

古文：天子坐漆床，居硃屋。
现代文：天子坐漆床，住朱红色房屋。
English: The son of heaven sits on a bed of lacquer and lives in a vermilion house.

古文：史臣按《左传》，丹桓宫之楹。
现代文：史臣查考《左传》，记载用朱红漆漆桓公庙的柱子。
English: Shi Chen checked "Zhu Chuan" and recorded that the pillars of Kuan Kung Temple were painted with vermilion lacquer.

古文：何休注《公羊》，亦有硃屋以居。
现代文：何休给《公羊传》作注，也有居住朱红色房屋的记载。
English: He often annotated "The Story of the Ram," and there is also a record of a vermilion-colored house.

古文：所从来久矣。
现代文：来历很久远。
English: It goes back a long way.

古文：漆床亦当是汉代旧仪，而《汉仪》不载。
现代文：漆床也应当是汉代以往的礼仪制度，但是《汉仪》没有记载。
English: The lacquer bed is also supposed to be the origin of the etiquette system in the Han Dynasty, but there is no record of it in the "Han Yi."

古文：寻所以必硃必漆者，其理有可言焉。
现代文：探求一定要用朱色一定要用漆的原因，其中有些道理是可以说明的。
English: Exploring the reasons why you must use vermilion and paint, some of which can be explained.

古文：夫珍木嘉树，其品非一，莫不植根深且，致之未易。
现代文：珍贵的奇木嘉树，品类繁多，无不生长在深山峻岭之中，采伐运输很不容易。
English: Precious exotic trees and shrubs, a wide variety of categories, all grow in the deep mountains and steep hills, and it is not easy to harvest and transport.

古文：藉地广之资，因人多之力，则役苦费深，为敝滋重。
现代文：凭藉广阔地域的资源，利用众多的人力采伐树木，劳役艰苦，费用繁多，造成的弊害越来越深重。
English: With the resources of a vast area, using a lot of manpower to cut down trees, labor is hard, costs are many, and the harm caused is becoming more and more serious.

古文：是以上古圣王，采椽不斫，斫之则惧刻桷雕楹，莫知其限也。
现代文：因此上古时代的圣王，用柞木作椽子，不加削斫，削斫的话便担心方椽楹柱都要刻镂雕饰，极尽奢华没有止境。
English: Therefore, the holy kings of ancient times used birch wood for rafters, without cutting the rafters. If they cut the rafters, they would worry that the square rafters would have to be carved and decorated. There is no end to the ultimate luxury.

古文：哲人县鉴微远，杜渐防萌，知采椽不惬后代之心，不斫不为将来之用，故加硃施漆，以传厥后。散木凡材，皆可入用。
现代文：哲人明鉴知远，防微杜渐，知道柞木椽子不会使后代满意，不加削斫的简朴作法不会被将来采用，所以加上朱红色用漆涂饰，来传给后世用了这种办法，一般零散的木材都可以建造房屋器具。
English: The philosopher knew that the birch lumber would not satisfy future generations, and that the simple method of not adding bevels would not be used in the future. Therefore, he added vermilion paint to pass it on to future generations. Using this method, ordinary scattered wood can be used to build houses and appliances.

古文：远探幽旨，将在斯乎。
现代文：远探深刻的用意，可能就在这方面吧。
English: Perhaps it is in this respect that the intention to explore far and deep comes from.

古文：殿屋之为员渊方井兼植荷华者，以厌火祥也。
现代文：宫殿房屋建有圆形深潭方形井槛，并种植荷花，是为了镇邪攘除火灾
English: The palace houses were built with a round deep pool and a square well threshold, and lotus flowers were planted to ward off evil and extinguish fires.

古文：古者贵贱皆执笏，其有事则搢之于腰带。所谓搢绅之士者，搢笏而垂绅带也。绅垂三尺。
现代文：古代贵贱都执笏，有事之时就把笏插在腰带上，所谓捂绅之士，就是插笏而垂带之人，腰带余下一段下垂作为装饰，称为绅带。
English: In ancient times, nobles and commoners alike wore a girdle. In times of need, the girdle was inserted into the belt. The so-called "gentleman of the girdle" was a person who inserted the girdle and hung it. The remaining section of the girdle hung down as decoration, and was called the gentleman's belt.

古文：笏者有事则书之，故常簪笔，今之白笔，是其遗象。
现代文：绅带下垂的长度是三尺。笏的用途是有事则书写于其上，以备遣忘，所以常插笔于冠，以备记事，现在的白笔，就是这种遣制。
English: The length of the sash hanging down is three feet. The use of the cassock is to have things written on it to remember, so a pen is often inserted in the crown to remember things. The current white pen is such a device.

古文：三台五省二品文官簪之；王公侯伯子男卿尹及武官不簪。
现代文：三台五省二品文官插笔。王公侯伯子男卿尹及武官不插笔。
English: Three provinces, five provinces, and two counties of civil officials inscribed. Wang Gong Hou, Bo Zi, Yang Qing Yin and military officers did not inscribe.

古文：加内侍位者，乃簪之。
现代文：加内侍官位的，才插笔。
English: It was not until he was appointed to the position of Kanai Jikan that he began to write.

古文：手板，则古笏矣。
现代文：手板，就是古代的笏。
English: The hand board is the ancient cymbal.

古文：尚书令、仆射、尚书手板头复有白笔，以紫皮裹之，名笏。
现代文：尚书令、仆射、尚书的手板头置白笔，用紫皮包裹，名为笏。
English: A white pen is placed at the top of the board for Shang Shuling, Zhu Ya, and Shang Shuling, and is wrapped in purple leather. It is called a cymbal.

古文：朝服肩上有紫生袷囊，缀之朝服外，俗呼曰紫荷。
现代文：朝服肩上有紫生夹囊，是缀在朝服外面，俗称紫荷。
English: The morning dress has a purple pouch on the shoulder, which is embroidered on the outside of the morning dress, commonly known as purple lotus.

古文：或云汉代以盛奏事，负荷以行，未详也。
现代文：有种说法认为汉代用紫生夹囊装上奏表章，以便携带，不知是否确实。
English: There is a saying that in the Han Dynasty, a purple pouch was used to hold the performance seal so that it could be carried, but I don't know if it is true.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，诏赐汉太尉杨彪几杖，待以客礼。
现代文：魏文帝董勿三年，诏令赐给汉太尉杨彪儿案与手杖，用客礼接待他。
English: Three years after the death of Emperor Wen of Wei and Dongbei, Emperor Wen of Wei issued an imperial edict to bestow Han Taijun Yang Biao'er with a case and a cane, and received him with courtesy.

古文：延请之日，使挟杖入朝。
现代文：延请他进宫的时候，让他扶持手杖入朝。
English: When inviting him to enter the palace, let him hold a cane and walk into the morning.

古文：又令著鹿皮冠。彪辞让，不听。
现代文：又诏令他戴鹿皮冠，杨彪再三辞让，皇帝不准。
English: The emperor also ordered him to wear a deerskin crown, but Yang Biao repeatedly refused to do so.

古文：乃使服布单衣皮弁以见。
现代文：于是让他穿布单衣戴皮弁朝见。
English: So he made him wear a cloth singlet and leather pants to see in the morning.

古文：《傅玄子》曰： 汉末王公名士，多委王服，以幅巾为雅。是以袁绍、崔钧之徒，虽为将帅，皆著巾。 
现代文：《傅玄子》载： 汉朝末年，王公名士大多厌弃王服，不戴冠，以用绢一幅束发为雅因此袁趋、崔钧等人，即使是将帅，也都用细绢幅巾束发。 
English: "Fu Xuan Zi" contains: At the end of the Han Dynasty, most of the princes and celebrities abhorred the king's clothes, did not wear crowns, and preferred to have their hair tied with a scarf. Therefore, Yuan Qian, Cui Yao and others, even if they were generals, also used a scarf to tie their hair.

古文：魏武以天下凶荒，资财乏匮，拟古皮弁，裁缣帛以为夹，合乎简易随时之义，以色别其贵贱。
现代文：魏武帝考虑到天下兵荒马乱，财产物资缺乏，模仿古代皮弁样式，剪裁绢帛作成恰，符合样式简易随时戴取十分方便的要求，用不同的颜色区别贵贱等级。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei, taking into account the chaos of the world and the lack of property and materials, imitated the ancient style of the leather flap and cut the crotch to make it just right. It met the requirements of the style being easy to wear at any time and very convenient. Different colors were used to distinguish between high and low grades.

古文：本施军饰，非为国容也。
现代文：本来用于车队之中，不是全国普遍都用的。
English: Originally, it was used in car convoys, but it is not universally used throughout the country.

古文：徐爰曰： 俗说夹本未有歧，荀文若巾之，行触树枝成歧，谓之为善，因而弗改。 
现代文：徐爰说： 民间说法蛤本来没有分岔，荀文若戴头巾走路，途中头巾撞上树枝被分成岔，他认为这样倒很好看，便不改变了。 
English: Xu Yao said: According to folk tales, there was originally no dividing line. If a man was walking while wearing a headscarf and the headscarf bumped into a tree branch on the way and was split into two, he thought it looked good and would not change it.

古文：通以为庆吊服。
现代文：通常作为庆贺吊唁的服饰。
English: It is usually worn as a celebratory attire.

古文：巾以葛为之，形如夹，而横著之，古尊卑共服也。
现代文：巾用葛布裁制，样式如同恰，但是横戴在头上，古代贵族平民都戴巾。
English: The scarf is made of Ge cloth, the style is similar to Cha, but it is worn across the head. In ancient times, nobles and commoners alike wore scarves.

古文：故汉末妖贼以黄为巾，时谓之 黄巾贼。 
现代文：所以选翘末年妖贼用黄布做成巾，戴在头上，当时称为 黄巾贼 。
English: Therefore, at the end of the election, the thief made a scarf with yellow cloth and wore it on his head. At that time, he was called the Yellow Scarf Thief.

古文：今国子太学生冠之，服单衣以为朝服，执一卷经以代手板。
现代文：现在国子监太学生以巾为冠戴在头上，穿上单衣作为朝服，持一卷经书代替手板。
English: Now, Kuniko supervising students wear a scarf as a crown on their heads, put on a singlet as a morning suit, and hold a volume of scriptures instead of a tablet.

古文：居士野人，皆服巾焉。徐爰曰： 帽名犹冠也。
现代文：士人庶民，都戴头巾。徐爰说： 帽的名称就是冠。
English: Civil servants, commoners, all wear headscarves. Xu Wei said: The name of the cap is the crown.

古文：义取于蒙覆其首。
现代文：取义于蒙覆头部。
English: Take the meaning of the hooded head.

古文：其本纚也。古者有冠无帻，冠下有纚，以缯为之。后世施帻于冠，因裁纚为帽。
现代文：帽原奉是繦占时候有冠没有帧，冠面有繦束发，是用丝织品做的，后世冠卜有帧，便把欐裁制为，阳。
English: The hat was originally made of silk fabric with a crown and no frame, but later it was made of silk fabric with a crown and a frame.

古文：自乘舆宴居，下至庶人无爵者，皆服之。 
现代文：上自皇帝闲居时，下至庶人没有爵位者，都戴帽。 
English: From the emperor when he was idle, down to the commoner without a title, everyone wore a hat.

古文：史臣案晋成帝咸和九年制，听尚书八座丞郎、门下三省侍郎乘车白帢低帻出入掖门。
现代文：史臣案晋成帝咸和九年定制，允许尚书八座丞郎、门卜二：省侍郎乘车戴白蛤低帧从宫中旁门进出。
English: The Shishen plan was made in the ninth year of Emperor Han of Jin Dynasty, and allowed Shangshu eight-seat chancellor, Mengbu two: provincial attendant to enter and exit from the side door of the palace by car wearing a white satin low frame.

古文：又二宫直宫著乌纱夹。
现代文：又允许二：宫直官戴乌纱恰。
English: It also allowed two: the palace steward, Dai Wusa-cha.

古文：然则士人宴居，皆著帢矣。而江左时野人已著帽，士人亦往往而然，但其顶圆耳。
现代文：因此士人闲居，都戴蛤。而晋时庶民已经戴帽，士人也往往如此，衹不过帽顶是圆形。
English: As a result, the nobles lived in idleness and all wore straw hats. In the Jin Dynasty, the common people already wore hats, and the nobles often did as well, although the top of the hat was round.

古文：后乃高其屋云。
现代文：后来才把前面的屋面形加高
English: It was only later that the shape of the roof in front was raised

古文：古者人君有朝服，有祭服，有宴服，有吊服。
现代文：古时候君主有朝服，有祭服，有宴服，有吊服。
English: In ancient times, the monarch had a morning dress, a ceremonial dress, a banquet dress, and a hanging dress.

古文：吊服皮弁疑衰，今以单衣黑帻为宴会服，拜陵亦如之。
现代文：吊服戴皮弁当已衰落了，现在穿单衣戴黑帧作为宴会服，拜谒陵寝也是这种服制。
English: Hanging clothes and wearing leather lunch boxes have declined. Nowadays, wearing a singlet with a black frame is the dress code for a banquet, and it is also the dress code for sleeping in a mausoleum.

古文：以单衣白夹为吊服，修敬尊秩亦服之也。
现代文：穿单衣白夹作为吊服，修敬尊秩也穿吊服。
English: Wear a singlet with a white clip as a hanging garment, and also wear a hanging garment to pay respects to the rank.

古文：单衣，古之深衣也。
现代文：单衣，就是古时候的深衣。
English: The single garment is the dark garment of ancient times.

古文：今单衣裁制与深衣同，唯绢带为异。
现代文：现在单衣裁制与深衣相同，衹是绢带不同。
English: Now, the cut of a single garment is the same as that of a dark garment, but the collar is different from the ribbon.

古文：深衣绢帽以居丧，单衣素帢以施吉。
现代文：穿深衣戴绢帽作为丧服。穿单衣戴白蛤用于吉庆。
English: Wearing dark clothes and a skullcap as mourning clothes. Wearing a singlet and white socks for auspicious occasions.

古文：晋武帝泰始三年，诏太宰安平王孚服侍中之服，赐大司马义阳王望衮冕之服。
现代文：晋武帝泰始三年，诏令太宰安平王司马孚穿戴侍中冠服，赐给大司马义阳王司马望衮衣和冕。
English: In the first three years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, Dazai Anping Wang Sima Fu was ordered to wear an attendant's middle crown, and the grand steward Ma Yiyang Wang Sima Wang was given a robe and a crown.

古文：四年，又诏赵、乐安、燕王服散骑常侍之服。
现代文：四年，又诏令壁丝、銮堂王、遮王穿戴散骑常侍冠服。
English: In four years, it was also decreed that Keishi, Shido-oh, and Shiro-oh should wear the crown robes of horseback riding attendants.

古文：十年，赐彭城王衮冕之服。伪楚桓玄将篡，亦加安帝母弟太宰琅邪王衮冕服。
现代文：十年，赐给彭城王衮衣和冕伪楚但玄将要篡位时，也加给安帝母弟太宰迭玺堕衮衣和冕。
English: Ten years later, the crown and robe were given to the king of Pengcheng, and the crown and robe were also given to Emperor An's maternal half-brother, Dazai Deri, when he was about to usurp the throne.

古文：宋兴以来，王公贵臣加侍中、散骑常侍，乃得服貂珰也。
现代文：宋建立以来，王公贵臣任侍中、散骑常侍才能戴饰有黄金瑺和貂尾的武冠。
English: Since the establishment of the Song Dynasty, it was only possible for princes and noblemen to wear the military crown adorned with a golden scepter and a hooked tail.

古文：宋孝武孝建元年，丞相南郡王义宣，二年，雍州刺史武昌王浑，又有异图。
现代文：宋孝武孝建元年，丞相南郡王刘义宣图谋不轨，二年，雍州刺史达旦玉塾噜又图谋不轨。
English: In the first year of Song Xiao Wu Xiao Jian, Liu Yixuan, the chancellor of Nan County, attempted to plot a plot, and in the second year, he attempted to plot a plot in Yongzhou.

古文：世祖嫌侯王强盛，欲加减削。
现代文：世担疑忌侯王势力强盛，打算加以减抑贬削。
English: The world is suspicious of the powerful influence of the Hou Wang, and intends to suppress and degrade it.

古文：其年十月己未，大司马江夏王义恭、骠骑大将军竟陵王诞表改革诸王车服制度，凡九条，表在《义恭传》。
现代文：当年十月己末日，大司马江夏王刘盏苤、骠骑大将军童壁工窒蜒上奏章改革诸王车服制度，共有九个条目，奏章载入《义恭传》。
English: At the end of October of that year, the grand secretary Ma Jiangxia Wang Liu Zhenqi and the cavalry general Tong Qigong meandered into the music chapter to reform the royal carriage dress system, with a total of nine items, and the music chapter was included in the "Biography of Boxing."

古文：上因讽有司更增广条目。
现代文：皇上便暗示有关部门再增加条目。
English: The emperor then hinted that the relevant departments should add more items.

古文：奏曰： 车服以庸，《虞书》茂典；名器慎假，《春秋》明诫。
现代文：有关部门上奏说： 把车马衣服奖给有功的诸侯，这是《虞书》记载的著名典制；名位称号和车服仪制等不可以随便给人，这是《春秋》明确的告诫。
English: Relevant departments reported at the meeting that: the award of chariot and horse clothes to meritorious lords is a famous award system recorded in the "Book of Fortunes"; the title of fame and the ceremonial system of chariot clothing should not be given to random people, which is a clear warning of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：是以尚方所制，禁严汉律，诸侯窃服，虽亲必罪。
现代文：因此尚方制造的金银器物、服饰、车舆等，严格按照汉律规定，诸侯王私自使用，即使再亲也必定治罪。
English: Therefore, the gold and silverware, clothing, chariots, etc. made by Shangfang were strictly in accordance with the Han law, and the princes and kings used them for their own purposes. Even if they were related to each other, it would be a crime.

古文：自顷以来，下僭弥盛。
现代文：自近年以来，以下僭上越来越严重。
English: Since recent years, the following problems have become more and more serious.

古文：器服装饰，乐舞音容，通于王公，达于众庶。
现代文：器物冠服，金银饰品，音乐歌舞，王公都普遍享用，甚至还流传到庶民中间。
English: Crowned robes, gold and silver ornaments, music, song and dance were widely enjoyed by princes, and even spread to the common people.

古文：上下无辨，人志靡一。
现代文：上下没有分别，造成民心混乱。
English: There is no distinction between the top and the bottom, causing confusion in the hearts of the people.

古文：今表之所陈，实允礼度。
现代文：现江夏王、竟陵王奏章中陈述的内容，确实符合礼制法度。
English: The content of the statement in the present Jiangxia Wang and Jingling Wang Songzhang is indeed in line with the rules of etiquette.

古文：九条之格，犹有未尽，谨共附益，凡二十四条。
现代文：但九个条目，仍有未涉及到的方面，谨此共同增补，总计二十四条。
English: However, there are still nine items that have not been covered, and we would like to update them together, for a total of 24 articles.

古文：听事不得南向坐，施帐并沓。
现代文：诸王在厅堂治事不能面朝南而坐，不能设帐幕及覆盖惜。
English: It is a pity that the kings cannot sit facing south in the hall, and cannot set up a tent and cover.

古文：蕃国官正冬不得跣登国殿，及夹侍国师传令及油戟。
现代文：藩国官吏正冬不得赤脚走上国殿，不得让国师夹侍左右传令，不得用油戟仪仗。
English: During the winter, officials of the domain were not allowed to walk barefoot on the Great Hall of the People, nor were they allowed to have the Grand Master of the People's Army and his attendants deliver orders, nor were they allowed to use greasepaint for ceremonial purposes.

古文：公主王妃传令，不得硃服。
现代文：公主王妃传令，不得穿朱服。
English: The princess was ordered not to wear the red dress.

古文：舆不得重杠。
现代文：车不得用重杠。
English: Vehicles may not be towed with heavy barges.

古文：鄣扇不得雉尾；剑不得鹿卢形；槊毦不得孔雀白；夹毂队不得绛袄；平乘诞马不得过二匹；胡伎不得彩衣。
现代文：鄣扇不得用雉尾。剑柄端不得用玉作成鹿卢形。槊驼装饰物不得用孔雀白惊羽毛。夹毂队不得穿深红袄。平乘随仪从以备的散马不得超过二匹。胡伎不得穿彩衣。
English: The fan should not be made of iris. The handle of the sword should not be made of jade. The camel should not be decorated with peacock feathers. The team should not wear deep red coats. There should not be more than two loose horses in the procession. The horse should not wear colorful clothes.

古文：舞伎正冬著袿衣，不得庄而蔽花；正冬会不得铎舞、杯柈舞。长褵伎、褷舒、丸剑、博山伎、缘大橦伎、升五案伎，自非正冬会奏舞曲，不得舞。
现代文：舞伎正冬穿桂衣，不得盛饰加花。正冬会不得表演铎舞、杯袢舞长蹯伎、趣舒、丸剑、博山伎、缘大幢伎、升五案伎，如果不是正冬会奏舞曲，不得表演舞蹈。
English: During the Midwinter Festival, the dancers are not allowed to wear katsura costumes, and they are not allowed to decorate their costumes with flowers. During the Midwinter Festival, they are not allowed to perform the gong dance, the goblet dance, the long gong dance, the jujitsu dance, the round sword dance, the hosannji dance, the yakitori dance, and the sho-goanji dance. If they do not perform a dance piece during the Midwinter Festival, they are not allowed to perform a dance.

古文：诸妃主不得著衮带。
现代文：诸妃主不得系衮带。
English: Princes and princesses are not allowed to wear the sash.

古文：信幡，非台省官悉用绛。
现代文：信幡，非台省官都用深红色。
English: Both the prefectural flag and the non-Taiwanese provincial flag are crimson.

古文：郡县内史相及封内官长，于其封君，既非在三，罢官则不复追敬，不合称臣，正宜上下官敬而已。诸镇常行，车前后不得过六队，白直夹毂，不在其限。
现代文：郡县内史相及封内官长，对于自己的封君，既然不能执敬如事父、师、君，那么罢官之后便不再追敬，不应称臣，衹宜执上下官敬而已诸镇长官平常出行，车前车后不得超过六队，周围担任侍卫的白直，不在这个限额之内。
English: County and prefectural historiographers and fonai officials, for their own fonin, since they can not be honored as a father, teacher, and prince, then they will no longer be honored after dismissal, they should not be honored as a minister. Changi holds respect for officials up and down, but town officials usually travel. There must not be more than six teams in front of and behind the car. Bai Zhi, who serves as a bodyguard around, is not within this limit.

古文：刀不得过银铜为装。
现代文：刀不得超过用银用铜装饰。
English: The edge of the sword shall not exceed the border of silver and bronze.

古文：诸王女封县主、诸王子孙袭封王王之妃及封侯者夫人行，并不得卤簿。
现代文：诸王女封县主、诸王子孙袭封王之妃及列侯夫人出行，都不得用仪仗队。
English: The princesses of the feudal lords, the grandsons of the princes, the queens of the feudal lords and the ladies of the feudal lords are not allowed to use the honor guard.

古文：诸王子继体为王者，婚姻吉凶，悉依诸国公侯之礼，不得同皇弟皇子。
现代文：诸王子继位为王，其婚葬吉凶礼仪，一律依照诸国公侯标准，不得比同皇弟皇子。
English: Princes succeed to the throne as kings, and their weddings and funerals are all in accordance with the standards of princes of all countries, and must not be compared to the younger princes of the emperor.

古文：车舆不得油幢，轺车不在其限。
现代文：车舆不得用经油饰的帷幕，朝车不在这个限制之内。
English: The chariot is not allowed to use the oiled curtain, and the morning chariot is not within this limit.

古文：平乘舫皆平两头作露平形，不得拟像龙舟，悉不得硃油。
现代文：平乘舫都要两头平齐成露平形状，不得昂首翘尾模拟龙舟形象，一律不得用朱红油饰。
English: Both ends of the flat-riding yoke should be flattened into a deflated shape, the head and tail should not be raised to simulate the image of a dragon boat, and no vermilion oil should be used.

古文：帐钩不得作五花及竖笋形。
现代文：帐钩不得作五花形及竖笋形。
English: The hooks must not be five-flowered or vertical.

古文：若先有器物者，悉输送台臧。
现代文：如果此前已有上述禁用器物，一律上交台省府库，文书下达后二十为最后期限。
English: If the above-mentioned prohibited items have already been used, they will all be handed over to the Taiwan Provincial Treasury. The deadline is 20 days after the document is issued.

古文：书到后二十日期，若有窃玩犯禁者，及统司无举纠，并临时议罪。 
现代文：如果有人暗自玩忽轻心，胆敢违反禁令，及掌管部门不督察检举，都要即时论罪严惩。 
English: If someone secretly acts recklessly, dares to violate the ban, and the department in charge does not inspect and report, they must be immediately convicted and severely punished.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏批准。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：车前五百者，卿行旅从，五百人为一旅。
现代文：官员出行作前导的五百，旧说古时候卿出行有一旅随从，一旅是五百人。
English: The so-called front five hundred, Sir travel with travel entourage, five hundred people is a journey.

古文：汉氏一统，故去其人，留其名也。
现代文：汉朝统一天下，所以去除五百人数，留下了五百这个名称。
English: The Musashi era ruled the world, so those people were no longer used, but the name remained.

古文：宋孝武孝建二年十一月乙巳，有司奏： 侍中祭酒何偃议： 自今临轩，乘舆法服，焘华盖，登殿宜依庙斋以夹御，侍中、常侍夹扶上殿，及应为王公兴，又夹扶，毕，还本位。 求详议。 
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建二年十一月乙巳曰，有关部门上奏说： 侍中祭酒何偃建议： 今后皇帝至殿前，身穿法服，置身华盖之下，上殿应当依照庙祭斋戒的礼仪用人夹御，由侍中、常侍在两旁夹扶上殿，如果要为王公起来，又由人夹扶，完毕，还复本位，请求详审讨论。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu of Song and Emperor Xiaojian in November of the second year said, the relevant departments made a report saying: the attendant suggested: In the future, the emperor should come to the front of the hall, wearing a legal suit and standing under the flower cover. The upper hall should be clamped in accordance with the etiquette of the temple festival and fasting. The attendant and the regular attendant should clamp the upper hall on both sides. If it is necessary to stand up for the king, it should be clamped by a person. After that, the standard should be restored, and a detailed review and discussion should be requested.

古文：曹郎中徐爰参议： 宜如省所称，以为永准。 诏可。
现代文：曹郎中徐爰附议： 应当按照省署上奏提出的建议施行，作为永久准则 下诏同意。
English: Cao Langzhong and Xu Wei's additional proposal: It should be implemented in accordance with the suggestions made by the provincial department in the report, and should be used as a permanent guideline.

古文：孝建三年五月壬戌，有司奏： 案汉胡广、蔡邕并云古者诸侯贰车九乘，秦灭六国，兼其车服，故王者大驾属车八十一乘。
现代文：孝建三年五月壬戌，有关部门上奏说： 考汉胡广、蔡邕都说古时候诸侯有贰车九乘，台减了六国，兼并其车服，所以王者大驾有属车八十一乘。
English: In May of the third year of Xiao Jian's reign, the relevant departments made a report saying: "Examiners Han Hu Guang and Cai Jian both said that in ancient times, the princes had nine chariots, and Taiwan reduced six countries and merged its chariots, so the king had eighty-one chariots.

古文：尚书、御史乘之。
现代文：尚书、御史乘坐。
English: Shosho and Goshi ride along.

古文：最后一车，悬豹尾。
现代文：最后一乘车，悬挂豹尾。
English: The last ride, with the leopard's tail hanging down.

古文：法驾则三十六乘。
现代文：法驾则有属车三十六乘。
English: There are thirty-six cars belonging to the law.

古文：检晋江左逮至于今，乘舆出行，副车相承五乘。 
现代文：考察束晋以来直至现在，皇帝车驾出行，副车相沿袭衹有五乘。 
English: Since the inspection of Sokjin until now, the emperor has traveled by car, and there are five carriages.

古文：尚书令建平王宏参议： 八十一乘，义兼九国，三十六乘无所准，并不出经典。
现代文：尚书令建卫王型塞附议： 大驾属车八十一乘，从说法上应该是兼并九国车服，而法驾属车三十六乘没有根据，这些说法都不是出自经典。
English: It is hereby ordered that the King Jianwei type be deleted and the following suggestion be made: The Great Driver belongs to the eighty-first vehicle, which is said to be the annexation of the Nine Kingdoms vehicle, and the Thirty-six Vehicle of the Law Driver is unfounded. These statements are not from the classics.

古文：自邕、广传说，又是从官所乘，非帝者副车正数。
现代文：从蔡邕、直昵而传说下来，而属车又是从宫乘坐的车，并不是皇帝副车正规的车乘数量。
English: It is said to have descended from Cai Qi and Zhi Ni, and the car that belongs to it is the car that is taken from the palace, and it is not the regular number of passengers of the emperor's second car.

古文：江左五乘，俭不中礼。
现代文：束晋副车五乘，过于省俭不符合礼制。
English: Sokjin has five carriages, and being too frugal is not in line with the etiquette.

古文：案《周官》云： 上公九命，贰车九乘。
现代文：考《周宫》记载： 上公九命，有贰车九乘。
English: An examination of the "Weekly Palace" records: Shang Gong has nine lives, and there are nine carriages.

古文：侯伯七命，车七乘。
现代文：侯伯七命，有贰车七乘。
English: Hou Bo has seven lives, and there are seven carriages.

古文：子男五命，车五乘。 然则帝王十二乘。 
现代文：子男五命，有贰车五乘，因此帝王副车应是十二乘。 
English: Sons and sons have five lives, and there are five carriages, so the emperor's second carriage should be twelve carriages.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏批准。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明元年九月丁未朔，有司奏： 未有皇太后出行副车定数，下礼官议正。 
现代文：大明元年九月丁未初一，有关部门上奏说： 皇太后出行副车没有确定的乘数，请下转礼部官员讨论确定。 
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the relevant departments reported: There is no definite multiplier for the empress dowager's travel car, please discuss and determine with the officials of the transfer department.

古文：博士王燮之议： 《周礼》，后六服五路之数，悉与王同，则副车之制，不应独异。
现代文：博士王燮之建议： 据《周礼》，后六服五辖的数额，完全和王相同，那么副车制度，不应惟独不同。
English: Dr. Wang Xizhi's suggestion: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the amount of the latter six services and five jurisdictions is completely the same as that of the king, so the side car system should not be different.

古文：又《记》云： 古者后立六宫、三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，以听天下之内治。 
现代文：另外《礼记》载： 古时候王后下面分设六宫，置三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，以掌管天下内事的治理。 
English: In addition, "Li Ji" contains: In ancient times, six palaces were set up under the queen, and three wives, nine concubines, twenty-seven wives, and eighty-one wives were set up to manage the internal affairs of the world.

古文： 天子立六官、三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一元士，以听天下之外治。 
现代文： 天子设立六大官署，置三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一元士，以掌管天下外事的治理。 
English: Tianzi set up six major government departments, and appointed three princes, nine nobles, 27 magistrates, and 81 officials to be in charge of the administration of foreign affairs.

古文：郑注云： 后象王立六宫而居之，亦正寝一，燕寝五。 
现代文：郑玄注说： 后像王一样设立六宫居住，也是正寝一处，燕寝五处。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: Afterward, like a king, he set up six palaces to live in, one for sleeping and five for sleeping.

古文：推所立每与王同，礼无降亦明矣。
现代文：推究王后设置总是与王相同，礼仪并不降抑也是很明显的。
English: It is obvious that the setting of the queen is always the same as that of the king, and the etiquette is not reduced.

古文：皇太后既礼均至极，弥不应殊。
现代文：皇太后既然礼仪与至尊均等，更不应当不同。
English: Since the Empress Dowager's etiquette is equal to that of the Supreme Ruler, it should not be different.

古文：谓并应同十二乘。 
现代文：所以说皇太后出行副车应同样是十二乘。 
English: Therefore, the second car of the empress dowager's travel should also be a twelve-seater.

古文：通关为允。
现代文：关文在各部门之间通报之后都表示赞同。
English: Guanwen expressed approval after the notification between the departments.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏批准。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明四年正月戊辰，尚书左丞荀万秋奏： 《籍田仪注》， 皇帝冠通天冠，硃珣，青介帻，衣青纱袍。
现代文：大明四年正月戊辰，尚书左丞荀万秋上奏说： 据《籍田仪注》， 皇帝戴通天冠，朱红色带子，戴青介帧，穿青纱袍。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, in the year of the Bo Chen, Shangshu Zuorong said: According to the "Homeland Ritual," the emperor wore a crown, a scarlet ribbon, a youthful frame, and a gauze robe.

古文：侍中陪乘，奉车郎秉辔。 
现代文：侍中陪乘，奉车郎手执马缰驾车。 
English: Accompanied by a chamberlain, he is driven by a charioteer on horseback.

古文：案《汉·舆服志》曰： 通天冠，乘舆常服也。 
现代文：考《后汉书舆服志》说： 通天冠，是皇帝平时戴的冠。 
English: An examination of the "Post-Han Dynasty History of Clothing" says: Tong Tian Guan is the crown that the emperor usually wears.

古文：若斯岂可以常服降千亩邪？
现代文：如此说来，难道可以常戴亲耕籍田吗?
English: So, is it possible to wear your family's farming land all the time?

古文：《礼记》曰： 昔者天子为藉千亩，冕而硃珣，躬秉耒耜。 郑玄注《周官》司服曰： 六服同冕 ，尊故也。
现代文：《礼记》载： 古时候天子亲耕籍田，戴冕，朱红色带子，亲手执耒耜，郑玄注《周官》司服说： 六种衣服同一种冕 ，是尊重的缘故。
English: "The Book of Rites" contains: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven personally cultivated the fields of his birth, wore a crown, a scarlet ribbon, and held a scepter with his own hands. Zheng Xuan annotated "Zhou Guan" and said: Six kinds of clothes with one kind of crown, is for the sake of respect.

古文：时服虽变，冕制不改。
现代文：不同时令衣服虽然变化，而冕的形制不改。
English: While the clothes may change, the shape of the crown does not.

古文：又潘岳《藉田赋》云： 常伯陪乘，太仆秉辔。 推此，舆驾藉田，宜冠冕，璪十二旒，硃珣，黑介帻，衣青纱袍。
现代文：另外，潘岳《籍田赋》写道： 常伯陪乘，太仆手执马缰驾车，以此推考，皇帝亲耕籍田，应戴冕，冕上悬有彩色丝绳穿成的十二旒，用朱红色带子系于颔下，戴黑介帧，穿青纱袍。
English: In addition, Pan Yue's "Cheng Tian Fu" wrote: "The emperor should wear a crown, the crown should be hung with twelve braids made of colored silk ropes, tied under the armpits with a scarlet ribbon, wear a black frame, and wear a blue robe.

古文：常伯陪乘，太仆秉辔。
现代文：由常伯陪乘，太仆手执马缰驾车。
English: Accompanied by his father-in-law and driven by his servant.

古文：宜改仪注，一遵二《礼》，以为定仪。 
现代文：应当修改礼仪制度，完全遵照《周礼》《礼记》制定正规礼仪。 
English: The etiquette system should be revised, and the formal etiquette should be formulated in full compliance with the "Weekly Etiquette" and the "Rituals."

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明四年正月己卯，有司奏： 南郊亲奉仪注，皇帝初著平天冠，火龙黼黻之服。
现代文：大明四年正月己卯，有关部门上奏说： 到南郊祭天的礼仪规定，皇帝开始戴平天冠，穿火龙黼黻礼服。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, the relevant departments reported: According to the etiquette regulations for the Southern Suburbs Festival, the emperor began to wear a flat crown and a fire dragon dress.

古文：还，变通天冠，绛纱袍。
现代文：返回时，改戴通天冠，换上绛纱袍。
English: When he returned, he put on a crown instead of a gauze robe.

古文：庙祠亲奉，旧仪，皇帝初服与郊不异，而还变著黑介帻，单衣即事，乖体。
现代文：祭祀宗庙，按以往礼仪，皇帝开始的冠服与郊祀没有不同，但返回时改戴黑介愤，换上单衣视事，不合体统。
English: According to the previous etiquette, the crowned robe worn by the emperor at the beginning of the ceremony was no different from the one worn at the suburban temple, but when he returned, he changed it to a black robe and put on a single garment, which was not in keeping with etiquette.

古文：谓宜同郊还，亦变著通天冠，绛纱袍。
现代文：我们认为应当同郊祀返回时一样，也改戴通天冠，换上绛纱袍。
English: We believe that it should be the same as when the suburban worshippers return home, they should also change to wearing the crown of heaven and put on the gauze robe.

古文：又旧仪乘金根车，今五路既备，依《礼》玉路以祀，亦宜改金根车为玉路。 
现代文：另外，按以往礼仪，皇帝祭祀乘金根车。现在五种辂车已经齐备，依据《礼》乘玉辖祭祀，也应当由乘金根车改为乘玉辂车。 
English: In addition, according to the previous etiquette, the emperor's sacrifice should be carried out on the golden chariot. Now that five kinds of chariots have been prepared, according to the "Rite," the use of the yakuza sacrifice should also be changed from the golden chariot to the yakuza chariot.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明六年八月壬戌，有司奏： 《汉仪注》 大驾卤簿，公卿奉引，大将军参乘，太仆卿御。
现代文：大明六年八月壬戌，有关部门上奏说： 《汉仪注》载 皇帝乘大驾出行时仪仗次第，公卿在前面引导，大将军陪乘，太仆卿驾车。
English: In August of the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, the relevant departments issued a report saying: "Hanyi Note" recorded that when the emperor traveled by chariot, it was a matter of honor, the nobles led in front, the general accompanied, and the servants drove.

古文：法驾，侍中参乘，奉车郎御 。
现代文：乘法驾出行，侍中陪乘，奉车郎驾车 。
English: Travel by carriage, accompanied by a chambermaid, and driven by a chauffeur.

古文：晋氏江左，大驾未立，故郊祀用法驾，宗庙以小驾。
现代文：东晋时，没有大驾，所以郊祀天地用法驾，祭祀宗庙用小驾。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was no large chariot, so the countryside worshiped the heavens and the earth with a chariot, and the ancestral temple worshiped with a small chariot.

古文：至于仪服，二驾不异。
现代文：至于礼仪服制，法驾小驾没有不同。
English: As for the etiquette dress code, there is no difference between men and women.

古文：拜陵，御服单衣帻，百官陪从，硃衣而已，亦谓之小驾，名实乖舛。
现代文：拜谒陵寝，皇帝穿单衣戴帧，百宫陪从，衹穿朱衣，也称为小驾，名实不相符。
English: Paying homage to the mausoleum, the emperor wearing a single dress and a frame, accompanying the hundred palaces, and wearing a vermilion dress, also known as a small driver, the name does not match the reality.

古文：考寻前记，大驾上陵，北郊。
现代文：考寻以往记载，皇帝乘大驾上陵，往北郊祭地。
English: According to historical records, the emperor rode on a chariot to the tomb and went to the northern suburb of the festival site.

古文：周礼宗庙于昊天有降，宜以大驾郊祀，法驾祠庙，小驾上陵，如为从序。
现代文：周代礼制，宗庙祭祀祈祷上天降福，应当乘大驾郊祀天地，乘法驾祭祀宗庙，乘小驾上陵，等次像有一定顺序。
English: According to the Zhou Dynasty ritual system, the ancestral temple worship and prayer to the heavens for blessing should be carried out in a certain order, such as driving to the suburbs to worship the heavens and the earth, driving to the ancestral temple to worship, and driving to the tomb to worship.

古文：今改祠庙为法驾卤簿，其军幢多少，临时配之。
现代文：现在祭祀宗庙改用法驾仪仗，其中军幢数额，临时配置。
English: Now, the sacrificial ancestral temple has changed to the law-driven ceremonial battle, in which the military building is temporarily deployed.

古文：至尊乘玉路，以金路象路革路木路小辇轮御轺衣书等车为副。
现代文：皇帝乘玉辂，以金辂象格革辖木辂小辇轮御轺衣书等车作为副车。
English: The emperor rode in a jade chariot, with a gold chariot, a leather chariot, a wooden chariot, a small wheeled chariot, and other chariots as sidecars.

古文：其余并如常仪。 
现代文：其余都仍然如同往常仪制。 
English: The rest is still the same as usual.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下韶同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大明七年二月甲寅，舆驾巡南豫、兗二州，冕服，御玉路，辞二庙。
现代文：大明七年二月甲寅，皇帝车驾巡行南豫州、兖州，着冕服，乘玉辂，告辞二庙。
English: In February of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty, in the month of Jia Yin, the emperor drove a car to patrol the southern provinces of Yuzhou and Ganzhou, wearing a crowned robe, riding on a jade palanquin, and bidding farewell to the two temples.

古文：改服通天冠，御木路，建大麾，备春搜之典。
现代文：然后改戴通天冠，换乘木辂，车上竖立大麾，完全按春季出行仪典。
English: Then change to wearing a crown, change to a raft, erect a large raft on the car, and complete the spring travel ceremony.

古文：明帝太始四年五月甲戌，尚书令建安王休仁参议： 天子之子，与士齿让，达于辟雍，无生而贵者也。
现代文：明帝泰始四年五月甲戌曰，尚书令建安王刘休仁参与谋议： 天子之子，与士以年龄大小相让，而达于辟雍，这是天生而贵。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty said on May 6th, the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, "I hereby order Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, to participate in the deliberation: The son of Heaven, and the son of man, according to the size of the age, but up to the height of Yong, this is innate and precious.

古文：既命而尊，礼同上公。
现代文：既天生尊贵，则礼仪与上公相同。
English: Since they are inherently noble, their etiquette is the same as that of the upper class.

古文：周制五等，车服相涉，公降王者，一等而已。
现代文：周代制度爵分为五等，车服等级与五等爵位相应，公降为王者，衹是一等爵位。
English: According to the Zhou Dynasty system, the peerage was divided into five grades, and the car clothing grade corresponded to the five-grade peerage. The king was the one who was publicly demoted, and the first-class peerage was the highest.

古文：王以金路赐同姓诸侯，象及革木，以赐异姓侯伯，在朝卿士，亦准斯礼。
现代文：王把金辖赐给同姓诸侯，把象辖、革辖及木辂赐给异姓侯伯，在朝廷的卿士，也按照同样的礼仪赐给辖车。
English: The king gave gold chariots to princes with the same surname, elephant chariots, leather chariots and wooden chariots to princes with different surnames, and chariots to nobles in the imperial court according to the same etiquette.

古文：按如此制，则东宫应乘金路。
现代文：根据这种制度，东宫太子则应乘金骆车。
English: According to this system, the Crown Prince should ride in the golden carriage.

古文：自晋武过江，礼仪疏舛，王公以下，车服卑杂；唯有东宫，礼秩崇异，上次辰极，下绝侯王。
现代文：自从晋武帝渡江减吴之后，礼仪制度荒疏背离正轨，王公以下大臣，车制冠服卑微混杂；衹有束宫太子，礼仪等秩特别尊崇，仅次于皇帝，远远高过侯王。
English: Since Emperor Jinwu crossed the Yangtze River and reduced Wu, the etiquette system has deviated from the right track. The ministers below the prince, the car-made crown and dress are mixed; the prince of the palace, the etiquette and other ranks are particularly respected, second only to the emperor, far higher than the prince.

古文：而皇太子乘石山安车，义不见经，事无所出。
现代文：然而皇太子乘坐石山安车，其义不见于经典，其事也没有先例。
English: However, the fact that the crown prince rode on the Ishiyama Ambulance is not a classic, nor is it unprecedented.

古文：《礼》所谓金、玉路者，正以金玉饰辂诸末耳。
现代文：《周礼》所说的金辖、玉辖，衹是用金饰用玉饰辖车的各处末端。
English: The gold and jade chariots mentioned in "Zhou Li" are made of gold and jade, and the ends of the chariots are decorated with gold and jade.

古文：左右前后，同以漆画。
现代文：车的左右前后，都用漆涂饰。
English: The front, left and right sides of the car are decorated with lacquer.

古文：秦改周辂，制为金根，通以金薄，周匝四面。
现代文：周代辂车，秦代改制为金根车，全部用金箔垂帘环绕四面。
English: Zhou Dynasty chariot, the Qin Dynasty reformed to gold chariot, all with gold foil hanging around the four sides.

古文：汉、魏、二晋，因循莫改。
现代文：汉朝、魏朝、西晋束晋，都沿袭而没有改变。
English: The Han Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty, and the Western Jin Dynasty all followed suit and did not change.

古文：逮于大明，始备五辂。
现代文：直至大明年间，才五种辖车齐备。
English: It was not until the middle of the following year that all five types of police cars were ready.

古文：金玉二制，并类金根，造次瞻睹，殆无差别。
现代文：金辖、玉辖两种车的形制，都和金根车类似，仓促看一下，几乎没有差别。
English: The shape of the two cars in Jinji and Yujie are similar to that of the Jinren car. If you look at them quickly, there is almost no difference.

古文：若锡之东储，于礼嫌重，非所以崇峻陛级，表示等威。
现代文：如果赐给束宫储君，从礼制上来说恐怕过重，这样做不能突出皇帝的最高地位，表示等级森严。
English: If it is given to the crown prince, it is probably too heavy from the point of view of etiquette. Doing so would not highlight the highest status of the emperor and would indicate a strict hierarchy.

古文：且《春秋》之义，降下以两，臣子之义，宜从谦约。
现代文：况且《春秋》所表述的礼义，用两个等次表示降抑，臣子的礼仪，应当以谦卑俭约为宜。
English: Moreover, the etiquette expressed in "Spring and Autumn" is expressed with two equal degrees of deference, and the etiquette of courtiers should be modest and frugal.

古文：谓东宫车服，宜降天子二等，骖驾四马，乘象辂，降龙碧旗九叶。
现代文：我认为束宫太子的车服，应当比天子降低二等，一人驾车，一人陪乘，一车四马，乘象辖，车上竖立降龙碧旗，有九旒。
English: I think that the dress of the crown prince should be two grades lower than that of the emperor. One person should drive the car, one person should accompany the car, one car should have four horses, one person should ride the elephant, and the dragon and blue flag should be raised on the car, and there should be nine chevrons.

古文：进不斥尊，退不逼下，沿古酌时，于礼为衷。 
现代文：进不凌犯至尊，退不威逼臣下，循考古今沿革，斟酌现在时宜，这样做很符合礼制。 
English: It is of the utmost importance not to trespass, not to retreat and not to oppress the vassals, to follow the archaeology and history, and to consider the current situation. This is in line with the etiquette.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：泰始四年八月甲寅，诏曰： 车服之饰，象数是遵。
现代文：参始四年八月甲寅，下诏说： 车子冠服的装饰，遵循象数配合对应的原则。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year, in August, the following edict was issued: The decoration of the chariot crown dress should follow the principle of matching the number of elephants.

古文：故盛皇留范，列圣垂制。
现代文：所以历代盛皇留下了典范，列圣传下了仪制。
English: Therefore, successive emperors have left a model, and the ceremony of canonization has been passed down.

古文：朕近改定五路，酌古代今，修成六服，沿时变礼。
现代文：朕近来改定五种辂车，斟酌古制，取合时宜，修成六种冠服，随时用于不同的礼仪。
English: I have recently revised the five kinds of chariots, considering the ancient system, taking the appropriate time, and made six kinds of crown clothes, which can be used for different etiquette at any time.

古文：所施之事，各有条叙；便可付外，载之典章。
现代文：具体实施事项，各有章法次第。现可以交付外朝，载入典章制度。
English: The specific implementation matters are subject to the rules and regulations. Now they can be delivered to the foreign court and recorded in the legal code system.

古文：朕以大冕纯玉缫，玄衣黄裳，乘玉辂，郊祀天，宗祀明堂。
现代文：朕采用：戴大冕以五彩丝绳作旒，有十二旒，每旒连缀十二粒纯玉，着玄色上衣黄色下裳，乘玉辂，到南郊祭天，到明堂祭祀祖宗。
English: I adopt: wearing a crown made of multicolored silk cords, with twelve cords, each cord decorated with twelve pure jade, wearing a black upper garment and yellow lower garment, wearing a jade bracelet, going to Nanjiao to worship Heaven, and going to Myeongdong to worship ancestors.

古文：又以法冕五彩缫，玄衣绛裳，乘金路，祀太庙，元正大会诸侯。
现代文：又采用：戴法冕以五彩丝绳作旒，着玄色上衣绛色下裳，乘金辂，到太庙祭祀祖宗，于正月元曰大会诸侯。
English: Also used: wearing a crown made of five-colored silk ropes, wearing a black upper garment and a black lower garment, using a golden scepter, going to the Imperial Temple to worship the ancestors, and in the first month of the year, a grand assembly of princes.

古文：又以饰冠冕四彩缫，紫衣红裳，乘象辂，小会宴飨，饯送诸侯，临轩会王公。
现代文：又采用：戴饰冠冕以四彩丝绳作旒，着紫色上衣红色下裳，乘象辂，驾临小型宴会，饯送诸侯，或是到殿前接见王公。
English: Also used: wearing an ornamental crown made of four-colored silk cords, wearing a purple upper garment and red lower garment, riding an elephant, arriving at a small banquet, escorting princes, or receiving a prince in front of the hall.

古文：又以绣冕三彩缫，硃衣裳，乘革路，征伐不宾，讲武校猎。
现代文：又采用：戴绣冕以三彩丝绳作旒，着朱红色上衣下裳，乘革辖，讨伐叛逆，或习武围猎。
English: Also used: wearing an embroidered crown with a three-colored silk cord as a collar, wearing a vermilion-red upper and lower garment, wearing a leather belt, fighting against rebellion, or practicing martial arts.

古文：又以宏冕二彩缫，青衣裳，乘木辂，耕稼，飨国子。
现代文：又采用：戴弦冕以二彩丝绳作旒，着青色上衣下裳，乘木辂，亲耕籍田，或是摆设酒食招待国子。
English: Also used: wearing a stringed crown made of two-colored silk rope, wearing a blue top and bottom, riding a wooden raft, personally cultivating the family farm, or arranging wine and food to invite the son of the country.

古文：又以通天冠，硃纱袍，为听政之服。 
现代文：又采用：戴通天冠，着朱红纱袍，作为听政之服。 
English: Also used: wearing a crown, wearing a scarlet robe, as a dress for listening to politics.

古文：泰始六年正月戊辰，有司奏： 被敕皇太子正冬朝驾，合著衮冕九章衣不？ 
现代文：泰始六年正月戊辰，有关部门上奏说： 收到敕书皇太子将正冬朝贺，是否应当着衮冕九章礼服呢? 
English: On the first day of the sixth month of the year, the relevant departments reported: Upon receipt of the imperial edict, the crown prince will have a midwinter morning greeting. Should he wear a crowned nine-chapter dress?

古文：仪曹郎丘仲起议： 案《周礼》，公自衮冕以下。
现代文：仪曹郎丘仲起提出建议： 考《周礼》记载，公穿戴衮冕以下的礼服。
English: The etiquette expert, Cao Langqiu, came up with a suggestion: according to the "Weekly Rites" records, the formal dress below the crown should be worn.

古文：郑注： 衮冕以至卿大夫之玄冕，皆其朝聘天子之服也。 
现代文：郑玄注： 从衮冕直至卿大夫的玄冕，都是公卿大夫朝聘天子的礼服。 
English: Zheng Xuan's note: From the imperial crown to the imperial crown of the noble doctor, it is the ceremonial dress of the noble doctor who is appointed by the emperor.

古文：伏寻古之上公，尚得服衮以朝。
现代文：我想古时候的上公，尚且能够穿戴衮冕朝见天子。
English: I think that in ancient times, it was possible for the emperor to wear a crown and meet the emperor.

古文：皇太子以储副之尊，率土瞻仰。
现代文：皇太子贵为储君，全国上下敬仰。
English: Crown Prince Takashi is the crown prince and is revered throughout the country.

古文：愚谓宜式遵盛典，服衮冕九旒以朝贺。 
现代文：愚意以为应当遵循盛典，着衮冕九旒礼服朝贺。 
English: He foolishly thought that he should follow the grand ceremony and wear a crowned nine-branched ceremonial dress.

古文：兼左丞陆澄议： 服冕以朝，实著经典。
现代文：兼左丞陆澄发表议论： 着冕服上朝，确实载于经典。
English: Lu Cheng, concurrently the left senator, made a comment: The crown-wearing ceremony in the last century is indeed recorded in the classics.

古文：秦除六冕之制，至汉明帝始与诸儒还备古章。
现代文：秦朝废除了六种冕服的制度，到汉明帝时才与众儒议定恢复了古代规章。
English: The Qin Dynasty abolished the system of six kinds of crowned robes, and it was not until the Han and Ming Dynasties that they agreed with the Confucianists to restore the ancient regulations.

古文：自魏、晋以来，宗庙行礼之外，不欲令臣下服衮冕，故位公者，每加侍官。
现代文：从魏、晋以来除宗庙祭礼，不想让臣下着衮冕礼服，所以位至三公者，常常加授侍官。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, in addition to the ancestral temple festival, they did not want their vassals to wear the coronation dress, so those who were ranked as the three nobles were often awarded the attendant.

古文：今皇太子承乾作副，礼绝群后，宜遵圣王之盛典，革近代之陋制。
现代文：现在皇太子秉承干纲作储君，礼仪远远高于诸王群臣之上，应当遵循圣王盛典，革除近代的陋制。
English: Now that the crown prince is inheriting the throne as the crown prince, the etiquette is far higher than that of kings and ministers. It is necessary to follow the holy king's rite and get rid of the modern vulgar system.

古文：臣等参议，依礼，皇太子元正朝贺，应服衮冕九章衣。
现代文：臣等共同谋议，依照礼仪制度，皇太子元正朝贺，应当着衮冕九苫礼服。
English: In accordance with the etiquette system, the crown prince, Yuan Zheng Chaoha, should wear a crowned nine-branched ceremonial dress.

古文：以仲起议为允。
现代文：认为丘佺起的建议允当。
English: He thought that the proposal to raise the hill was reasonable.

古文：撰载仪注。 
现代文：可以编撰载入仪注。 
English: Can be compiled into instrument notes.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏批准。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：后废帝即位，尊所生陈贵妃为皇太妃，舆服一如晋孝武太妃故事，唯省五牛旗及赤旗。
现代文：后废帝即位，尊生母陈贵妃为皇太妃，车驾冠服完全如同晋孝武帝太妃旧例。衹减省了五牛旗和赤旗。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended the throne, his biological mother, Chen Guifei, became the crown princess. She drove a car and wore a crown, just as Emperor Jin Xiaowu's crown princess did in the old days. The five-cattle flag and the red flag were omitted.

