古文：元帝世祖孝元皇帝，讳绎，字世诚，小字七符，高祖第七子也。
现代文：世祖孝元皇帝名绎，字世诚，乳名七符，是高祖的第七个儿子。
English: The seventh son of Emperor Gaozu, Emperor Xiaoyuan, whose name was derived from the Chinese characters "世诚" and "乳名七符."

古文：天监七年八月丁巳生。
现代文：天监七年八月丁巳出生。
English: In August of the seventh year of the Tenjin era, Ding Si was born.

古文：十三年，封湘东郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：天监十三年，被封为湘束郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, he was named the king of Hunan County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：初为宁远将军、会稽太守，入为侍中、宣威将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：起初任宁远将军、会稽太守，入朝后任侍中、宣威将军、丹阳尹。
English: At first, he was appointed as General Ningyuan and Censor-in-Chief, and after entering the imperial court, he was appointed as Chamberlain, General Xuan Wei, and Danyang Yin.

古文：普通七年，出为使持节、都督荆、湘、郢、益、宁、南梁六州诸军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史。
现代文：普通七年，出京任使持节，都督荆、湘、郢、益、宁、南梁六州诸军事，西中郎将，荆州刺史。
English: Usually seven years old, he was appointed as an envoy to Beijing on the Jisi Festival. He was the military governor of six states including Jing, Hunan, Shandong, Yixing, Ning, and Nanliang, the general of West China, and the historian of Jingzhou.

古文：中大通四年，进号平西将军。
现代文：中大通四年，进封号为平西将军。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he received the title of General Pingxi.

古文：大同元年，进号安西将军。
现代文：大同元年，又进封号为安西将军。
English: In the first year of Datong, he was given the title of General Anxi.

古文：三年，进号镇西将军。
现代文：大同三年，进封号为镇西将军。
English: In the third year of Datong, he was given the title of Zhenxi General.

古文：五年，入为安右将军、护军将军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：大同五年，入朝为安右将军、护军将军，兼领石头戍军事。
English: In the fifth year of Datong, he entered the imperial court as General An Yu, General of the Protectorate, and the military leader of the Stone Army.

古文：六年，出为使持节、都督江州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：大同六年，出京为使持节、都督江州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史。
English: In the sixth year of the Datong, he went to Beijing for the Envoys' Festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, General Zhenan, and the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：太清元年，徙为使持节、都督荆、雍、湘、司、郢、宁、梁、南、北秦九州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：太清元年，迁官为使持节，都督荆、雍、湘、司、郢、宁、梁、南秦、北秦九州诸军事，镇西将军，荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, the relocation of officials was held as a festival, with the governors of Jing, Yong, Hunan, Shih, Min, Ning, Liang, South Qin, and North Qin Kyushu as military officials, the general of Zhenxi, and the historian of Jingzhou.

古文：三年三月，侯景寇没京师。
现代文：太清三年三月，侯景入侵并且攻陷京城。
English: In March of the third year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Houjing invaded and captured Beijing.

古文：四月，太子舍人萧歆至江陵宣密诏，以世祖为侍中、假黄钺、大都督中外诸军事、司徒承制，余如故。
现代文：四月，太子舍人萧韶到江陵宣读密韶，任命世祖为侍中、假黄铁、大都督中外诸军事、司徒承制，其余的官职还像从前一样。
English: In April, Xiao Xi, the prince's son-in-law, went to Gangneung to read out the imperial edict, appointing the ancestor as the attendant, the false yellow iron, the great governor of the military and the military, and the scholar, and the rest of the official positions were still the same as before.

古文：是月，世祖征兵于湘州，湘州刺史河东王誉拒不遣。
现代文：这个月，世祖向湘州征召军队，湘州刺史河东王萧誉抗拒命令不派遣军队。
English: This month, Shizu conscripted troops to Hunan Province, but the governor of Hunan Province, Wang Xiaoyuan, resisted the order not to send troops.

古文：六月丙午，遣世子方等帅众讨誉，战所败死。
现代文：六月丙午，世担派遣世子方等率领众人讨伐萧誉，战败而死。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of June, the world council dispatched the world's sons and daughters to lead the people in a crusade against bad reputation, but they were defeated and died.

古文：七月，又遣镇兵将军鲍泉代讨誉。
现代文：七月，世祖又派遣镇兵将军鲍泉代为讨伐萧誉。
English: In July, the ancestor sent the town's general, Bao Quan, to fight against Xiao Ren.

古文：九月乙卯，雍州刺史岳阳王察举兵反，来寇江陵，世祖婴城拒守。
现代文：九月乙卯，雍州刺史岳阳王萧察举兵反叛，来侵扰辽瞳，世祖绕城拒守。
English: In September, King Xiaochao of Yueyang raised an army and rebelled against the Yongzheng Emperor, coming to invade Liaomi. Shizuo refused to defend the city.

古文：乙丑，察将杜掞与其兄弟及杨混，各率其众来降。
现代文：乙丑，萧察部将杜勋与其兄弟以及杨混各自率领他们的部众前来投降。
English: Second Ugly, Xiao Zhab, Du Xun, his brother, and Yang Jian each led their troops to surrender.

古文：丙寅，察遁走。
现代文：丙寅，萧察逃走。
English: Cui Yin, Xiao Cao fled.

古文：鲍泉攻湘州不克，又遣左卫将军王僧辩代将。
现代文：鲍泉攻打湘州不能取胜，世祖又派左卫将军王僧辩代为统兵。
English: Bao Quan's attack on Hunan could not win, and the ancestor sent the left guard general Wang Sangye to replace him as the general.

古文：大宝元年，世祖犹称太清四年。
现代文：大宝元年，世祖仍然沿用太清年号，称太清四年。
English: In the first year of Dabao, the founder still used the Taiqing year name, saying that it was the fourth year of Taiqing.

古文：正月辛亥朔，左卫将军王僧辩获橘三十子共蒂，以献。
现代文：正月辛亥初一，左卫将军王僧辩获得三十个共有一蒂的橘子，把它们献给了皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of Xinhai, the General of the Left Division, Wang Sangye, obtained thirty tangerines with a total of one stem, and presented them to the emperor.

古文：二月甲戌，衡阳内史周弘直表言凤皇见郡界。
现代文：二月甲戌，衡阳内史周弘直上表说凤凰在本郡地界出现。
English: In February, in Jiaxuan, Hengyang Inner Historian Zhou Hongzhi said that the phoenix appeared at the county boundary.

古文：夏五月辛未，王僧辩克湘州，斩河东王誉，湘州平。
现代文：夏季的五月辛未，王僧辩攻克湘州，斩杀河东王萧誉，湘州平定。
English: In the summer of May Xinwei, Wang Sangye defeated Xiangzhou, killed King Xiaoyu of Hedong, and subdued Xiangzhou.

古文：六月，江夏王大款、山阳王大成、宜都王大封自信安间道来奔。
现代文：六月，江夏王大款、山阳王大成、宜都王大封从信安抄小路前来投奔。
English: In June, King Dasong of Jiangxia, King Dacheng of Shanyang, and King Dafeng of Yidu came from Xin'an to join the army.

古文：九月辛酉，以前郢州刺史南平王恪为中卫将军、尚书令、开府仪同三司，中抚军将军世子方诸为郢州刺史，左卫将军王僧辩为领军将军。
现代文：九月辛酉，世祖以前郢州刺史南平王萧恪为中卫将军、尚书令、开府仪同三司，中抚军将军世子方诸为郢州刺史，左卫将军王僧辩为领军将军。
English: At the end of September, Nanping Wang Xiao Ke, the ancestor of the former Bozhou military governor, became the general of the middle guard, Shang Shuling, Kaifu Yi and three divisions, the descendants of the general of the middle guard, Fang, became the general of the Bozhou military governor, and the general of the left guard, Wang Sangye, became the leading general.

古文：改封大款为临川郡王，大成为桂阳郡王，大封为汝南郡王。
现代文：改封大款为临川郡王，大成为桂阳郡王，太封为汝南郡王。
English: Daifeng Daifeng became the king of Linchuan County, Daifeng Daifeng became the king of Guiyang County, and Taifeng Daifeng became the king of Yunnan County.

古文：是月，任约进寇西阳、武昌，遣左卫将军徐文盛、右卫将军阴子春、太子右卫率萧慧正、巂州刺史席文献等下武昌拒约。
现代文：这个月，任约进犯侵扰西阳、亘生旦，世担派遣左卫将军涂塞盛、右卫将军卫箠王壹、太子右卫率萧慧正、塑丛刺史卢塞毖等下武昌抵抗任约。
English: This month, the World Council of Guardians dispatched the left guard general Tu Jie Sheng, the right guard general Wei Xuan Wang I, the prince of the right guard Xiao Huizheng, and the plastic bush stabbing Slusehan to the Wuchang resistance.

古文：以中卫将军、尚书令、开府仪同三司南平王恪为荆州刺史，镇武陵。
现代文：以中卫将军、尚书令、开府仪同三司南平王萧恪为荆州刺史，镇守武陵。
English: Zhongwei Shogun, Shang Shuling, Kaifu Yi and Nanping Wang Xiao Ke, the three chiefs, are the history of Jingzhou and the town guards of Wuling.

古文：十一月甲子，南平王恪、侍中临川王大款、桂阳王大成、散骑常侍江安侯圆正、侍中左卫将军张绾、司徒左长史昙等府州国一千人奉笺曰：窃以嵩岳既峻，山川出云；大国有蕃，申甫惟翰。
现代文：十一月甲子，南平王盖坚、侍中堕川王芦去趑、挂垦旺芦去盛、散骑常侍江塞堡芦回正、侍中左卫将军彊绾、司徒左长史蕴昙等府州国共一千人给世担进献书信说：我们私下认为嵩岳已经很险峻，山川又高出白云；大国有屏障，申甫作辅佐。
English: In November, a total of one thousand people from prefectures and provinces, including the Nanping King Ga Jian, the attendant of the fallen King Chuan Lu, the attendant of Wang Lu, the attendant of Wang Lu, the attendant of Jiang Sa Castle, the attendant of Lu Huizheng, the attendant of the middle left guard of the general, and the attendant of the left long history, wrote a letter to the world, saying: We privately believe that Mount Song is already very steep, and the mountains and rivers are higher than the clouds; the country has a barrier, and Shen Fu is an assistant.

古文：岂非皇建斯极，以位为宝；圣教辨方，慎名与器。
现代文：难道不是皇帝建立了这样的极至，才能使人们把官位看作宝贝；圣人的教诲让人们辨别行事的方法，对名声和重器都要采取谨慎的态度。
English: Was it not the emperor who set up these extremes, so that office might be held as a precious thing, and the teachings of the sages taught men to be circumspect in their conduct, and to be wary both of reputation and of heavy weapons?

古文：是知太尉佐帝，重华表黄玉之符，司空相土，伯禹降玄圭之锡。
现代文：因此知道太尉辅佐皇帝，重华用黄玉之符表扬他；司空察看地貌，伯虽降下玄珪的赏赐。
English: Therefore, knowing that the captain assisted the emperor, Chonghua praised him with the sign of the topaz; Sikuo inspected the landscape, and Bo lowered the reward of the imperial scepter.

古文：伏惟明公大王殿下，命世应期，挺生将圣。忠为令德，孝实天经，地切应、韩，寄深旦、奭，五品斯训，七政以齐，志存社稷，功济屯险。
现代文：我们谦恭地想明公大王殿下，都是因为时事命定并且在一定的日期应运而生，诞生的都是将帅圣贤，忠是他们的美德，孝实在是天经地义的事，心地与应、韩一样恳切，所寄托的比旦、奭更深，这些事是五种品德的准则，七政因此而一致，心志存在于社稷，功绩是能救艰险。
English: We humbly wish to point out that His Imperial Highness the Grand Duke was born in accordance with the fates of the times and on a certain date. All generals and sages are born. Loyalty is their virtue. Filial piety is indeed a matter of natural justice. Their hearts are as earnest as those of Ying and Han, and their hopes are deeper than those of Dan and Han. These things are the standards of the five virtues, and the seven policies are therefore consistent. Their hearts exist in the society, and their achievements can save hardships and dangers.

古文：夷狄内侵，枕戈泣血，鲸鲵未扫，投袂勤王，能使游魂请盟以屈膝，丑徒衔璧而慑气。
现代文：如今夷狄入侵，他们枕戈待旦悲伤哭泣泪尽流血，鲸鲵还未扫除，又要投袂而起奋力勤王，能使游魂也请求结盟从而使敌人屈膝，丑恶之徒也含璧屏气前来归附。
English: Now that the barbarians have invaded, they are lying in wait, weeping with sorrow, weeping with tears, and bleeding to death. The whalebone has not yet been swept away, and they have to throw in the towel and rise up to fight for the king. They can make the wandering souls also request an alliance so that the enemy will bend their knees, and the ugly ones will also come to attach themselves with bated breath.

古文：亲蕃外叛，衅均吴、楚，义讨申威，兵不血刃。
现代文：亲近的蕃族向外叛变，罪过与吴、楚相同，他们兴义师讨伐伸张国威，兵不血刃。
English: The nearby Yi people rebelled against the outside world. Their crime was the same as that of Wu and Chu. They fought against the invaders to extend the national power, and the soldiers did not shed blood.

古文：湘波自息，非筑杜弢之垒；岘山离贰，不伐刘表之城。
现代文：湘州的动乱自然平息，不是因为筑了杜搜那样的壁垒；岘山不再怀有二心，不征伐刘表那样的城池。
English: The turmoil in Hunan naturally subsided, not because of the construction of barriers like Duzo; Lushan no longer harbored double-mindedness and did not conquer the city like Liu Biao.

古文：九江致梗，二别殊派，才命戈船，底定灊、霍。
现代文：九江阻塞，二别异流，刚命令用兵，就平定了濡、霍。
English: Jiujiang blocked, two different currents, just ordered the use of troops, they leveled the wet, Huo.

古文：溯流穷讨，路绝窥窬，胡兵侵界，铁马雾合，神规独运，皆即枭悬，翻同翅折，遂修职贡。
现代文：逆流而上尽力追讨，使敌人无路可走，胡兵侵入国界，铁马就如雾般合围，神机妙算单独运筹，敌酋都立即被悬首示众，倾倒失败如同鸟儿的翅膀折断了，于是只好向朝廷修好进贡。
English: Going against the tide, he tried his best to recover, so that the enemy had no way to go, the Hu soldiers invaded the national border, the iron horse was surrounded like a fog, the miraculous operation was carried out independently, the enemy chiefs were immediately hanged, and the failure of dumping was broken like the wings of a bird, so he had to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：梁、汉合契，肆犀利之兵，巴、汉俱下，竭骁勇之阵。
现代文：梁、汉配合默契，尽用犀利的兵器；巴、汉一起南下，竭尽骁勇布置战阵。
English: Liang and Han tacitly cooperated and made full use of sharp weapons; Ba and Han went south together and made every effort to set up battle lines.

古文：南通五岭，北出力原；东夷不怨，西戎即序。
现代文：梁南面与五岭相通，北面兵出力原；束夷不存怨恨之心，西戎谨守秩序。
English: Liangnan is connected to Wuling in the south, and the soldiers in the north have made great efforts; Shuyi does not hold grudges, and Xi Rong keeps order.

古文：可谓上流千里，持戟百万，天下之至贵，四海之所推也。
现代文：可以说国土上推千里，持戟之士多达百万，梁成了天下最尊贵，四海所推崇的国家。
English: It can be said that there are thousands of miles on the land, and there are as many as one million people who hold the lantern. Liang has become the most honorable country in the world, respected by the four seas.

古文：今海水飞云，昆山起燎，魏文悲乐推之岁，韩宣叹成礼之日，阳台之下，独有冠盖相趋；梦水之傍，尚致车舆结辙。
现代文：今海水飞扬成云，昆山升起火炬，魏文要为这乐于推举人才的年头而思旧伤感，韩宣要为这礼成的日子而感叹，阳台之下，衹有达官贵人在奔走；梦水的旁边，还有车子来往。
English: Now the seawater is flying into the clouds, Kunshan is raising the torch, Wei Wen wants to be nostalgic for the years when he was happy to nominate talents, and Han Xuan wants to sigh for the days when he was honored. Under the balcony, there are many dignitaries running around; next to the dream water, there are cars coming and going.

古文：麰麦两穗，出于南平之邦；甘露泥枝，降乎当阳之境。
现代文：大麦结两个穗子，此事出于南平地区；树枝挂满甘露，此事降于当阳境界。
English: The barley has two ears, which is from the Nanping area; the branches are full of nectar, which is from the Dangyang area.

古文：野蚕自绩，何谢欧丝；闲田生稻，宁殊雨粟。
现代文：野外的蚕儿自己能吐丝，何必要感谢欧丝；闲置的水田裹长出了稻子，遣难道和天上降下粟米有什么不同。
English: Silkworms in the wild can spin silk by themselves, so why should we thank the European silkworm? Rice has sprouted from idle paddy fields, so what is the difference between sending rice and sending corn from the sky?

古文：莫非品物咸亨，是称文明光大，岂可徽号不彰于彝典，明试不陈乎车服者哉！
现代文：莫非众物都通达顺利，逭叫做光大文明，岂能不在青铜器和典籍上表明这美好的称号，而英明的任用怎能不向官员们陈述呢!
English: Is it not that all things pass smoothly, and are called splendid civilization, can it not be that this beautiful title is shown on bronzes and classics, and how can a wise appointment not be presented to officials!

古文：昔晋、郑入周，尚作卿士；萧、曹佐汉，且居相国。
现代文：从前晋、郑入周逞能作卿士；萧、曹辅佐汉朝，尚且官居相国。
English: Formerly, Jin and Zheng Rong Zhou Gan Neng were noblemen; Xiao and Cao Zuo were assistants to the Han Dynasty, and they lived in the same country.

古文：宜崇兹盛礼，显答群望。
现代文：应该使这样盛大的礼遇更加隆重，来明确回答众人的厚望。
English: Such a grand reception should be made more grand to clearly answer the high expectations of the people.

古文：恪等稽寻甲令，博询惇史，谨再拜上，进位相国，总百揆，竹使符一，别准恒仪。
现代文：我等查寻好的法令，广泛咨询诚实的史官，谨慎地拜了再拜奉上此信，希望您位进至相国，总揽百事，使节符信均出于您一处，您分别裁准那永恒的礼仪。
English: We have searched for good decrees, consulted widely with honest historians, revered and revered this letter carefully, and hope that you will enter the country of the other party, collect all the things, the envoys and letters are all from you, and you separately approve the eternal etiquette.

古文：杖金斧以剪逆暴，乘玉辂而定社稷。
现代文：您手持金斧来消灭逆贼暴徒，乘玉车来安定社稷。
English: You hold a golden axe to destroy the rebel thugs and ride a jade chariot to stabilize the society.

古文：傍罗丽于日月，贞明合于天地。
现代文：我们在旁边列位相助比如附着于日月。忠贞清白可与天地相合。
English: Loyalty and innocence can be compatible with heaven and earth.

古文：扶危翼治，岂不休哉！
现代文：扶持危难的国家辅佐对国家的治理，难道不是很美善吗!
English: Isn't it wonderful to support a country in crisis and assist in the governance of the country?

古文：恪等不通大体，自昧伏奏以闻。
现代文：恪等不识大体，自是昧死伏地进奏以使您知道。
English: I don't know much about it, but I'll play along to let you know.

古文：世祖令答曰： 数钟阳九，时惟百六，鲸鲵未剪，寤寐痛心。
现代文：世祖韶令答说： 节数积聚在重阳，时序衹在百六，鲸鲵未曾剪除，我无论是醒是睡都感到痛心。
English: The Ancestor replied, "The number of knots has accumulated in Chongyang, the time sequence is one hundred and six, and the whalebone has not been cut. Whether I am awake or asleep, I feel sad.

古文：周粤天官，秦称相国，东至于海，西至于河，南次硃鸢，北渐玄塞。率兹小宰，弘斯大德。将何用继踪曲阜，拟迹桓、文，终建一匡，肃其五拜。
现代文：周的天官，秦称相国。东到大海，西到黄回，南到塞卢，北到边塞，劝导这些小宰，弘扬这些大德，将用什么接续曲阜孔子的踪迹，和桓、文并肩。最后要来一次纠正，严肃地拜上五拜。
English: To the east to the sea, to the west to the Yellow River, to the south to the Selu, to the north to the border fortress, to persuade these young leaders, to promote these great virtues, what will be used to continue the trail of Qufu Confucius, and Huan and Wen side by side. Finally, we must come to correct once, and seriously worship five times.

古文：虽义属随时，事无虚纪，传称皆让，《象》著鸣谦，瞻言前典，再怀哽恧。 
现代文：即使你们的意思属于随时因变，事情也无虚假记载，但是经传所称都是谦让，《象》写的也都是谦让之言，看看先前的典籍，我再次心怀悲伤与惭愧。 
English: Even if your intentions are subject to change at any time, and there are no false records of things, but what is said in the sutras is all condescension, and what is written in the "Elephant" is also all words of condescension. Looking at the previous classics, I once again feel sad and ashamed.

古文：十二月壬辰，以定州刺史萧勃为镇南将军、广州刺史。
现代文：十二月壬辰，世祖以定州刺史萧勃为镇南将军、卢丛刺史。
English: In December of the year of the dog, the ancestor of the Dingzhou stabbing was Xiao Bo, who was the general of Zhenan and the stabbing of Lu Cong.

古文：遣护军将军尹悦、巴州刺史王珣、定州刺史杜多安帅众下武昌，助徐文盛。
现代文：派遣护军将军芝隘、旦业刺史王跑、宣业刺史挂名噬率领兵众南下亘过，援助途塞盛。
English: He dispatched the escorting generals Zhiguo, Danye Zhishi Wangran, and Xuanye Zhishi Hangnao to lead the soldiers to the south, and the assistance was successful.

古文：大宝二年，世祖犹称太清五年。
现代文：左宣二年，世担仍然称作塞遣五年。
English: In the second year of Zuo Xuan, Shitan was still called Seyuan for five years.

古文：二月己亥，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：二月己亥，魏派遣使者来访。
English: In February, Wei sent an envoy to pay a visit.

古文：三月，侯景悉兵西上，会任约军。
现代文：三月，谴率全部军队西上，与巡的军队会合。
English: In March, he led the entire army westward to meet up with the troops on patrol.

古文：闰四月丙午，景遣其将宋子仙、任约袭郢州，执刺史萧方诸。
现代文：四月丙午，堡景派他的将领宋子仙、任约袭击呈泌，抓获刺史芦左谴。
English: On the afternoon of April 3rd, Song Zixian and Ren You, his generals sent by the castle, attacked and captured Zhishi Luzao.

古文：戊申，徐文盛、阴子春等奔归，王珣、尹悦、杜多安并降贼。
现代文：戊申，捡塞盛、压王鲞等奔驰来归，旦甸、尹坦、拄室撞一起投降了贼兵。
English: Wushin, Zhaoxesheng, Zhenwangjie and others came and went in a gallop. Dandian, Yintan and Xingshuyan surrendered to the bandits.

古文：庚戌，领军将军王僧辩帅众屯巴陵。
现代文：庚戌，领军将军王僧辩率领众兵防守巴陆。
English: Geng Xuan and the leading general Wang Sangye led the troops to defend Baluchistan.

古文：甲子，景进寇巴陵。
现代文：甲子，侯景进犯侵扰巴陵。
English: Jia Zi and Hou Jing invaded and harassed Baling.

古文：五月癸未，世祖遣游击将军胡僧祐、信州刺史陆法和帅众下援巴陵。
现代文：五月癸未，世担派遣游击将军姐僵苞、值州刺史陆法和率众下援旦建。
English: On the last day of May, the World Council of Churches dispatched guerrilla generals Sister Zengqi, Guan Zhou, Shi Lufa and their followers to support Dan Jian.

古文：任约败，景遂遁走。以王僧辩为征东将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令，胡僧祐为领军将军，陆法和为护军将军。
现代文：任钓兵败，拯于是逃走；世担又以王僧辩为征东将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令，塑坦茧为领军将军，陆运塑为护军将军。
English: After the defeat of Ren Ying, Zeng then fled; the world was worried about Wang Sangyan as the general of the eastward expedition, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Shang Shuling, Shou Tan Rong as the general of the leading army, and Lu Yun Shou as the general of the escort army.

古文：仍令僧辩率众军追景，所至皆捷。
现代文：仍然命令王僧辩率领众军追逐侯景，所到之处都取得了胜利。
English: He still ordered Wang Sangye to lead the troops to chase Hou Jing, and they won everywhere they went.

古文：八月甲辰，僧辩下次湓城。
现代文：八月甲辰，王僧辩南下驻扎在湓城。
English: In August, Wang Sofen went south and was stationed in Lucheng.

古文：辛亥，以镇南将军、湘州刺史萧方矩为中卫将军。
现代文：辛亥。世担以镇南将军、龃丛刺史芦立复为中卫将军。
English: Xinhai. The world is worried about General Zhenan and Geng Congzishi Lulifu as the middle guard generals.

古文：司空、征南将军、南平王恪进号征南大将军。湘州刺史，余如故。
现代文：司空、征南将军南平王萧恪进封号为征南大将军、湘州刺史，其余照旧。
English: Siku, the general of the Southern Expedition, Nanping Wang Xiao, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the history of Xiangzhou, and the rest as before.

古文：九月己亥，以征东将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令王僧辩为江州刺史，余如故。
现代文：九月己亥，世祖以征东将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令王僧辩为江州刺史，其余照旧。
English: In September of the same year, the founder of the dynasty, the General of the Expedition to the East, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Shang Shuling Wang Sofen became the history of Jiangsu Province, and the rest remained the same.

古文：盘盘国献驯象。
现代文：盘盘国前来贡献的大象。
English: Elephants from all over the country came to contribute.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔，有紫云如车盖，临江陵城。
现代文：冬季的十月辛丑初一，有紫云形如车盖，飞临江陵城。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a purple cloud shaped like a car cover flies over Gangneung City.

古文：侍中、征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史、尚书令、长宁县侯王僧辩等奉表曰：众军薄伐，涂次九水，即日获临城县使人报称：侯景弑逆皇帝，贼害太子，宗室在寇庭者，并罹祸酷。
现代文：这个月，太宗崩。侍中、征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史、尚书令、长宁县侯王僧辩等人进表说：众军正在讨伐逆贼，途中驻扎在九水，当日收到临城县派人报告称：侯景忤逆弑皇帝。害太子，宗室人员凡是身在叛贼处的，一起都遭受到灾祸和暴虐。
English: This month, Emperor Taizong passed away. Chamberlains, generals of the Eastern Expedition, officials of Kaifu and the Three Departments, the governor of Jiangsu Province, Shang Shuling, the prince of Changning County, and others came to the table and said: The army is fighting against the traitors, and on the way they are stationed in Jiu Shui. On the same day, they received a report from Lincheng County that said: Prince Hou Jingsong is rebelling against the emperor. If the prince is harmed, the family members who are with the traitors will all suffer disasters and tyranny.

古文：六军恸哭，三辰改曜。
现代文：六军因此而恸哭，日月星也都改变了光芒。
English: As a result, the Six Armies are crying, and the sun, moon and stars have all changed their shine.

古文：哀我皇极，四海崩心。
现代文：为我皇帝而悲哀，四海之人为此心痛欲裂。
English: People all over the world are grieving for my emperor, and their hearts are breaking.

古文：我大梁纂尧构绪，基商启祚。
现代文：我大梁继承尧所建立的事业，以商所开启的国统为根基。
English: I am determined to carry on the business established by Zou, with the unification of the country initiated by the businessman as the foundation.

古文：太祖文皇帝徇齐作圣，肇有六州。
现代文：太祖文皇帝顺应齐的禅让为圣主，开始领有六州。
English: Emperor Taizowen made Zenjia, who was obedient to Qi, the patron saint, and began to rule six states.

古文：高祖武皇帝聪明神武，奄龛天下。
现代文：高祖武皇帝聪明神武，包有并平定天下。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu was wise and powerful, and he conquered and pacified the whole world.

古文：依日月而和四时，履至尊而制六合。
现代文：依顺日月而且协调四时，即帝位后就控制天下。
English: According to the sun and the moon and coordinated at four o'clock, that is, after the throne, it will control the world.

古文：丽正居贞，大横固祉。
现代文：附着于正道自可居于安定，帝王登基的先兆本来就是国家的福祉。
English: Adhering to the right path can lead to stability, and the harbinger of the emperor's ascension to the throne is the welfare of the country.

古文：四叶相系，三圣同基。
现代文：四世相承继，三圣同根基。
English: Four generations succeed each other, and the three saints have the same foundation.

古文：蠢尔凶渠，遂凭天邑。
现代文：你们这些凶暴的贼寇多么愚蠢，竟敢欺凌天子的国土。
English: How stupid you are, you violent bandits, how dare you bully the land of the Son of Heaven.

古文：阊阖受白登之辱，象魏致尧城之疑。
现代文：间阖遭受白登的耻辱，象魏招致尧城的怀疑。
English: While Zhai suffered the ignominy of Baiden, Zhao Wei attracted the suspicion of Zhengcheng.

古文：云扆承华，一朝俱酷。
现代文：重臣得宠，一朝的臣民都受暴虐。
English: The senior vassal is favored, and all the subjects of a dynasty are tyrannized.

古文：金桢玉干，莫不同冤。
现代文：国家的贤才良臣，没有谁不同受冤屈的。
English: No one is more wronged than the nation's sages and ministers.

古文：悠悠彼苍，何其罔极！
现代文：悠悠苍天，多么没有准则!
English: Yoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoyoy!

古文：臣闻丧君有君，《春秋》之茂典；以德以长，先王之通训。
现代文：我听说失去君主后就应该有君主出现，这是《春秋》的美好法则；用有道德的人和长子为君，这是先王的通用准则。
English: I heard that after losing a monarch, there should be a monarch, which is the beautiful rule of "Spring and Autumn"; using a moral person and the eldest son as the ruler, this is the general rule of the former king.

古文：少康则牧众抚职，祀夏所以配天；平王则居正东迁，宗周所以卜世。
现代文：少康因此即帝位统治民众，祭祀夏的宗庙以配天神；平王就居正位并束迁雒邑，宗周以此继世。
English: As a result, Shokang ruled the people from the imperial throne, and the ancestral temple, which was dedicated to the god of summer, was used as a place of worship for the deities. King Hei took the throne and moved the capital, and Zong Zhou succeeded to the throne.

古文：汉光以能捕不道，故景历重昌；中宗以不违群议，故江东可立。
现代文：汉光以自己的才能惩罚不道之人，所以汉代的伟大国统重新昌盛；中宗因为不违众议，所以江束可以立国。
English: Han Kuang used his talent to punish those who did not follow the right path, so the great national unification of the Han Dynasty flourished again; because the Chinese sect did not go against public opinion, Jiang Zong was able to establish the country.

古文：俦今考古，更无二谋。
现代文：考察古史分别今事，再无第二种计策。
English: There is no other way to look at ancient history.

古文：伏惟陛下至孝通幽，英武灵断，当七九之厄，而应千载之期；启殷忧之明，而居百王之会。
现代文：我们谦恭地想陛下极为孝敬性情深沉，英武神断，正当七九之灾，却应了千年的期望；为殷切忧愁的人们开启希望之光明，而且要主持百王的盟会。
English: We humbly think that Your Majesty is extremely filial and has a deep-rooted disposition. He is a great warrior and a great decision-maker. He justifies the disaster of 1979, but meets the expectations of a thousand years; opens the light of hope for those who are deeply saddened, and presides over the League of a Hundred Kings.

古文：取威定霸，嶮阻艰难，建社治兵，载循古道。
现代文：获取威信确定霸主地位，有很多艰难险阻，建设国家治理军队，遵循古代的方法。
English: There are many difficulties and obstacles in gaining prestige and establishing a dominant position, building a national governance army, and following the ancient methods.

古文：家国之事，一至于斯。
现代文：家国大事，已经到了这种地步。
English: Domestic affairs have reached such a stage.

古文：天祚大梁，必将有主。
现代文：上天赐福给大梁，大梁必将有君主。
English: Heaven bless the girders, the girders will surely have a monarch.

古文：轩辕得姓，存者二人；高祖五王，代实居长。
现代文：轩辕得姓，存有二人；高祖五个王，代确实居长。
English: There are two people with the surname of Xuan Xuan; five kings of Gaozu, and the generation is really long.

古文：乘屈完而陈诸侯，拜子武而服大辂。
现代文：凭藉屈完使诸侯陈列，任用子武就驾驶大车。
English: By virtue of yielding and completing the display of the princes, he appointed Zi Wu to drive the cart.

古文：功齐九有，道济生民。
现代文：功德与九有相齐，道德对百姓有利。
English: Merit is equal to everything, and morality is beneficial to the people.

古文：非奉圣明，谁嗣下武！
现代文：不尊奉这样的圣明之君，那由谁来继承帝位延续国脉!
English: If you don't respect such a holy ruler, then who will inherit the throne and continue the lineage?

古文：臣闻日月贞明，太阳不可以阙照；天地贞观，乾道不可以久惕。
现代文：我听说日月贞洁明亮，太阳不能失缺光明；天地坚贞可观，天道不能让人长久地担心。
English: I have heard that the sun and the moon are chaste and bright, and the sun cannot lose its brightness; the heavens and the earth are remarkably firm, and the heavenly way cannot make people worry for a long time.

古文：黄屋左纛，本为亿兆而尊；鸾辂龙章，盖以郊禋而贵。
现代文：黄屋左纛。本来是因为亿万人民才尊贵；鸾车龙纹，大概是因为郊野的祭祀而显贵。
English: Huangya Zuoqi. Originally, it was because of the hundreds of millions of people that it was noble; the dragon pattern of the carriage, probably because of the sacrifice in the countryside.

古文：宝器存乎至重，介石慎于易差。
现代文：实器因为极其贵重才存在，对容易发生错误的事很谨慎才能操守坚贞。
English: The real thing exists only because it is extremely valuable, and it is prudent to be cautious about things that are prone to error in order to maintain integrity.

古文：黔首岂可少选无君，宗祏岂可一日无主。
现代文：百姓难道能缺少选择没有国君，社稷岂能一没有主宰。
English: Can the people be short of choice without a sovereign, can society be without a ruler?

古文：伏愿陛下扫地升中，柴天改物。
现代文：我诚恳地希望陛下扫地升中，祭天改物。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty sweeps the floor, rises to the middle, and makes amends.

古文：事迫凶危，运钟扰攘，盖不劳宗正奉诏，博士择时，南面即可居尊，西向无所让德。
现代文：天下事窘迫凶危，国运混乱，大概可以不需劳动宗正们奉诏行事，博士们选择时日，面向南就可以居于尊位，面向西就不必在道德上有所谦让。
English: When the world is in distress and danger, and the national movement is in chaos, there is probably no need for the laborers to act according to the edict, and the doctors to choose the time and day. Facing south, they can live in dignity, and facing west, they do not have to be morally humble.

古文：四方既知有奉，八百始可同期。
现代文：四方既然知道有尊可奉，百姓才能有共同的期望。
English: Since the four parties know that there is honor to be honored, the people can have common expectations.

古文：残寇潜居，器藏社处，乾象既倾，坤仪已覆。斩莽輗车，烧卓照市，廓清函夏，正为茔陵，开雪宫围，庶存钟鼎，彼黍离离，伊何可言。
现代文：残贼隐居，器械藏在社庙之处，干象已经倾斜，坤仪又已颠覆，斩除王莽的车子，烧掉董卓的照市，廓清函夏，正是为了先帝的陵墓，洗刷宫廷耻辱，希望能保存帝业，那周朝故都镐京黍子纷披的景象，还有什么可说的。
English: The remnants of the thieves live in seclusion, the instruments are hidden in the places of shrines and temples, the dry elephant has been tilted, the Kun instrument has been subverted, the car of Wang Mang has been cut off, the photo of Dong Zhuo has been burned, and the summer of Hanzha has been cleared. It is precisely for the mausoleum of the former emperor, to wash the disgrace of the court, hoping to preserve the imperial heritage. What else can be said about the scene of the ancient capital, Beijing, being covered with cocoons.

古文：陛下继明阐祚，即宫旧楚。
现代文：陛下继承光明的事业和帝位，就位于楚的旧宫。
English: His Majesty inherits the bright cause and the imperial throne, which is located in the old palace of Chu.

古文：左庙右社之制，可以权宜；五礼六乐之容，岁时取备。
现代文：左边宗庙右边社庙的礼制，可以循权宜之计；五礼六乐的采纳，可供岁时取用完备。
English: The ritual system of the family temple on the left and the community temple on the right can be followed as a matter of expediency; the adoption of the five rites and six pleasures is complete and can be used at any age.

古文：金芝九茎，琼茅三脊。
现代文：金芝九根茎，琼茅三个棱。
English: Ganoderma lucidum has nine stems, and aconite has three edges.

古文：要卫率职，尉候相望。
现代文：重要的侍卫任职，尉官候望相互可看见。
English: Important bodyguard duties, lieutenants can look forward to seeing each other.

古文：坐庙堂以朝四夷，登灵台而望云物，禅梁甫而封泰山，临东滨而礼日观。
现代文：陛下坐庙堂之上以使四夷朝拜，登临灵台观望云物，禅祭梁甫封祭泰山，幸临束海之滨礼拜日观。
English: His Majesty sat on top of the temple hall to make the Shi'i pay homage, ascended the altar to watch the clouds, the Zen festival Liang Hufu Festival Mount Tai, and the happiness of the coast of the Bund to watch the Sunday.

古文：然后与三事大夫，更谋都鄙。
现代文：这以后再与三事大夫，另谋都城和边疆之事。
English: After that, he and Sanjodafu plotted about the capital and the frontier.

古文：左瀍右涧，夹雒可以为居，抗殿疏龙，惟王可以在镐，何必勤勤建业也哉。
现代文：左沥右涧，中间夹有雒水可以居处；高大的殿堂稀疏的龙脊，帝王也可以建都在镐，何必辛辛苦苦定要建都建业呢。
English: From the left to the right, there is water in the middle, which can be used as a place to live; from the tall hall to the sparse dragon ridge, the emperor can also be built in the dragon, why do you have to work hard to build the capital?

古文：臣等不胜控款之至，谨拜表以闻。
现代文：我们不能忍受极度的恳切心情，谨慎地拜上奏表让陛下知道。
English: We can't bear to be too earnest, so we discreetly bow to the music stand to let His Majesty know.

古文：世祖奉讳，大临三日，百官缟素。
现代文：世祖奉奠太宗，大哭三天，百官都身穿孝服。
English: The world's ancestors paid tribute to Taizong, wept for three days, and all officials wore filial piety.

古文：乃答曰： 孤以不德，天降之灾，枕戈饮胆，扣心泣血。
现代文：世祖适才回答王僧辩的奏表说： 孤因为德行不好，上天降下灾祸给我，我枕戈待旦卧薪尝胆，扣击心扉泪尽泣血。
English: It was only then that Sezu Shicai replied to Wang Sangye's report, saying, "It is because my virtue is not good that the heavens have sent me a calamity. I have been lying in bed for a long time, feeling my guts, beating my heart, and weeping blood with tears.

古文：风树之酷，万始不追；霜露之哀，百忧总萃。
现代文：狂风刮树的严酷，就是重新开始一万次也不能和这次相比；飞霜降露的悲哀，使我百忧交集。
English: The severity of the wind-swept trees, even if I start again ten thousand times, cannot be compared to this time; the sadness of the frosty dew, I have a lot of worries.

古文：甫闻伯升之祸，弥切仲谋之悲。
现代文：刚听说伯升的灾祸，又遭受仲谋的悲伤。
English: I just heard about the disaster of Bo Xing, and suffered from the sadness of the conspiracy.

古文：若封豕既歼，长蛇即戮，方欲追延陵之逸轨，继子臧之高让，岂资秋亭之坛，安事繁阳之石。
现代文：如果封豕已经被歼灭，长蛇被杀死，我才想追慕延陵的飘逸踪迹，继承子臧的高让品性，难道要藉助秋亭之坛，怎么能侍奉繁阳之石。
English: If the seal has been annihilated and the snake has been killed, I only want to pursue the flowing traces of Yanling, inherit the high-yielding character of Zibo, and how can I use the altar of the autumn pavilion to serve the stone of the prosperous sun.

古文：侯景，项籍也；萧栋，殷辛也。
现代文：侯景，就如同项籍一样；萧栋，就如同殷辛一样。
English: Houjing, just like Xiangqi; Xiaodong, just like Yinxin.

古文：赤泉未赏，刘邦尚曰汉王；白旗弗悬，周发犹称太子。
现代文：未赏赤泉，刘邦还是个汉王；白旗没有悬挂时，周发仍称太子。
English: If he did not appreciate Akizumi, Liu Bang was still a Han king; when the white flag was not hoisted, Zhou Fa was still called the crown prince.

古文：飞龙之位，孰谓可跻；附凤之徒，既闻来议。
现代文：飞龙高位，谁说可以登上；攀龙附凤之徒，已经听到我的回答的就请来议事。
English: Those who say that flying dragons can ascend to high places, and those who say that climbing dragons and attaching phoenixes can ascend to high places, have already heard my answer, please come to the meeting.

古文：群公卿士，其谕孤之志，无忽！ 
现代文：诸位公卿士人，希望能明白孤的心意，不要忘记! 
English: Fellow nobles and judges, I hope you can understand the thoughts of the lonely, don't forget!

古文：司空南平王恪率宗室五十余人，领军将军胡僧祐率群僚二百余人，江州别驾张佚率吏民三百余人，并奉笺劝进。
现代文：司空南平王萧恪率领宗室五十多人，领军将军胡僧佑率领二百多位官员，江州别驾张佚率领三百多位官吏百姓，一起奉上书笺劝世祖进皇帝位。
English: Sikyong Nanping Wang Xiao Ke led more than 50 members of the imperial family, the leading general Hu Sang You led more than 200 officials, and the governor of Jiangsu Province Zhang Ye led more than 300 officials and commoners. Together, they sent a letter to the emperor to persuade him to ascend to the throne.

古文：世祖固让。
现代文：世祖坚持辞让。
English: The patriarch insisted on resigning.

古文：十一月乙亥，王僧辩又奉表曰：紫宸旷位，赤县无主，百灵耸动，万国回皇。
现代文：十一月乙亥，王僧辩又一次进表给世祖说：紫色的宫殿旷缺帝位，神州无入主宰，百样生灵为此恐惧不安，万国因此心神难宁。
English: In November of the second year of the Heian period, Wang Sangye once again went to the ancestor and said: the purple palace lacks the imperial throne, the divine state has no dominion, a hundred kinds of living beings are afraid and uneasy about this, and the hearts of all nations are restless.

古文：虽醉醒相扶，同归景亳，式歌且诵，总赴唐郊，犹惧陛下俯首潸然，让德不嗣。
现代文：即使酒醉的人和清醒的人互相搀扶，一起回到景亳，又歌唱又朗诵，总是奔赴唐的郊野，仍然免不了害怕陛下低头流泪，在道德方面有所谦让因而不继承帝位。
English: Even if drunks and sober people help each other, go back to Jingyuan together, sing and recite, and always go to the countryside of Tang, it is still inevitable that His Majesty would be afraid of bowing his head and shedding tears, and would not inherit the throne because of moral modesty.

古文：传车在道，方慎宋昌之谋；法驾已陈，尚杜耿纯之劝。
现代文：驿车已经在道，还要慎重对待宋昌的谋略；帝车已经排好队列，还要杜绝耿纯的规劝。
English: The imperial car is already on the road, and Song Chang's strategy should be treated with caution; the imperial car has been lined up, and Geng Chun's exhortation should be eliminated.

古文：岳牧翘首，天民累息。
现代文：山岳和百官翘首期盼陛下即帝位，上天和百姓的这种心情在不断地积累增长。
English: The mountains and hundreds of officials are eagerly looking forward to His Majesty's enthronement, and this kind of mood of heaven and the people is constantly accumulating and growing.

古文：臣闻星回日薄，击雷鞭电者之谓天；岳立川流，吐雾蒸云者之谓地。
现代文：我听说星星来去太阳升落，雷击电闪的地方叫做天；山岳耸立百川奔流，吐出雾气聚起云彩的地方叫做地。
English: I have heard that the place where the stars come and go, the sun rises and sets, and the lightning flashes is called the sky; the place where the mountains rise and the rivers flow, and the place where the clouds gather, spewing out mist, is called the earth.

古文：苞天地之混成，洞阴阳之不测，而以裁成万物者，其在圣人乎！
现代文：包容天地的混合生成，洞察阴阳的难以估测，因此裁成万物，这样的人大概存在于圣人之中吧!
English: Such a person, who is tolerant of the mixed creation of heaven and earth, who has an insight into the yin and yang that is difficult to estimate, and who therefore creates all things, probably exists among the sages!

古文：故云 天地之大德曰生，圣人之大宝曰位。 
现代文：所以说 天地的大德叫生，圣人的大宝是位 。
English: Therefore, it is said that the great virtue of heaven and earth is birth, and the great treasure of a saint is the position.

古文：黄屋庙堂之下，本非获已而居；明镜四衢之樽，盖由应物取训。
现代文：黄屋庙堂之下，本来不是为了获得才占据它；明镜高悬四衢八达之尊贵，大概是由于适应万物变化取得教诲的缘故。
English: Under the Yellow House Temple, it was not originally occupied in order to obtain it; the dignity of the mirror hanging high in all directions is probably due to adapting to the changes of all things to obtain teachings.

古文：伏惟陛下稽古文思，英雄特达。
现代文：我诚恳地想陛下考查古人文思，英伟雄奇独立通达。
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will examine the ancient humanism, the heroic, the magnificent, and the independent.

古文：比以周旦，则文王之子；方之放勋，则帝挚之季。
现代文：用周旦作比，陛下是文王之子；用放勋打比方，那么陛下是帝挚的弟弟。
English: Comparing with Zhou Dan, His Majesty is the son of King Wen; comparing with Fang Xun, then His Majesty is the younger brother of the Emperor.

古文：千年旦暮，可不在斯。
现代文：千年快如早晚，即位之时可不就在此吗。
English: The millennium is fast approaching, and the time of enthronement is almost here.

古文：庭阙湮亡，钟鼎沦覆，嗣膺景历，非陛下而谁？
现代文：朝廷埋没危亡，国家的宾器沦丧翻覆，承受大梁国统，不是陛下又能是谁?
English: The imperial court is in danger of being buried, the state apparatus is in danger of being overturned, and the mainstay of the nation is in danger of being overthrown. If not His Majesty, then who?

古文：岂可使赤眉更立盆子，隗嚣托置高庙。
现代文：岂能让赤眉再立盆子，隗嚣托放高庙。
English: Won't it be possible to let the red eyebrows re-erect the pot, and the hustle and bustle to put up the high temple.

古文：陛下方复从容高让，用执谦光。
现代文：陛下正在反复从容地崇尚谦让，用此来获取谦逊的光彩。
English: His Majesty is repeatedly and calmly advocating modesty, using it to gain the glory of modesty.

古文：展其矫行伪书，诬罔正朔，见机而作，断可识矣。
现代文：观察贼寇的假传伪韶，欺骗正朔，见机作恶，绝对可以认清他们的真面目。
English: Observing the fake news, deception, and opportunistic evil of the bandits, we can definitely see their true colors.

古文：匪疑何卜，无待蓍龟。
现代文：没有疑问何需占卜，不用依靠蓍草龟甲来占测算。
English: There is no question about the need for divination, and there is no need to rely on the tortoise shell to account for the calculation.

古文：日者，公卿失驭，祸缠霄极，侯景凭陵，奸臣互起，率戎伐颖，无处不然，劝明诛晋，侧足皆尔。
现代文：从前，公卿失去控制，灾祸多达天空的尽头，侯景欺凌天下，奸臣交替而起，率领戎狄讨伐颖，无处不是这样，劝明诛晋，到处都是如此。
English: Once upon a time, the nobles lost control, the calamity reached the end of the sky, Hou Jing bullied the world, the treacherous vassals rose up in turn, led by Erong Di to fight Fai Ying, nowhere is this not the case, persuade Ming and Jin, this is the case everywhere.

古文：刁斗夜鸣，烽火相照。
现代文：刁斗在深夜裹不停地被敲响，烽火互相照耀。
English: In the dead of night, gongs continue to be rung and bonfires are lit.

古文：中朝人士，相顾衔悲；凉州义徒，东望殒涕，惵惵黔首，将欲安归！
现代文：梁朝的人士，相顾含悲；凉塑的义兵，束望落泪，心怀恐惧的老百姓，将要在哪裹身!
English: Liang Dynasty people, caring for each other with sorrow; cool-shaped volunteers, looking forward to tears, fear-stricken people, where will they wrap themselves!

古文：陛下英略纬天，沉明内断，横剑泣血，枕戈尝胆，农山圮下之策，金匮玉鼎之谋，莫不定算扆帷，决胜千里。
现代文：陛下英才宏略齐天，性情沉明内心善于决断，横剑悲哭泪尽流血，枕戈待旦卧薪尝胆，农山圮下的策略，金匮玉鼎上的计谋，没有不是在屏风后帷帐裹决定的，它们可以决胜于千里之外。
English: His Majesty's talents are as vast as the sky, his temperament is clear and his heart is good at making decisions, his sword is sad, his tears are full of blood, his pillow is waiting for him to lie down and taste the gall, the strategy of the farmers, the strategy of the gold and the jade, are not decided behind the screen, they can win more than a thousand miles away.

古文：击灵鼍之鼓，而建翠华之旗，驱六州之兵，而总九伯之伐，四方虽虞，一战以霸。
现代文：敲击灵鼍战鼓，树起翠华战旗，驱使六州士兵，统率九伯的征伐，四方虽然存有忧患，但是一战就可以称霸。
English: Knocking the cymbals, raising the battle flag, driving the soldiers of the six states, and leading the conquest of the nine provinces. Although there are troubles in the four directions, they can dominate in the first battle.

古文：斩其鲸鲵，既章大戮，何校灭耳，莫匪奸回，史不绝书，府无虚月。
现代文：斩除鲸鲵，已经表明最大的杀戮，肩扛刑具盖没了耳朵，没有不是好人佞臣，历史不会断绝记载，官府没有虚度的岁月。
English: The cutting of the whale's fin has already shown the greatest killing, the shoulder-carrying torture device cover has lost its ear, there is no not a good man and vassal, history will not stop recording, the government has no wasted years.

古文：自洞庭安波，彭蠡底定，文昭武穆，芳若椒兰，敌国降城，和如亲戚，九服同谋，百道俱进，国耻家怨，计期就雪，社稷不坠，翙在圣明。
现代文：自从洞庭波平浪静，彭蠡安定，文臣声名显著武将肃穆，德行美如椒兰，敌国的城池投降，与我们和睦如亲戚，九服同计谋，百种方法一起进用，国耻家怨，洗雪之时指曰可待，社稷不失，全在乎圣明之人。
English: Since Dongting, the waves have been calm, Peng Rong has been stable, and Wencheng has become famous as a prominent military commander, the virtue is as beautiful as a pepper plant, the city of the enemy country has surrendered, the harmony with us is like a relative, the nine services have conspired together, a hundred methods have been used together, the national shame and family grudge, the time to wash the snow can be expected, the social disgrace is not lost, the person who cares about the sacred.

古文：今也何时，而申帝启之避，凶危若此，方陈泰伯之辞。
现代文：现在是什么时候，陛下却重申帝启的避让之辞；如此凶险危难，陛下却正在陈述泰伯的言论。
English: When is it that your majesty repeats the evasive speech of the emperor; when it is so dangerous that your majesty is stating the speech of Tiber?

古文：国有具臣，谁敢奉诏。
现代文：国家有有才能的大臣，谁敢尊奉韶令。
English: If a country has talented ministers, who would dare to honor the imperial edict?

古文：天下者高祖之天下，陛下者万国之欢心，万国岂可无君，高祖岂可废祀。
现代文：天下是高祖的天下，陛下是万国人的欢心，万国岂能没有君主，高祖难道能停止祭祀。
English: The world is the world of Gaozu. His majesty is the heart of all nations. Can all nations be without a monarch? Can Gaozu stop the sacrifices?

古文：即日五星夜聚，八风通吹，云烟纷郁，日月光华，百官象物而动，军政不戒而备。
现代文：近日五星夜裹会聚，八方的风畅通地吹，云彩烟雾浓盛，日月放出光芒，百官感于物象而行动，军政不需告诚就做好准备。
English: Recently, the five stars have gathered in the night, the wind of the eight directions blows smoothly, the clouds are thick with smoke, the sun and the moon emit light, the organs of the body are affected by the object and act, and the military and politics do not need to be sincere to prepare.

古文：飞舻巨舰，竟水浮川；铁马银鞍，陵山跨谷。
现代文：飞快而巨大的舰船，浮游水面从头至尾；铁马银鞍，越山跨谷。
English: A fast and huge ship, floating on the water from end to end; an iron horse with a silver saddle, crossing mountains and valleys.

古文：英杰接踵，忠勇相顾，湛宗族以酬恩，焚妻子以报主。
现代文：英杰接踵而至，忠勇之士互相顾盼，沉没宗族来报答皇恩，焚烧妻子儿女以报答主上。
English: Heroes come one after another, the loyal and brave look to each other, sink the clan to repay the royal favor, and burn the wife and children to repay the Lord.

古文：莫不覆盾衔威，提斧击众，风飞电耀、志灭凶丑。
现代文：没有谁不以盾掩身威风凛凛，手提利斧攻击敌众，如风般飞跃如电样闪耀，志在消灭凶恶之人。
English: There is no one who does not cover himself with a shield and swagger, attack the enemy with an axe, fly like the wind and shine like electricity, aiming to destroy the evil people.

古文：所待陛下昭告后土，虔奉上帝，广发明诏，师出以名，五行夕返，六军晓进，便当尽司寇之威，穷蚩尤之伐，执石赵而求玺，斩姚秦而取钟，修扫茔陵，奉迎宗庙。
现代文：所依靠的是陛下明告后土，虔诚地尊奉上天，广泛地散发陛下圣明的韶书，使师出有名，军队傍晚返回，拂晓又进发，便要竭尽剿寇的威势，穷尽童尤般的征伐，捕获互赵求得帝印，斩杀型瞳取来国家宝器，修整洒扫陵墓，尊奉恭迎宗庙。
English: Relying on His Majesty's explicit announcement of the future land, devoutly honoring the heavens, widely distributing the imperial edict of His Majesty's holiness and wisdom, making the teacher famous, the army returned in the evening and advanced again at dawn, so they had to exhaust the power of the invaders, exhaust the childlike conquest, capture each other to obtain the imperial seal, kill the eyes to obtain the national treasure, clean and sweep the mausoleum, and honor and welcome the ancestral temple.

古文：陛下岂得不仰存国计，俯从民请。
现代文：陛下岂能不上存国家大计，下顺民心。
English: How could His Majesty fail to save the country's grand plan and win the hearts and minds of the people?

古文：汉宣嗣位之后，即遣蒲类之军；光武登极既竟，始有长安之捷。
现代文：坠宣童继位之后，就派遣莲类的军队；光亘进登位完毕，才有长安大捷。
English: After the succession of Sheng Xuan Tong, he dispatched a lotus-like army; after the accession of Guangwu Jin, only Chang'an achieved great success.

古文：由此言之，不无前准。
现代文：由此说来，不是没有已存的标准的。
English: Therefore, it is not as if there are no existing standards.

古文：臣等或世受朝恩，或身荷重遇，同休等戚，自国刑家，苟有腹心，敢以死夺。
现代文：我们这些大臣有的世代享受朝廷的恩宠，有的自己受到隆重的知遇之恩，我们与陛下同欢乐共悲伤，按照国家的标准要求家人，假如我们另有心腹之人，敢用死来改变它。
English: Those of us who are ministers have enjoyed the grace of the imperial court for generations, and some of us have received the grace of a grand opportunity. We share the joys and sorrows of His Majesty, and we ask our families according to the standards of the country. If we have another confidant, we dare to change it with death.

古文：不任慺慺之至，谨重奉表以闻。
现代文：我不能忍受极度的忧愁，谨慎地再次进奉奏表以让陛下知道。
English: I couldn't bear the extreme sadness, so I discreetly handed in the score again to let His Majesty know.

古文：世祖答曰： 省示，复具一二。
现代文：世担回答说： 省读所示，答覆一二。
English: The Moderator replied: As indicated in the recitation, answer one or two.

古文：孤闻天生蒸民而树之以君，所以对扬天休，司牧黔首。
现代文：孤听说天生众民而后为他们树立国君，从而匹配弘扬上天的美德，主宰百姓。
English: He heard that all the people were born and then set up a sovereign for them, so as to match and promote the virtues of heaven and dominate the people.

古文：摄提、合雒以前，栗陆、骊连之外，书契不传，无得称也。
现代文：在摄提、合雒以前，栗坠、銮连之外，文字没有记载，不能称颂。
English: In addition to chestnut pendants and necklaces, there is no written record before the taking and closing of the urns, so they cannot be praised.

古文：自阪泉彰其武功，丹陵表其文德，有人民焉，有社稷焉，或歌谣所归，或惟天所相。
现代文：自从龌表明其武功，旦堕表明其文德，才有了人民，有了社稷，或者是民间歌谣所歌颂的对象，或是上天所帮助的人。
English: It was not until the Zhou Dynasty showed its martial prowess and the Tang Dynasty showed its literary virtue that there were people, a society, or an object of praise in folk songs, or a person helped by heaven.

古文：孤遭家多难，大耻未雪，国贼则蚩尤弗剪，同姓则有扈不宾，卧而思之，坐以待旦，何以应宝历，何以嗣龙图。
现代文：孤多次遭遇家难，大耻还未洗雪，蚩韭一样的国贼还没有剪除，同姓中还有直尘一样的人不归顺，孤卧床思考这些问题。难以成眠，坐着等待天亮，孤凭什么继国统，凭什么展宏图。
English: Lone has repeatedly encountered family difficulties, the great shame has not yet been washed away, the traitor like the wart has not been cut out, there are still people with the same surname who do not surrender, and Lone is lying in bed thinking about these problems. It is difficult to fall asleep, sitting and waiting for the dawn, what does Lone rely on to succeed the country, and what does he rely on to expand his grand plan.

古文：庶一戎既定，罪人斯得，祀夏配天，方申来议也。 
现代文：希望一战能尽定天下，罪人就能捕获，祭祀夏，匹配天，你们方能再来商议。 
English: I hope that the first battle can settle the world, the sinners can be captured, the sacrificial summer, the match day, and you can come to discuss again.

古文：是时巨寇尚存，未欲即位，而四方表劝，前后相属，乃下令曰： 《大壮》乘乾，《明夷》垂翼，璇度亟移，玉律屡徙，四岳频遣劝进，九棘比者表闻。
现代文：世担因此时巨寇还在，不想就位，然而四方之人上表规劝他就位的，前后相连，世祖就下令说： 《大壮》升天，《明夷》垂翅，美好的制度屡次被改变，美好的法律多次被更动，四岳频繁地派人来劝孤即位，九棘接连地上表让孤知晓。
English: As a result, the world worried that the great dragon was still there and did not want to take the throne. However, the people of the four quarters went to the table to persuade him to take the throne. Back and forth, the ancestor ordered: "Da Zhuang" ascended to heaven, "Mingyi" spread its wings, the beautiful system was repeatedly changed, the beautiful laws were repeatedly changed, the four mountains frequently sent people to persuade the lonely to take the throne, and the nine thorns successively went to the table to let the lonely know.

古文：谯、沛未复，茔陵永远，于居于处，寤寐疚怀，何心何颜，抚兹归运。
现代文：谯、迹没有收复，陵墓离得还远，孤无论是居处，还是睡醒都心怀忧苦，孤有何心情何面目，掌握此等归帝位的命运。
English: No trace has been recovered, the mausoleum is still far away, and no matter where they live or when they wake up, their hearts are full of sorrow. No matter what mood they are in, no matter what kind of face they have, they must grasp the fate of returning to the throne.

古文：自今表奏，所由并断，若有启疏，可写此令施行。 
现代文：从今日起一切表奏，所过州县一起截断，如果需要启发疏导，可以抄写遣道命令并施行。 
English: Starting from today, all signs will be cut off at the same time when passing through the county. If you need inspiration and guidance, you can copy the order and implement it.

古文：是日，贼司空、东南道大行台刘神茂率仪同刘归义、留异赴义，奉表请降。
现代文：这天，贼司空、东南道大行台刘神茂率领仪同刘归义、留异奔赴道义，进表请求投降。
English: On this day, Liu Shenmao, the leader of the Thief Siku and the Southeast Daqiantai Liu Shenmao, led the ceremony to go to Doyi with Liu Guiyi and Ruiyi, and entered the table to request surrender.

古文：大宝三年，世祖犹称太清六年。
现代文：大实三年，世祖仍称太清六年。
English: In the third year of the Dashi era, the ancestor still said that the Taichung era lasted for six years.

古文：正月甲戌，世祖下令曰： 军国多虞，戎旃未静，青领虽炽，黔首宜安。
现代文：正月甲戌，世担下令说： 军国多忧患，战争还未停息，贼祸虽然炽烈，老百姓却应该安定。
English: In the first month of the year, the Council of World Affairs issued an order saying: The military country is in a lot of trouble, the war has not yet stopped, and although the scourge of thieves is fierce, the people should be stable.

古文：时惟星鸟，表年祥于东秩；春纪宿龙，歌岁取于南畯。
现代文：时序衹在鸟星，表明今年东方吉祥；春季应在龙宿，快乐的年景出现在南方。
English: The time sequence of the star in the bird indicates that the East is auspicious this year; the spring should be in the Dragon Inn, and the happy year will appear in the south.

古文：况三农务业，尚看夭桃敷水；四人有令，犹及落杏飞花。
现代文：何况农民务业，还要看茂盛美丽的桃花和上天所施的雨水；四方的老百姓是有节令的，仍要观察杏子落花儿飞。
English: What's more, in the business of farming, it is necessary to see the lush and beautiful peach blossoms and the rain from the heavens; the people of the four directions have festivals, and they still need to observe the apricot falling flowers.

古文：化俗移风，常在所急；劝耕且战，弥须自许。
现代文：变化风俗改移风气，常常是因为紧急的事；勉励耕作和战斗，必须更加自我督促。
English: Changes in customs and customs are often due to urgent matters; encourage farming and fighting, we must be more self-disciplined.

古文：岂直燕垂寒谷，积黍自温，宁可堕此玄苗，坐飡红粒，不植燕颔，空候蝉鸣。
现代文：是否衹是燕国边陲和寒谷，堆积的黍米可以自己温热，岂可毁坏这些黑苗，坐吃红色的米粒，不种植燕颔，空等候蝉儿呜叫。
English: Whether it is the edge of the tern country and the cold valley, the accumulated glutinous rice can warm itself, can it destroy these black seedlings, sit and eat red rice grains, do not plant terns, and wait for cicadas to cry.

古文：可悉深耕穊种，安堵复业，无弃民力，并分地利。
现代文：可让百姓全部来深耕密植，安居乐业，不要废弃民力，一起分享田地的好处。
English: All the people can be allowed to deeply cultivate and densely plant, live and work safely, do not waste people's power, and share the benefits of the field together.

古文：班勒州郡，咸使遵承。 
现代文：此项命令要颁布到州郡，并约束他们都来遵守。 
English: This order shall be promulgated to the States and Counties and they shall be bound to comply therewith.

古文：以智武将军、南平内史王褒为吏部尚书。
现代文：世祖任命智武将军、南平内史王褒为吏部尚书。
English: The founder of the dynasty appointed General Zhiwu and Nanping Naishi Wang Bao as officials.

古文：二月，王僧辩众军发自寻阳。
现代文：二月，王僧辩的众多军队从寻阳开出。
English: In February, Wang Sangye's numerous troops set out from Xuanyang.

古文：世祖驰檄告四方曰：夫剥极生灾，乃及龙战，师贞终吉，方制獖豕。
现代文：世祖疾传檄文昭告四方说：衰败到了极点就会生灾，于是有了圣人参与的战争，军队占卜的结果总是吉兆，所以才能制服贼寇。
English: The Ancestor's Anecdote tells the four sides that: when the decline reaches the extreme, disaster will occur, so there is a war in which sages participate, and the results of the army's divination are always auspicious, so it is only possible to subdue the bandits.

古文：岂不以侵阳荡薄，源之者乱阶；定龛艰难，成之者忠义。
现代文：难道不是因为贼寇侵犯正义引起政基摇动民风不厚，根源在贼寇扰乱秩序；平定叛乱十分艰难，使它成功的衹有忠义。
English: Wasn't it because the bandits violated justice that caused the political foundation to shake and the people's morale was not strong? The root cause was that the bandits disrupted the order; it was very difficult to quell the rebellion, and there was loyalty in its success.

古文：故羿、浇灭于前，莽、卓诛于后。
现代文：所以羿、浇在前面被消灭，莽、卓在后来被诛杀。
English: Therefore, Zou and Guo were eliminated in the first place, while Meng and Zhuo were killed later.

古文：是故使桓、文之勋，复兴于周代；温、陶之绩，弥盛于金行。
现代文：因此使桓、文的功勋，在周代重现；温、陶的功绩，更盛于五行为金的朝代。
English: Therefore, the feats of Jiguan and Wen reappeared in the Zhou Dynasty; the feats of Wen and Tao were more prevalent in the Five Dynasties.

古文：粤若梁兴五十余载，平壹宇内，德惠悠长，仁育苍生，义征不服。
现代文：至于銮朝建立五十余年了，平定统一天下，美德和恩惠流传得遥远而长久，仁爱养育了苍生，道义征伐了不顺服之人。
English: As for the founding of the Qian Dynasty more than 50 years ago, it was a time of peaceful unification, virtue and benevolence spread far and wide, benevolence nurtured sentient beings, and morality subjugated those who disobeyed.

古文：左伊右瀍，咸皆仰化；浊泾清渭，靡不向风。
现代文：左面是伊右面是漫，都仰威归化；浑浊的泾水清澈的迢丞，无不向风而动。
English: The left side is Yi and the right side is Man, both of which are naturalized by Yang Wei; the muddy water is clear water, all of which are moving towards the wind.

古文：建翠凤之旗，则六龙骧首；击灵鼍之鼓，则百神警肃。
现代文：树立起翠凤大旗，那么六龙举首奋发；敲击灵鼍战鼓，那么百神警戒肃敬。
English: When the great banner of the Jade and Phoenix is raised, the six dragons lift up their heads to fight; when the war drums of the coffin are beaten, the hundred deities stand at attention.

古文：风、牧、方、邵之贤，卫、霍、辛、赵之将，羽林黄头之士，虎贲缇骑之夫，叱咤则风云兴起，鼓动则嵩、华倒拔。
现代文：风、牧、方、邵的贤才，卫、霍、圭、赵的名将，羽林军中的水军，勇士中的骑士，一声吆喝风云就会兴起，战鼓鸣响嵩山、华山就会拔起倒掉。
English: The sages of the wind, the herdsman, the square, and Shao, the famous generals of Wei, Huo, Gui, and Zhao, the sailors of the Ulin Army, the knights of the warriors, the storm clouds will rise with a shout, the war drums will sound, and Mount Songshan and Mount Huashan will be uprooted and toppled.

古文：自桐柏以北，孤竹以南，碣石之前，流沙之后，延颈举踵，交臂屈膝。
现代文：从桐柏以北，孤竹以南，碣石之前，流沙之后，人们都伸长脖子抬起脚后跟盼望，交叉双臂弯屈两膝表示臣服。
English: From Tongbai to the north, from Lone Bamboo to the south, before ocher, after quicksand, people craned their necks, lifted their heels in hope, crossed their arms and bent their knees in submission.

古文：胡人不敢牧马，秦士不敢弯弓。
现代文：胡人不敢放马，秦人不敢弯弓射箭。
English: Hu people dare not let go of horses, Qin people dare not bend the bow and shoot arrows.

古文：叶和万邦，平章百姓，十尧九舜，曷足云也。
现代文：协和万国，辨别彰明百姓，既使十个尧九个舜，又何足道哉。
English: To unite the nations, to divide the peoples, to make the ten tribes into nine, how great is that!

古文：贼臣侯景，匈奴叛臣，鸣镝余噍。
现代文：贼臣侯景，匈奴叛臣，战乱之中苟延残喘。
English: The traitorous vassal Hou Jing, the Hun traitor, lingered on in the midst of the war.

古文：悬瓠空城，本非国宝，寿春畿要，赏不逾月。
现代文：悬瓠是座空城，本来不是国宝，寿春是重要之地，奖赏不能超过一个月。
English: Hanging scroll is an empty city, it is not a national treasure, Shuchun is an important place, the reward can not exceed one month.

古文：开海陵之仓，赈常平之米，檄九府之费，锡三官之钱，冒于货贿，不知纪极。
现代文：打开海陵仓，救济常平的米，征召九府的费用，赐给三官的钱财，冒领财物，不知道法度和准则。
English: Open the tomb of the sea, relief the rice of Changping, conscript the expenses of the nine prefectures, give money and wealth to the three officials, pretend to take property, do not know the laws and standards.

古文：敢兴逆乱，梗我王畿。
现代文：敢于谋逆作乱，阻塞我京郊交通。
English: They dared to conspire to create turmoil and obstruct traffic in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：贼臣正德，阻兵安忍。
现代文：贼臣正德，怎么忍心用军队阻碍我们。
English: Thief Zheng De, how dare you use the army to obstruct us.

古文：日者结怨江羋，远适单于。
现代文：先前与江、芈结怨，远远地投奔单于。
English: He had previously harbored grudges against Jiang and Zou, and had distanced himself from them to join Shan Yu.

古文：简牍屡彰，彭生之魂未弭；聚敛无度，景卿之诮已及。
现代文：虽然屡次用简牍表彰，彭生的魂灵仍未得到安抚；聚敛无度，景卿的谴责已到。
English: Although he was repeatedly commended with a gold medal, Peng Sheng's soul still could not be appeased; he had amassed too much wealth, and Jing Jing's condemnation had already arrived.

古文：为虎傅翼，远相招致。
现代文：为老虎安上翅膀，把灾祸从很远的地方招致。
English: Put wings on tigers, and they will bring disaster from far away.

古文：虔刘我生民，离散我兄弟。
现代文：杀害我的人民，离散我的兄弟。
English: Kill my people and scatter my brothers.

古文：我是以董率皋貔，躬擐甲胄，霜戈照日，则晨离夺晖，龙骑蔽野，则平原掩色，信与江水同流，气与寒风俱愤。
现代文：所以我率领勇猛的军队，亲自穿着甲胄。明亮的戈矛映照日光，早晨离开时使得阳光失去光辉；龙骑遮蔽原野，平原失去了原来的颜色，信念和江水同流，气概与寒风一起发愤。
English: So I led a brave army, wearing armor myself; bright spears reflected sunlight, and when I left in the morning, the sun lost its brilliance; dragon riders covered the fields, the plains lost their original color, faith and the river flowed together, and courage and the cold wind were angry.

古文：凶丑畏威，委命下吏，乞活淮、肥，苟存徐、兗。
现代文：凶恶之人惧怕威势，把命运委托给下吏，在淮、肥之间乞求活命，在徐、兖之间苟且圆存。
English: Wicked people are afraid of authority, entrusting their fate to subordinates, begging for their lives between Huai and Hui, and remaining steadfast between Xu and Zhou.

古文：涣汗既行，丝纶爰被。
现代文：离散污浊之事已经实行，丝做的绶带于是披在身上。
English: The separation of the stains has been carried out, and the silk ribbon is then put on the body.

古文：我是以班师凯归，休牛息马。
现代文：因此我们班师回朝凯旋而归，让牛马休息。
English: Therefore, our team returned to the morning with a triumphant return, and let the cattle and horses rest.

古文：贼犹不悛。遂复矢流王屋，兵躔象魏。
现代文：贼寇仍然不悔改，于是又一次让箭射过王屋，贼兵停留在宫门前。
English: The robber is still unrepentant, so he once again shoots an arrow through the king's house, and the robber soldiers remain in front of the palace gate.

古文：总章之观，非复听讼之堂；甘泉之宫，永乖避暑之地。
现代文：总章观，不再是听讼堂；甘泉宫，永远不再是避暑胜地。
English: The General Chapter is no longer a court of law; Ganquan Palace is no longer a summer resort.

古文：坐召宪司，卧制朝宰，矫托天命，伪作符书。
现代文：坐着招集有司，卧着可制裁朝廷宰辅大臣，假传天命，伪造符书。
English: Sitting to convene a meeting of magistrates, lying down to be sanctioned by the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court, falsely transmitting the Mandate of Heaven, and forging a certificate.

古文：重增赋敛，肆意裒剥，生者逃窜，死者暴尸，道路以目，庶僚钳口。
现代文：增加赋税，肆意聚财盘剥，活着的人四处逃生，死去的人暴尸路旁，道路上相见衹能侧目示意，僚属们衹能闭口不言。
English: Taxes were raised, money was amassed and plundered, the living fled in all directions, the dead were left on the side of the road, and when they saw each other on the road, they could only look at each other and keep silent.

古文：刑戮失衷，爵赏由心，老弱波流，士女涂炭。
现代文：量刑判决失当，赏爵赐位随意，老弱之人衹能随波逐流，文人妇女生活困苦。
English: Sentencing decisions are improper, knighthoods are given at will, the old and weak can drift with the tide, and literati women live in hardship.

古文：臧获之人，五宗及赏；搢绅之士，三族见诛。
现代文：奴婢之类的人，五代宗族都能得到奖赏；为官之人，却三族被杀。
English: People such as slaves and maidservants, five generations of clans can be rewarded; people who are officials, however, three clans were killed.

古文：谷粟腾踊，自相吞噬。
现代文：粮食价格飞涨，老百姓祇得自相吞噬。
English: Grain prices have skyrocketed, and the common people have been left to fend for themselves.

古文：惵惵黔首，路有衔索之哀；蠢蠢黎民，家陨桓山之泣。
现代文：心怀恐惧的老百姓，在路上有被大绳子捆绑的悲哀；愚笨的黎民百姓，家家流着死别生离的苦泪。
English: The fear-stricken people on the road have the sorrow of being tied up with a big rope; the stupid people of Lai have the bitter tears of death and separation.

古文：偃师南望，无复储胥、露寒，河阳北临，或有穹庐氈帐。
现代文：从偃师南望，不再有储胥、露寒，从河阳到北边去，有时会看到穹庐毡帐等胡人用品。
English: From the south of Jinshi, there is no longer any hoarding, cold dew, and from the north of Heyang, sometimes you can see Hu people's goods such as dome tents.

古文：南山之竹，未足言其愆；西山之兔，不足书其罪。
现代文：砍尽南山之竹做成竹简，也不够用来记载贼臣的罪过；拔尽西山兔子的毛做成笔，也不足以书写贼人的罪恶。
English: It is not enough to cut the bamboo of Nanshan into bamboo strips to record the sins of thieves; it is not enough to pluck the hairs of rabbits from the West Mountain to make pens to write the sins of thieves.

古文：外监陈莹之至，伏承先帝登遐，宫车晏驾。
现代文：外监陈莹之到了，告诉我先帝已经登遐，宫车晏驾。
English: Chen Yingzhi, the overseer, arrived and told me that the former emperor had ascended the throne and that the carriage was on its way.

古文：奉讳惊号，五内摧裂，州冤本毒，无地容身。
现代文：听到这噩耗我惊恐号哭，五脏六腑都被悲伤摧裂，烦闷冤屈身受毒害之苦，无处容身。
English: Hearing this bad news, I cried out in horror, my five organs and six limbs were destroyed by sadness, I was annoyed and angry, I succumbed to the suffering of poisoning, and I had nowhere to hide.

古文：景阻饥既甚，民且狼顾，遂侵轶我彭蠡，凭凌我郢邑，穷据我江夏，掩袭我巴丘。
现代文：侯景受阻缺粮已经很厉害，老百姓将要走投无路，侯景于是侵扰袭击我彭蠡，欺凌我郢邑，窃据我江夏，偷袭我巴丘。
English: Hou Jing was hindered by the shortage of grain, which was already severe, and the common people were about to be cornered. Therefore, Hou Jing harassed and attacked my Pengye, bullied my Ye, stole my Jiangxia, and secretly attacked my Bachu.

古文：我是以义勇争先，忠贞尽力。
现代文：所以我们义勇争先，忠贞尽力。
English: That's why we strive to be the first, and do our best to be loyal.

古文：斩馘凶渠，不可称算，沙同赤岸，水若绛河。
现代文：斩杀凶寇，无法计算，沙岸被血染红，河水变成深红色。
English: It is impossible to count the number of times that the murderous mugger has been killed. The beach is stained red with blood, and the river has turned crimson.

古文：任约泥首于安南，化仁面缚于汉口，子仙乞活于鄢郢，希荣败绩于柴桑。
现代文：任约的头在安南腐朽为泥，化仁在汉口被捆绑，子仙在鄢、郢乞求活命，希荣在柴桑失败。
English: Renyou's head rotted to mud in Annan, Huaren was tied up in Hankou, Zixian begged for his life in Handan and Handan, and Xirong failed in Chaisang.

古文：侯景奔窜，十鼠争穴，郭默清夷，晋熙附义，计穷力屈，反杀后主。
现代文：侯景四处逃窜，如同十只老鼠争一个洞穴，郭默使夷狄太平，晋熙依附正义，侯景计穷力竭，反而杀死后主。
English: Hou Jing fled everywhere, like ten mice fighting for a cave, Guo Miao made peace, Jin Xi adhered to justice, Hou Jing exhausted his efforts, but killed his successor.

古文：毕、原、禜、郇、并离祸患，凡、蒋、邢、茅，皆伏鈇锧。
现代文：毕、原、酆、郇，一起遭遇祸患，凡、蒋、邢、茅，都遭杀戮。
English: Bi, Yuan, Yao, Yao, all suffered the calamity together, and Van, Chiang, Yao, Mao, were all killed.

古文：是可忍也，孰不可容！
现代文：这些可以忍受，还有什么不可以容忍!
English: What is tolerable, what is intolerable!

古文：幕府据有上流，实惟分陕，投袂荷戈、志在毕命。
现代文：幕府据有上流地域，实际祇分陕境，投袂而起荷戈而战、志在完成命令。
English: According to the shogunate, there were upstream regions, in fact, it was divided into Shaanxi territory, and it was determined to fulfill the order.

古文：昔周依晋、郑，汉有虚、牟。
现代文：从前周依靠晋、郑，漠外有虚、牟。
English: From the previous week, I relied on Jin and Zheng, and there was a void and a void outside.

古文：彼惟末属，犹能如此；况联华日月，天下不贱，为臣为子，兼国兼家者哉！
现代文：它们并不是重要的属国，尚且能够如此；何况与日月光华相联，天下人并不以为低贱，作为大臣作为人子，兼顾国和家的人呢!
English: They are not important vassal states, and yet they can be so; not to mention that they are connected with the sun and moon, and the world does not think they are lowly, as a minister, as a son of man, who cares about the country and home!

古文：咸以义旗既建，宜须总一，共推幕府，实用主盟。
现代文：都认为义旗既已建立，各种力量都应统一，共同推举幕府，实际是用来主持联盟。
English: They all believed that since the banner of righteousness had already been established, all forces should be unified and jointly elect the shogunate. In fact, it was used to preside over the alliance.

古文：粤以不佞，谬董连率，远惟国艰，不遑宁处。
现代文：就因为推举我遣个没有才智之人，主持统率诸军，远救国家艰难，无暇宁静地居处。
English: Just because I was elected, I sent a man without talent to preside over and lead the army, save the country from hardship, and have no time to live peacefully.

古文：中权后劲，龚行天罚，提戈蒙险，陨越以之。
现代文：中间权且行事后来劲头十足，恭敬地替天行罚，提戈进击多次蒙险，以死赴难。
English: After acting as the middle power, he was full of vigor and respectfully punished for the sky. Tigo attacked many times and risked his life.

古文：天马千群，长戟百万，驱贲获之士，资智勇之力，大楚逾荆山，浅原度彭蠡，舳舻泛水，以掎其南，辎軿委输，以冲其北。
现代文：我有千群天马，百万支长戟，驱使勇敢之士，藉助智勇之力，大楚越过荆山，由浅原渡过彭蠡，大船浮水，以牵制贼寇的南边；车子运送，以冲击贼寇的北边。
English: I have thousands of heavenly horses, millions of long horses, driving the brave men, with the help of wisdom and courage, crossing the Jing Mountain, crossing the Penghu from the Asahara, large boats floating water to hold the south side of the bandit; transporting the car to impact the north side of the bandit.

古文：华夷百濮，赢粮影从。
现代文：华人夷人和百濮人，都担着粮食像影子一样跟从我们。
English: The Chinese, the barbarians, and the centipedes all followed us like shadows, carrying grain.

古文：雷震风骇，直指建业。
现代文：我们像雷霆震怒狂风骇人，直指建业。
English: We are like a thunderbolt, the furious wind is terrifying, pointing directly at Jianye.

古文：按剑而叱，江水为之倒流；抽戈而挥，皎日为之退舍。
现代文：我们按剑呼喝，长江水因此倒流；抽出戈来一挥，洁白明亮的太阳因此退避三舍。
English: We shouted with our swords, and the Yangtze River flowed backwards; we shouted with our guns, and the bright white sun retreated.

古文：方驾长驱，百道俱入，夷山殄谷，充原蔽野。
现代文：并驾长驱，百路并进，平山填谷，充满平原遮蔽郊野。
English: And drive a long drive, hundreds of roads, flat mountains fill the valley, full of plains sheltering the countryside.

古文：挟辀曳牛之侣，拔距磔石之夫，骑则逐日追风，弓则吟猿落雁。
现代文：能夹住辕拉倒牛的伙伴，能拔出鶸距碎裂石头的大丈夫，骑马能追逐太阳和风，弯弓能使猿猴哀吟大雁坠落。
English: A partner who can hold a plow and pull down a cow, a man who can pull out a plow from a cracked stone, a horse that can chase the sun and wind, and a bow that can make a monkey mourn the fall of a goose.

古文：捧昆仑而压卵，倾渤海而灌荧。
现代文：好似捧起昆仑来压住蛋，倾倒渤海来灌灭微弱的火光。
English: It's like holding up the Kunlun River to hold down the egg, and dumping the Bohai Sea to extinguish the faint glow of the fire.

古文：如驷马之载鸿毛，若奔牛之触鲁缟。
现代文：如同四匹马运载一根鸿毛，如同奔跑的牛触上鲁国的绢。
English: As four horses bear a great load, as a rushing ox touches the plough of the field.

古文：以此众战，谁能御之！
现代文：用这样的军队作战，谁能抵挡他们!
English: With such an army to fight, who can stand against them!

古文：脱复蜂虿有毒，兽穷则斗。
现代文：倘使报复的蜂和蝎子会施放毒液，是因为野兽走投无路就会搏斗。
English: If vengeful bees and scorpions release venom, it is because the beasts are cornered and will fight.

古文：谓山盖高，则四郊多垒；谓地盖远，则三千弗违。
现代文：说山大概很高，但是四郊有很多壁垒；说地大概很辽远，但是三干兵众不违命。
English: He said that the mountain was probably very high, but there were many barriers in the four suburbs; he said that the land was probably very far away, but the three soldiers did not disobey orders.

古文：如彼怒蛙，譬如鼷鼠，岂费万钧，无劳百溢。
现代文：如同那发怒的青蛙，又像那小老鼠，难道要花费万钩之力去消灭它们，无需付出百镒的劳力。
English: Like the angry frog, like the little mouse, is it possible to exterminate them with the strength of a thousand hooks, without the expenditure of a hundred thousand laborers?

古文：加以日临黄道，兵起绛宫，三门既启，五将咸发，举整整之旗，扫亭亭之气，故以临机密运，非贼所解，奉义而诛，何罪不服？
现代文：加上日期逢临黄道吉日，军队从绛宫兴起，三门已经打开，五将已经出发，举起整齐的旗子，横扫耸立的云气，所以兵临机要秘密运动，不是贼人所能知道；遵奉正义诛杀贼寇，什么样的罪过能不服诛。
English: In addition, the date coincides with the auspicious day of the zodiac, the army rises from the Summer Palace, the three doors have been opened, the five generals have set out, raised a neat flag, swept the towering clouds, so the soldiers should move secretly, not the thieves can know; obey justice and kill thieves, what kind of sin can not obey justice.

古文：今遣使持节、大都督、征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史、尚书令、长宁县开国侯王僧辩率众十万，直扫金陵。
现代文：现在派使持节、大都督、征束将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史、尚书令、长宁县开国侯王僧辩率领十万兵众，直扫金陵。
English: Now, he has dispatched Jichisai, the grand governor, the general of conscription, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, the governor of Jiangzhou, Shang Shuling, and the prince of Kaifu, Wang Sangye of Changning County, to lead 100,000 soldiers to sweep the Jinling.

古文：鸣鼓聒天，摐金振地。
现代文：敲响鼓声音喧扰上天，击响锣声音震动大地。
English: The sound of the beating of the drum stirs up the heavens, and the sound of the clanging of the cymbals shakes the earth.

古文：硃旗夕建，如赤城之霞起；戈船夜动，若沧海之奔流。
现代文：红色的旗子傍晚竖起，如同赤城的晚霞升起；兵戈舰船乘夜行动。就像沧海奔流。
English: The red flag is hoisted in the evening, just as the evening glow rises in Akagi; warships operate at night. It's like the tides of the sea.

古文：计其同恶，不盈一旅。
现代文：计算侯景的同伙，不足一旅。
English: Count Hou Jing's companions, less than one trip.

古文：君子在野，小人比周。
现代文：君子都在民间，小人结党营私。
English: Nobles are in the people, villains are in the party.

古文：何校灭耳，匪朝伊夕。
现代文：扛着校这种刑具盖没了耳朵，不是发生在早晨就是发生在晚上。
English: Carrying a cane, this kind of torture device covers one's ears, either in the morning or in the evening.

古文：舂长狄之喉，系郅支之颈。
现代文：舂长狄的喉咙，拴住郅支的脖子。
English: He grabbed Chang Di's throat and grabbed Zou Zhi's neck.

古文：今司寇明罚，质钅夫所诛，止侯景而已。
现代文：现在司寇严厉惩罚，杀人的刑具所诛杀的，祇是侯景罢了。
English: Now, the scoutmaster severely punishes, and it is only Hou Jing who is killed by the murderous torture device.

古文：黎元何辜，一无所问。
现代文：老百姓有什么罪过，一律不问罪。
English: The common people are not to be blamed for any wrongdoing.

古文：诸君或世树忠贞，身荷宠爵，羽仪鼎族，书勋王府，俯眉猾竖，无由自效，岂不下惭泉壤，上愧皇天！
现代文：各位君子有的世代表现忠贞，自己又深受恩宠封有爵位，地位与显赫家族相匹配，功勋在王府裹都有记载，却对狡猾的小人俯首顺从，无法自己去为国效力，难道不下有愧于泉水与土壤，上愧于皇天!
English: Gentlemen, some of the world's representatives are loyal, and they themselves are deeply favored with knighthoods, their status matches that of prominent families, and their achievements are recorded in the royal palace. However, they bow down to cunning villains and are unable to serve the country on their own. Are they not worthy of spring water and soil, and above all, worthy of the emperor!

古文：失忠与义，难以自立。
现代文：失去忠和义，就难以自立。
English: If you lose loyalty and righteousness, it's hard to stand up for yourself.

古文：想诚南风，乃眷西顾，因变立功，转祸为福。
现代文：想使南风纯正，就回头向西看，顺应变化建立功勋，转变灾祸为幸福。
English: If you want to make the south wind pure, look back to the west, adapt to changes, build merits, and turn disasters into happiness.

古文：有能缚侯景及送首者，封万户开国公，绢布五万匹。
现代文：如果有能捆绑侯景以及送上他的首级的人，就封他为万户开国公，赐绢布五万匹。
English: If there is someone who can tie up Hou Jing and present him with his head, he will be named the founder of the country and given fifty thousand camels.

古文：有能率动义众，以应官军，保全城邑，不为贼用，上赏方伯，下赏剖符，并裂山河，以纡青紫。
现代文：如果有能够率领策动义军，来响应官军，保全城邑，不被贼寇所利用，就上赏他封地作官，下赏他剖符予以封功，一起分治山河，并授青紫勋带。
English: If someone is able to lead the rebel army, respond to the official army, protect the city, and not be taken advantage of by thieves and robbers, he will be awarded the title of fief official, the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award of the award.

古文：昔由余入秦，礼同卿佐；日磾降汉，且珥金貂。
现代文：从前由余进入秦国，礼遇与卿佐等同；日弹投降汉朝，帽上可以插戴金貂尾。
English: In the past, if you entered Qin from Yu, you were treated with the same courtesy as a noble aide; if you surrendered to the Han Dynasty, you could wear a gold crest on your cap.

古文：必有其才，何恤无位。
现代文：如果确实有那样的才能，又何必担忧没有官位。
English: If you really have that kind of talent, why worry about not having a position.

古文：若执迷不反，拒逆王师，大军一临，刑兹罔赦。
现代文：如果执迷不悟，违抗官军，那么大军一到，杀死这些人绝不赦免。
English: If they persist and disobey the official army, they will not be pardoned for killing these people once the army arrives.

古文：孟诸焚燎，芝艾俱尽；宣房河决，玉石同沉。
现代文：孟诸放火焚烧草木，结果灵芝与艾草一起烧尽；宣房决开河堤，结果玉和石头一同沉没。
English: Meng Zhu set fire to the grass and trees, and the result was that the Ganoderma lucidum and wormwood were burned up together; Xuanwu House broke through the riverbank, and the result was that the jade and stone sank together.

古文：信赏之科，有如皎日；黜陟之制，事均白水。
现代文：赏罚的条文一定真实可信，有如洁白明亮的太阳；贬退和提升的规定，事情与白水一样不可改变。
English: The provisions of rewards and punishments must be true and credible, like the white and bright sun; the provisions of demotion and promotion, things are as immutable as white water.

古文：檄布远近，咸使知闻。
现代文：檄文颁布到远近各地，使人们都知晓。
English: The edict was promulgated far and wide, so that people knew about it.

古文：三月，王僧辩等平侯景，传其首于江陵。
现代文：三月，王僧辩等平定侯景，把侯景的头传送到江陵。
English: In March, Wang Sangyan and others subdued Houjing and sent his head to Jiangling.

古文：戊子，以贼平告明堂、太社。
现代文：戊子，把贼乱平定的消息祭告于明堂、太社。
English: Bosi reported the news of the suppression of the banditry to Myeongdong and Taisha.

古文：己丑，王僧辩等又奉表曰：众军以今月戊子总集建康。
现代文：己丑，王僧辩等又进表说：各路军马在本月戊子会集建康。
English: Ji Jiu, Wang Sangyan and others also went to the table and said: All armies and horses will gather and build health this month.

古文：贼景鸟伏兽穷，频击频挫，奸竭诈尽，深沟自固。
现代文：贼寇侯景如鸟儿藏匿野兽般走投无路，频频出击频频受挫，奸诈竭尽，陷于深沟不能自拔。
English: Like a bird hiding a wild beast, the thief and robber Houjing was cornered. He was frequently defeated, his treachery exhausted, and he could not extricate himself from the deep ditch.

古文：臣等分勒武旅，百道同趣，突骑短兵，犀函铁楯，结队千群，持戟百万，止纣七步，围项三重，轰然大溃，群凶四灭。
现代文：臣等分率军队，百路同进，勇往直前的骑兵带着短兵器，犀牛皮做的锁甲铁打的盾牌，集结成千群军队，持百万戈戟，阻止纣于七步之内，包围项羽于三层之中，轰然一声敌兵全线崩溃，群凶四处都被消灭。
English: The courtiers led the army in fractions, marching together on a hundred roads, the gallant cavalrymen with short weapons, the rhinoceros leather armor-piercing shields, gathered in thousands of troops, holding a million gourds, stopping the hail within seven steps, encircling the plumes in three layers, and the enemy soldiers collapsed all along the line with a roar, and the gangs were eliminated everywhere.

古文：京师少长，俱称万岁。
现代文：京城裹的老少人们，都称颂陛下万岁。
English: People of all ages in the capital city are praising His Majesty.

古文：长安酒食，于此价高。
现代文：长安的酒食，因此价格抬高。
English: Chang'an's wine and food, so the price is high.

古文：九县云开，六合清朗，矧伊黔首，谁不载跃！
现代文：九县乌云散开，六合天清气朗，况且这裹的老百姓，谁不高兴地跳跃!
English: The dark clouds of Jiuxian County have dispersed, the sky of Liuhe County is clear and cheerful, and what's more, the people here are all jumping with joy!

古文：伏惟陛下咀痛茹哀，婴愤忍酷。
现代文：臣等诚恳地想陛下咀嚼痛苦含有悲哀，被悲愤缠绕强忍暴虐。
English: The courtiers sincerely wished that His Majesty would chew on the bitterness, contain the sorrow, be entangled in the grief, and endure the tyranny.

古文：自紫庭绛阙，胡尘四起，需垣好畤，冀马云屯，泣血治兵，尝胆誓众。
现代文：从紫庭绛阙，胡人兵燹四起，宫墙建在好峙，冀马如云般屯集，陛下泪尽流血精心治兵，卧薪尝胆率师发誓。
English: From Zi Ting Zi, Hu Ren soldiers to four, the palace wall was built in a good standoff, the horses gathered like a cloud, His Majesty shed tears of blood and carefully led the soldiers, and swore to lie down and taste the gall.

古文：而吴、楚一家，方与七国俱反；管、蔡流言，又以三监作乱。
现代文：然而县、楚联为一家，正和七国一起谋反；筐、基散布流言，又靠三监作乱。
English: However, the county and Chu Lian are one family, and they are plotting a rebellion together with the seven countries; the basket and the base are spreading rumors, and they are relying on the three supervisors to make trouble.

古文：西凉义众，阻强秦而不通；并州遗民，跨飞狐而见泯。
现代文：西凉的义军，受阻于强秦却不能相通；并州的遣民，跨越盈皿然而被减。
English: The rebels in the West Liang, hindered by the strong Qin, could not communicate with them; and the exiles in the state, crossing the Yinsai, were reduced.

古文：豺狼当路，非止一人；鲸鲵不枭，倏焉五载。
现代文：豺狼当道，不止一个人；罪魁祸首未被枭首示众，很快已过了五年。
English: There is more than one wolf at the door; the culprit has not been unmasked, and soon five years have passed.

古文：英武克振，怨耻并雪，永寻霜露，如何可言！
现代文：英武之人能够振奋精神，怨恨与耻辱一起得到洗刷，永远寻找霜露，这有什么可说!
English: What can be said of a warrior who can raise his spirits, whose resentment and shame are washed away together, and who is always on the lookout for dew?

古文：臣等辄依故实，奉修社庙，使者持节，分告茔陵。
现代文：我们就依据从前的事实，奉修社庙，使者持节，分别报告先帝陵墓。
English: On the basis of the facts of the past, we report separately on the mausoleum of the former emperor, honoring the shrine and temple, and the messenger holding the festival.

古文：嗣后升遐，龙輴未殡，承华掩曜，梓宫莫测，并即随由备办，礼具凶荒。
现代文：继位君主刚刚升遐，载灵柩的龙车还未出殡，承华掩去光芒，皇帝的灵柩何时出殡不可推测，臣等就一起随机备办，虽然年成不好仍要礼节具备。
English: The successor to the throne has just ascended the throne, the dragon cart carrying the coffin has not yet left the funeral, Chenghua hides the light, it is impossible to predict when the emperor's coffin will leave the funeral, the ministers and others will prepare together at random, although the year is not good, they still need to have etiquette.

古文：四海同哀，六军袒哭，圣情孝友，理当感恸。
现代文：四海共同悲哀，六军将士袒身痛哭，圣上性情孝顺友爱，臣等理当感动哀动。
English: The four seas mourn together, the soldiers of the Six Armies weep bitterly, the divine disposition is filial piety and fraternal love, and the vassals and others should be moved and saddened.

古文：日者，百司岳牧，祈仰宸鉴。
现代文：从前，众位官员，都祈求仰盼陛下明确察鉴。
English: In the past, all officials prayed and looked forward to His Majesty's clear examination.

古文：以锡珪之功，既归有道，当璧之礼，允属圣明；而优诏谦冲，窅然凝邈。
现代文：因为赏赐珪玉的功业，已经归于有道；应当受璧的礼遇，的确属于圣明，而优良的教诲和谦虚的美德，深远稳定。
English: Because the work of awarding the gem has been attributed to the Tao; the courtesy that should be received by the gem is indeed sacred, and the fine teachings and the virtue of modesty are far-reaching and stable.

古文：飞龙可跻，而《乾》爻在四；帝阍云叫，而阊阖未开。
现代文：飞龙可升，然而《干》爻在四；皇帝的守门人在喊叫，然而板阖却未打开。
English: The dragon can fly, but the "dry" curtain is on fire; the emperor's gatekeeper is shouting, but the lintel has not been opened.

古文：讴歌再驰，是用翘首。
现代文：对陛下的诬歌一再传扬，人民因此翘首以盼。
English: False songs about His Majesty have been propagated again and again, and the people are looking forward to it.

古文：所以越人固执，熏丹穴以求君；周民乐推，逾岐山而事主。
现代文：所以有越地的人很固执，熏丹穴来求君；周地的人乐于推贤，越过岐山来事奉主上。
English: Therefore, some people in Yueji are very obstinate and come begging to you; people in Zhouji are willing to be virtuous and cross the mountains to serve the Lord.

古文：汉王不即位，无以贵功臣；光武不止戈，岂谓绍宗庙。
现代文：汉王不即位，就无法使功臣尊贵；光武止于萧王，难道能说是接续宗庙吗。
English: If Han Wang did not ascend the throne, he would not be able to make his meritorious vassals noble; if Guangwu stopped at Xiao Wang, can it be said to be a continuation of the ancestral temple?

古文：黄帝游于襄城，尚访治民之道；放勋入于姑射，犹使樽俎有归。
现代文：黄帝在襄城巡游时，还询问治民的方法；放勋进入姑射，还使樽俎各有所归。
English: When the Yellow Emperor was on a tour of Xiangcheng, he also inquired about the methods of governing the people; he also made the cask and the barrel each have their own place.

古文：伊此傥来，岂圣人所欲，帝王所应，不获已而然。
现代文：这些倘若来到，哪裹是圣人所想要的，衹是和帝王之运相应和，不能阻止罢了。
English: If these things come to pass, no matter what the sage wants, they are in accordance with the emperor's fortune and cannot be stopped.

古文：伏读玺书，寻讽制旨，顾怀物外，未奉慈衷。
现代文：臣诚恳地板读玺书，寻找和背诵圣制的深旨，不过除了能领会表面的意思外，臣未能接受到陛下慈爱的深衷。
English: The vassal earnestly read the sutra on the floor, searching for and reciting the deep meaning of the sacred system, but in addition to being able to understand the surface meaning, the vassal could not accept the deep meaning of His Majesty's love.

古文：陛下日角龙颜之姿，表于徇齐之日，彤云素气之瑞，基于应物之初。
现代文：陛下有日角龙颜之姿，这表现于您聪敏明慧的时候；陛下有彤云素气之瑞，这奠基于陛下应和万物之初。
English: Your Majesty has the appearance of the sun angle dragon, which is manifested when you are intelligent and clever; Your Majesty has the happiness of the clouds, which is based on Your Majesty should be the beginning of all things.

古文：博览则大哉无所与名，深言则晔乎昭章之观。
现代文：陛下博览心胸阔大无法比拟，深奥的言论比显著的宫观还要光亮。
English: His majesty's erudition and broad-mindedness are beyond comparison, and his profound remarks are even more brilliant than the obvious palace view.

古文：忠为令德，孝实动天。
现代文：忠是陛下的美德，孝实在能感动上天。
English: Loyalty is His Majesty's virtue, and filial piety can truly move heaven.

古文：加以英威茂略，雄图武算，指麾则丹浦不战，顾眄则阪泉自荡。
现代文：加上陛下英明威武多谋略，有雄武的计划，指挥作战则丹浦不战自胜，顾盼之间则阪泉自除。
English: In addition to His Majesty's wise and powerful military strategy, there is a heroic plan, directing the battle, Tanpo will win without a fight, and Hanquan will win without a fight.

古文：地维绝而重纽，天柱倾而更植。
现代文：地维断绝重新系结，天柱倾斜再竖立。
English: The ground support was disconnected and re-tied, and the sky pillar was tilted and re-erected.

古文：凿河津于孟门，百川复启；补穹仪以五石，万物再生。
现代文：在孟门凿通河津，百重又畅流；用五彩石弥补苍穹，万物得以再生。
English: In Mengmen, the river is chiseled and flows smoothly; the sky is made up of multicolored stones, and all things can be regenerated.

古文：纵陛下拂袗衣而游广成，登泬山而去东土，群臣安得仰诉，兆庶何所归仁。
现代文：如果让陛下轻拂糁衣巡游广成，登临蠄山而离开柬土，那么群臣怎么能敬仰您和向您倾诉，众多的百姓又向哪裹归附仁义。
English: If your majesty were to leave Cambodia with a flick of the wrist and go on a tour of Guangcheng, climbing Lushan Mountain, how could the courtiers admire you and confide in you, and where would the masses of people turn to for benevolence and righteousness?

古文：况郊祀配天，罍篚礼旷，斋宫清庙，匏竹不陈，仰望銮舆，匪朝伊夕，瞻言法驾，载渴且饥。岂可久稽众议，有旷则！
现代文：何况郊祀是为了配天，却出现 晕 和 篚 这些礼器空缺，斋宫清庙，匏和竹这些乐器却不陈设，人们仰望銮舆，不是早晨就是晚上，盼望谈论法驾，如饥似渴，怎么能长期拖延众人议论的事，荒废了法则!
English: What's more, suburban worship is meant to match the heavens, but these ceremonial instruments, the halo and gong, appear to be vacant, while the musical instruments, the palanquin and bamboo, are not displayed. People look up to the gong, either in the morning or in the evening, hoping to talk about the Dharma. They are so hungry and thirsty, how can they delay the things that everyone is talking about for a long time? The Dharma has been abandoned!

古文：旧郊既复，函、雒已平。
现代文：旧邦已经收复，函、雒已经平定。
English: The old state has been recovered, and Hanzhong and Xinjiang have been pacified.

古文：高奴、栎阳，宫馆虽毁；浊河清渭，佳气犹存。
现代文：高奴、梁阳，宫馆虽然被毁；但是浑浊的河水清澈的渭水，佳气仍然存在。
English: Gao Nong, Liang Yang, and the imperial palace were destroyed, but the turbid river water and the clear brackish water, and the auspicious atmosphere still exist.

古文：皋门有伉，甘泉四敞，土圭测景，仙人承露。
现代文：外城的皋门是多么高大，甘泉宫四下敞开，土圭可以测量曰影，仙人顶盘可以承露。
English: How tall the gate of the outer city is, the Ganquan Palace is wide open, the tower can measure the shadow, and the top plate of the hermit can receive the dew.

古文：斯盖九州之赤县，六合之枢机。
现代文：这裹大概就是九州的赤县，六合的枢纽机要。
English: This is probably Kyushu's Akaseki, the hub of Rokuo.

古文：博士捧图书而稍还，太常定礼仪而已列。
现代文：博士捧着图书逐渐归来，太常拟定礼仪已经列出。
English: The doctor gradually returned, holding a book, and the etiquette he had drawn up was listed.

古文：岂得不扬清驾而赴名都，具玉銮而游正寝！
现代文：陛下岂能不发清驾奔赴名都，具办玉銮车辇去游宫殿的正房!
English: How could His Majesty not drive to the famous capital in a limousine and tour the palace's main building?

古文：昔东周既迁，镐京遂其不复；长安一乱，郏、洛永以为居。
现代文：往昔束周已经迁都雒邑，镐京于是不再为都城；长安一乱，郏、洛就永远成为帝王的居所。
English: In the past, Sokcho had moved the capital to Suyeup, so Suyeong was no longer the capital; when Chang'an was in turmoil, Suyeop and Luo became the permanent residences of emperors.

古文：夏后以万国朝诸侯，文王以六州匡天下。
现代文：夏后凭万国而使诸侯朝拜，文王靠六州匡正天下。
English: After the summer, all nations made the princes worship, and King Wen relied on the six states to rule the world.

古文：迹基百里，剑杖三尺。
现代文：足迹衹出现在百里之内，剑杖衹有三尺。
English: Footprints appear within a hundred miles, and swords and staves within three feet.

古文：以残楚之地，抗拒九戎；一旅之师，剪灭三叛。
现代文：凭藉残楚之地，抗拒九戎；一支劲旅，消灭三支叛军。
English: With the help of the remnants of the land, to resist the nine forces; a vigorous journey, to eliminate the three rebel forces.

古文：坦然大定，御辇东归。
现代文：道路子坦局势非常安定，御辇得以东归。
English: The situation on the road was very stable, and Miho was able to return to the east.

古文：解五牛于冀州，秣六马于谯郡。缅求前古，其可得欤？
现代文：解散五牛于冀丛，喂六马于姜逊远求前世古人，这样的事能够找到吗?
English: Is it possible to find such a thing as dissolving five oxen in the Jizhong Mountains and feeding six horses in the Jiangxun Mountains?

古文：对扬天命，何所让德！
现代文：对应弘扬天命的事，何必在德行上有所谦让!
English: When it comes to carrying forward the mission of heaven, why should we be modest in our virtue?

古文：有理存焉，敢重所奏。
现代文：臣有理存于心中，所以敢再次重复我曾进奏过的话。
English: I have reason in my heart, so I dare to repeat what I have already said.

古文：相国答曰： 省表，复具一二。
现代文：相国代陛下回答说： 览察过奏表。具体回覆一二。
English: His Majesty, the representative of the other country, replied: "I have reviewed the transcript. I would like to respond to one or two specific points.

古文：群公卿士，亿兆夷人，咸以皇天眷命，归运所属，用集宝位于予一人。
现代文：诸位公卿士人，亿万夷人，都用皇天眷顾命令我，用归帝位的命运属于我为理由，因此而认为应聚集实位给我一个人。
English: All of you noblemen and gentlemen, hundreds of millions of barbarians, have ordered me with the patronage of the emperor, and with the reason that the fate of returning to the throne belongs to me, so they think that they should gather to give me one person.

古文：文叔金吾之官，事均往愿；孟德征西之位，且符前说。
现代文：文叔的金吾官职，事情与往日的希望等同；孟德有征西之位。也符合前人的说法。
English: Uncle Wen's Jingu official post, things are the same as the hope of the past; Meng De has the position of conquering the West. It is also in line with the saying of the predecessors.

古文：今淮海长鲸，虽云授首；襄阳短狐，未全革面。
现代文：现在淮海长鲸一样的侯景，虽然说已经交出了他的脑袋；襄阳还有短狐一样的贼人，尚未完全洗心革面。
English: Now, there is Houjing, who is like a fin whale in the Huaihai Sea, although it is said that he has already handed over his head; there is also a thief like a short fox in Xiangyang, who has not yet completely washed his heart and face.

古文：太平玉烛，尔乃议之。 
现代文：太平盛世玉烛高照之时，你们再议论我即位的事。 
English: When the golden candle shines high in the Taiping era, you will talk about my accession again.

古文：辛卯，宣猛将军硃买臣密害豫章嗣王栋，及其二弟桥、樛，世祖志也。
现代文：辛卯，宣猛将军朱买臣秘密杀害豫章嗣王盖檀，以及萧捷的两个弟弟萧桥、萧穋，这是世祖的愿望。
English: Xinwu, Xuanzang general Zhu Baichen secretly killed Yu Zhang's heir Wang Gaitan, as well as Xiao Jie's two brothers Xiao Qiao and Xiao Yao, which was the ancestor's wish.

古文：四月乙巳，益州刺史、新除假黄钺、太尉武陵王纪窃位于蜀，改号天正元年。
现代文：四月乙巳，益州刺史、新除假黄钹、太尉武瞳王芦起窃居帝位于蜀，改年号为天正元年。
English: At the stroke of midnight in April, the year of the first year of the Tensho era was changed to the year of the first year of the Tensho era.

古文：世祖遣兼司空萧泰、祠部尚书乐子云拜谒茔陵，修复社庙。
现代文：派兼司空盖台、祠部尚书銮王云拜谒先帝陵寝，修复社庙。
English: He was also assigned to be the secretary of the sky-covering platform, and the ancestral hall department, Shang Shuxuan Wang Yun worshiped and slept in the former emperor's tomb, and restored the shrine and temple.

古文：丁巳，世祖令曰： 军容不入国，国容不入军。
现代文：丁巳，世祖下令说： 军容不入国，国容不入军。
English: However, the ancestor ordered, "The military is not allowed to enter the country, and the country is not allowed to enter the military."

古文：虽子产献捷，戎服从事，亚夫弗拜，义止将兵。今凶丑歼夷，逆徒殄溃，九有既截，四海乂安。
现代文：即使是子产报捷，也要身着戎服办事，垩去不拜濩帝，道理仅因为要带兵现在凶恶的贼寇已被歼灭平定，叛逆的人已经灭亡崩溃，九州已经统一，四海安定。
English: Even if one's progeny is to report a victory, they must also wear military uniforms to work, and must not go to pay homage to the emperor. The reason is only because they have to lead soldiers. Now the vicious bandits have been annihilated and pacified, the rebellious people have been destroyed and collapsed, Kyushu has been unified, and the four seas are stable.

古文：汉官威仪，方陈盛礼，卫多君子，寄是式瞻。
现代文：汉宫威严的仪节，正设盛大的礼仪，卫有很多君子，寄托于此让人瞻仰。
English: Han Palace's majestic ceremonies, grand etiquette is being set up, and there are many gentlemen on duty, which makes people admire it.

古文：便可解严，以时宣勒。 
现代文：现在便可以解除紧急状态，按时机不同另行宣布诏谕统率百姓。 
English: Now, the state of emergency can be lifted, and an edict can be issued to lead the people according to the different timing.

古文：是月，以东阳太守张彪为安东将军。
现代文：这个月，世祖任命束阳太守张彪为安东将军。
English: This month, Shizu appointed Zhang Biao, the governor of Sokyang, as General Anton.

古文：五月庚午，司空南平王恪及宗室王侯、大都督王僧辩等，复拜表上尊号，世祖犹固让不受。
现代文：五月庚午，司空南平王萧恪以及宗室王侯、大都督王僧辩等人，又上表请世祖上尊号，世祖仍然坚持辞让不接受。
English: In the late afternoon of May, Sikyong Nanping Wang Xiaoqiu, as well as the Prince and Grand Duke Wang Sangye and others, again requested the title of Supreme Patriarch from the Emperor, but the Emperor still refused to accept the request.

古文：庚辰，以征南将军、湘州刺史、司空南平嗣王恪为镇东将军、扬州刺史，余如故。
现代文：庚辰，世祖任命征南将军、湘州刺史、司空南平嗣王萧恪为镇东将军、扬州刺史，其余如旧。
English: Geng Chen, the ancestor, appointed the General of the Southern Expedition, the Shishi of Hunan Province, the General of the Southern Expedition, the General of the Eastern Expedition, Wang Xiao, the Shishi of Yangzhou Province, and the rest as before.

古文：甲申，以尚书令、征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史王僧辩为司徒、镇卫将军。
现代文：甲申，又任命尚书令、征束将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史王僧辩为司徒、镇卫将军。
English: Jiaxin also appointed Shang Shuling, Zhaozhuang Zheng, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Jiangzhou Sisi Wang Sangye as Sitoru, and Zhenwei Zheng.

古文：乙酉，斩贼左仆射王伟、尚书吕季略、少卿周石珍、舍人严亶于江陵市。
现代文：乙酉，在江陵的街市斩杀了叛贼的左仆射王伟、尚书吕季略、少卿周石珍、舍人严宜。
English: Acetylene, in the streets of Gangneung, killed the traitor's left-hand man, Shaowang Wei, Shangshu Lujiliu, Shaoqing Zhou Shizhen, and Sheren Yan Yi.

古文：是日，世祖令曰： 君子赦过，著在周经；圣人解网，闻之汤令。
现代文：这天，世祖下令说： 君子赦免别人的遇错，这写在周经上；圣人解纲，这在汤令上听说遇。
English: On this day, the ancestor ordered: "A gentleman forgives the mistakes of others, which is written in the Zhou Dynasty; a saint solves problems, which is heard about in the Tang Dynasty."

古文：自猃狁孔炽，长蛇荐食，赤县阽危，黔黎涂炭，终宵不寐，志在雪耻。
现代文：自从殓狁的祸乱更加炽烈，长蛇频频食人，赤县危险。老百姓困苦不堪，我整夜不能入睡，心志常在雪耻上。
English: Since the calamity of the hailstorm has become more intense, the long snake has frequently eaten people, and Aka County is in danger. The people are in great distress, I can't sleep all night, and my mind is often on the snow.

古文：元恶稽诛，本属侯景；王伟是其心膂，周石珍负背恩义，今并烹诸鼎镬，肆之市朝。
现代文：首恶伏诛，本来就应该杀侯量；王售是谴的心腹，厘互壁忘恩负义，现在把他们一起在鼎镘裹烹死，在市朝陈尸示众。
English: The head of the evil, Fuxi, was supposed to kill Hou Jiao; Wang Xuan was the heart of the punishment, and they were ungrateful to each other. Now they are all wrapped up in the coffin, and the corpse is displayed in the city.

古文：但比屯邅寇扰，为岁已积，衣冠旧贵，被逼偷生，猛士勋豪，和光苟免，凡诸恶侣，谅非一族。
现代文：但是国家接连地遭遇困境遭受贼寇侵扰，积年已久，达官显族旧时贵人，被逼得苟且偷生，猛士元勋和豪杰，随波逐流苟且免祸，凡此恶人同伙，看来并非同族人。
English: However, the country has been facing difficulties one after another and has been invaded by thieves and robbers for a long time. The dignitaries of the old days, who were forced to live a hard life, have been forced to live a hard life. The brave soldiers and heroes, who follow the tide and are immune to misfortune, are not the same as the villains.

古文：今特阐以王泽，削以刑书，自太清六年五月二十日昧爽以前，咸使惟新。 
现代文：今天特别阐明君王的恩泽，削减刑狱书简，从太清六年五月二十日黎明以后，各地都要使政令从新。 
English: Today, it is specially clarified that since the dawn of May 20, the sixth year of the Taiqing Dynasty, all regions should make the government decree new.

古文：是月，魏遣太师潘乐、辛术等寇秦郡，王僧辩遣杜掞帅众拒之。
现代文：这个月，魏派遣太师迈塞、圭面等侵扰台型，王憎避派丝叠率领兵众抗拒他们。
English: This month, Wei dispatched the grand masters Ma Xie and Gui Mian to harass the table, and Wang Huan dispatched Silk Jie to lead the soldiers to resist them.

古文：以陈霸先为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史。
现代文：世祖又任命陈霸先为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史。
English: The founder also appointed Chen Baxian as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and Southern Xuzhou History.

古文：是月，魏遣使贺平侯景。
现代文：这个月，魏派遣使者贺梁平定侯景叛乱。
English: This month, Wei dispatched envoy He Liang to quell the Houjing Rebellion.

古文：八月，萧纪率巴、蜀大众连舟东下，遣护军陆法和屯巴峡以拒之。
现代文：八月，萧坦率领旦、蜀大军连舟束下，世担派遣护军陆法和驻扎旦堕以抗拒他们。
English: In August, Xiao Tan led the Tang and Shu armies in a fleet of boats, and the World Defense Council dispatched the escort troops of the Land Law and stationed in Tang to resist them.

古文：兼通直散骑常侍、聘魏使徐陵于鄴奉表曰：臣闻封唐有圣，还承帝喾之家；居代惟贤，终纂高皇之祚。
现代文：兼通直散骑常侍、聘魏使徐陵在邺进表说：臣听说封庐卢有圣人，还要继承帝璺的家；居住迩的是贤人，终究继承了区皇的帝位。
English: He said, "I heard that there was a saint in Huanqianlu, and he was to inherit the imperial throne. It was a wise man who lived in Huanqian, and he eventually inherited the imperial throne of the regional emperor.

古文：无为称于革舄，至治表于垂衣，而拨乱反正，非闻前古。
现代文：清静无为用生牛皮做鞋的时代被称颂，治理得极好表现于能够垂衣拱手无为而治，而拨乱反正，并非间断前世古法。
English: The era of calm and do-nothing shoes made from raw cowhide was praised, and excellent governance was demonstrated by the ability to hang one's coat and do nothing, but the chaos was not interrupted by the ancient law of the previous generation.

古文：至如金行重作，源出东莞；炎运犹昌，枝分南顿。
现代文：至于像以 金 为德的朝代重新兴盛，那是发生于东莞；以 火 为德的帝业之运仍然昌盛，枝条从南顿分出。
English: As for the resurgence of the dynasty with the virtue of gold, it happened in Dongguan; the imperial fortune with the virtue of fire is still flourishing, and the branches are branching out from Nantong.

古文：岂得掩显姓于轩辕，非才子于颛顼？
现代文：难道能因为轩辕而掩盖了显贵之姓，因为颛顼而责怪才子吗?
English: Is it possible to cover up the name of a dignitary because of the turmoil, and blame a talented person because of the turmoil?

古文：莫不时因多难，俱继神宗者也。
现代文：没有谁不时时遭受灾难，同样是继承神宗的人啊。
English: No one suffers misfortune from time to time, even those who have inherited the religion of God.

古文：伏惟陛下，出《震》等于勋、华，明让同于旦、奭。
现代文：臣诚恳地为陛下着想，陛下出于《震》卦等同于勋、华，贤明礼让和旦、奭相同。
English: The minister sincerely thought for the sake of His Majesty, who, according to the "Earthquake" sutra, is equal to Xun and Hua, and is as wise and courteous as Dan and Yao.

古文：握图执钺，将在御天，玉縢珠衡，先彰元后。
现代文：握圆执铁，将在于驾驭天命，玉滕珠衡，先表彰元君。
English: Holding the circle and holding the iron, will be in the control of destiny, Yu Tengzhuheng, first to commend the Yuanjun.

古文：神祇所命，非惟太室之祥；图画斯归，何止尧门之瑞。
现代文：神祇所命令的，不仅仅是太室的吉祥；河圃洛书所归属的，又何止是尧门的祥瑞。
English: What the deities command is not only the auspiciousness of the ethereal chamber, but also the auspiciousness of the gate.

古文：若夫大孝圣人之心，中庸君子之德，固以作训生民，贻风多士。
现代文：像大孝是圣人的心，中庸是君子的美德，当然可以作为百姓的规范，可以留给很多士子作为劝告。
English: As filial piety is the heart of a saint, and moderation is the virtue of a gentleman, of course, it can be used as a standard for the people, and can be left to many scholars as advice.

古文：一日二日，研览万机；允文允武，包罗群艺。
现代文：一天二天，研究阅览日理万机；能文能武，包罗各种技艺。
English: One day or two days, study the reading of the day of the machine; can literature, can martial arts, including a variety of skills.

古文：拟兹三大，宾是四门，历试诸难，咸熙庶绩，斯无得而称也。
现代文：拟此三大，宾是四门，历次尝试诸多灾难，取得多而大的成绩，这不能称颂吗?
English: Can it not be praised that the three greats and the four guests have tried many calamities and achieved many great achievements?

古文：自无妄兴暴，皇祚浸微，封犭希修蛇，行灾中国，灵心所宅，下武其兴，望紫极而长号，瞻丹陵而殒恸。
现代文：自从无德狂妄之人兴暴作乱，皇位旁落皇权衰微，大猪长蛇，在中原地区制造灾难，上天神意所在，下民中将要发生武斗，遥望紫极而长声号泣，瞻仰丹陵而悲恸落泪。
English: Since the immoral and arrogant people have rioted and caused chaos, the imperial power has waned with the fall of the imperial throne, and the great pigs and snakes have created disasters in the Central Plains, God's will has been done, and there will be armed battles among the common people. Looking at the purple pole from afar, they will cry loudly, and looking at Danling, they will be sad and shed tears.

古文：家冤将报，天赐黄鸟之旗；国害宜诛，神奉玄狐之箓。
现代文：家族的冤将要申报时，上天就赏赐黄乌大旗；国家的祸害应该诛杀，神灵就奉送银狐之符录。
English: When the family's grievance is about to be reported, heaven will reward the Yellow and Black Flag; the country's scourge should be fought, and the gods will send the Silver Fox Symbol.

古文：滕公拥树，雄气方严；张绣交兵，风神弥勇。
现代文：滕公拥抱大树，雄气正猛；张绣交战，风神更勇。
English: Tenggong embraces the big tree, his courage is fierce; Zhangxu engages in battle, the wind god is more courageous.

古文：忠诚冠于日月，孝义感于冰霜。
现代文：忠诚冠盖曰月，孝义感动冰霜。
English: Loyalty crowns the moon, filial piety moves the frost.

古文：如霆如雷，如貔如虎，前驱效命，元恶斯歼。
现代文：如雷霆，如虎貔，往前驱驰拼命效力，元凶就被歼灭。
English: Like a thunderbolt, like a vise, driving forward with desperate efficiency, the culprit is annihilated.

古文：既挂胆于西州，方燃脐于东市。
现代文：已经在西州挂胆，又正在束市燃脐。
English: It has already shut down in Xizhou and is in the process of shutting down in Sokcho.

古文：蚩尤三冢，宁谓严诛？王莽千剸，非云明罚？
现代文：蚩尤三冢，难道能说是严厉的诛杀；王莽千割，不能说是明罚。
English: It can be said to be a severe beating; it cannot be said to be a clear punishment.

古文：青羌赤狄，同畀豺狼，胡服夷言，咸为京观。
现代文：青羌、赤狄，都投给豺狼，穿胡服讲夷言的人，都被战胜封土作成大墓。
English: The young and the old both voted for the wolf, and those who wore silly clothes and talked nonsense were defeated and fenced off to make a big grave.

古文：邦畿济济，还见隆平；宗庙愔愔，方承多福。
现代文：以国都为中心的广大土地非常有利，再现兴隆和平；宗庙和谐，正承受很多幸福。
English: The vast land centered on the national capital is very favorable, reproducing prosperity and peace; the ancestral temple is harmonious and is receiving a lot of happiness.

古文：自氤氲浑沌之世，骊连、栗陆之君，卦起龙图，文因鸟迹。
现代文：自从烟气弥漫浑沌洪荒的时代，有骊连、栗陆之君，卦象因为龙的圆纹而产生，文字也是因为鸟的足迹才出现。
English: Since the era of smog-filled chaos and floods, there have been Qilian, Chestnut, Guanzhong, because of the dragon's roundness, and the text is also because of the bird's footprints.

古文：云师火帝，非无战阵之风，尧誓汤征，咸用干戈之道。
现代文：云师火帝，并非没有助战阵的风；尧、汤誓师征伐，都是用的干戈正道。
English: The master of cloud, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master of thunder and the master of fire, the master of wind and the master of fire, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master of cloud, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master of thunder and the master of fire, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master of cloud, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master of cloud, the master of fire, is not without the wind to support the battle line; the master

古文：星躔东井，时破崤、潼；雷震南阳，初平寻、邑。
现代文：星过东井宿区，当时就破了崤、潼；雷震南阳，初次平定寻、邑。
English: The star passed over the Dongjing residential area, and at that time, the thunderbolt and hailstone were broken; the thunderbolt shook the south, and for the first time, the city was subdued.

古文：未有援三灵之已坠，救四海之群飞，赫赫明明，龚行天罚，如当今之盛者也。
现代文：从来没有过在援救已经坠落的、月、星时，救助四海的水鸟时，显扬明白，恭谨地施行上天的惩罚，能如当今这样盛大。
English: Never before, when rescuing fallen stars and moons, or waterfowl from the four seas, has God's punishment been so clearly and reverently carried out as it is today.

古文：于是卿云似盖，晨映姚乡；甘露如珠，朝华景寝。
现代文：于是祥云似盖，清晨辉映姚乡；甘露如珍珠，早晨在高大的寝殿上光彩照人。
English: As a result, Xiangyun is like a canopy, the early morning glow reflects Yao Township; the nectar is like a pearl, and in the morning it shines brilliantly on the tall sleeping hall.

古文：芝房感德，咸出铜池；蓂荚伺辰，无劳银箭。
现代文：芝房感于恩德，都出现在刨迤；瑞草黄荚伺候良辰，无需劳动银箭。
English: Shibafo is similar to Ende, both appear in the planter; Zui Cao and Huang Qi wait for a good time, without the need for labor to make silver arrows.

古文：重以东渐玄菟，西逾白狼，高柳生风，扶桑盛日，莫不编名属国，归质鸿胪，荒服来宾，遐迩同福。
现代文：加上东面逐步发展到玄茎，西面越过旦狙，产塑生风，迭垩出日，这些地方没有不列名在属国，归顺鸿胪，荒远之地莫不宾服，国家远近同享幸福。
English: In addition, the east has gradually developed into the stem, and the west has crossed the Dan River, producing and creating the wind, and the sun has risen repeatedly. These places are not unlisted in the country, but belong to the country, and the country is far and near to share happiness.

古文：其文昭武穆，跗萼也如彼；天平地成，功业也如此。
现代文：那些文采显著武艺美好，就如同花萼舆花托；天平地成，功业也就如此。
English: Those literary works, remarkable martial arts are beautiful, just like the calyx of the flower; the balance is perfect, and so is the work.

古文：久应旁求掌固，谘询天官，斟酌繁昌，经营高邑。
现代文：很久就应该旁求掌故，咨询天官，思量鳘昌，经营高邑。
English: It's long past time to learn from the past, consult with heavenly officials, think about Yuchang, and run Gaoyu.

古文：宗王启霸，非劳阳武之侯；清跸无虞，何事长安之邸。
现代文：宗王在霸主中兴起，不用烦劳阳武侯；帝王的清驾没有忧患，何必事奉长安府邸。
English: The ancestral king rises among the overlords, and there is no need to bother the Yangwuhou. There is no worry about the emperor's safe driving, so why do you have to serve the Chang'an Mansion?

古文：正应扬銮旂以飨帝，仰凤扆以承天，历数在躬，畴与为让！去月二十日，兼散骑常侍柳晖等至鄴，伏承圣旨谦冲，为而弗宰，或云泾阳未复，函谷无泥，旋驾金陵，方膺天眷。
现代文：正是应该发出皇帝的车驾来使他有所享受，仰看凤屏来承受天恩，天定的即位人就在陛下自身，谁同意陛下的谦让上月二十日，兼散骑常侍堑嘤等到邺，敬承圣旨谦和冲淡，因而没有主宰朝政。有人说泾阳没有收复，函谷没有修缮，圣驾归回金医，方能接受上天的眷顾。
English: It is precisely the emperor's chariot that should be sent out for him to enjoy, look up to Fengping to receive the grace of heaven, and the person who is destined to ascend to the throne is his majesty himself, who agrees to his majesty's humble concession on the 20th of last month, and rides around to wait for the emperor, honoring the holy will of modesty and dilution, and thus does not dominate the court politics. Some people say that the sun has not been restored, Hakodate has not been repaired, and the saint has returned to the gold doctor, and only then can he receive the patronage of heaven.

古文：愚谓大庭、少昊，非有定居；汉祖、殷宗，皆无恒宅。
现代文：愚认为主庭、型退，没有固定的居所；坠担、星噬，都没有长久的住宅。
English: Gu thought that the main courtyard, the type retreat, had no fixed residence; the crashing burden, the star-eating, had no long-term residence.

古文：登封岱岳，犹置明堂；巡狩章陵，时行司隶。
现代文：登上岱岳并封祭，还设置明堂；巡狩章陵，按时行使司隶之权。
English: He ascended Mount Shou and held a ceremony to seal it, and also set up a Ming hall; he went on a hunting expedition to the tombs, and exercised his authority as a priest on time.

古文：何必西瞻虎据，乃建王宫；南望牛头，方称天阙。
现代文：何必向西看一定要如虎据龙盘，才建立王宫；南望生玺，才称得上是天阙。
English: Why do you have to look to the west, you must be like a tiger according to the dragon plate, only to build a royal palace; look to the south, only to be able to be called a heavenly beacon.

古文：抑又闻之：玄圭既锡，苍玉无陈，乃棫朴之愆期，非苞茅之不贡。
现代文：抑或又听说：玄圭已经赏赐，苍玉没有陈设，是木材加工误期，不是苞茅没有进贡。
English: Or they may have heard that: Xuan Gui has been rewarded, Cang Yu has not been decorated, it is a delay in wood processing, not that there is no tribute for the cedar.

古文：云和之瑟，久废甘泉；孤竹之管，无闻方泽。
现代文：云和之瑟所奏佳音，久已不在甘泉响起；孤笪之管的乐曲，也没有在大泽听到遇丁。
English: It has been a long time since the good news played by Yunhe's father has been heard in Ganquan; the music of the lonely reed pipe has not been heard in Osawa.

古文：岂不惧欤！
现代文：难道不让人惧怕吗。
English: Isn't that scary?

古文：伏愿陛下因百姓之心，拯万邦之命。
现代文：臣诚恳地希望陛下依顺百姓的心意，拯救万邦的命运。
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will follow the will of the people and save the fate of all nations.

古文：岂可逡巡固让，方求石户之农；高谢君临，徒引箕山之客！
现代文：岂能退却坚辞，才求石户的农人；推辞统治天下的请求，白白招引箕山之客百姓不知道君主不自以为有德。
English: Could he not withdraw his firm words and ask the farmers of Shishido for help? Refuse his request to rule the world and invite the guests from Shaoshan in vain? The people do not know that the monarch does not consider himself to be virtuous.

古文：未知上德之不德，惟见圣人之不仁。
现代文：衹看见圣人的不仁。
English: He saw the saint's insensitivity.

古文：率士翘翘，苍生何望！昔苏季、张仪，违乡负俗，尚复招三方以事赵，请六国以尊秦。
现代文：国土上所有的人都翘首以待，苍生还有别的什么希望从前苏季、张堡，远离家乡随异俗，尚且又招引三方之士来事奉羹蝈，请来六国尊奉秦国。
English: All the people in the country are looking forward to it. What other hope is there for sentient beings? In the past, the Soviet Union and Zhangye, far away from their hometowns, followed different customs. In addition, they also invited people from the three sides to come to serve the soup bowl, and invited the six countries to honor and serve Qin.

古文：况臣等显奉皇华，亲承朝命，珪璋特达，通聘河阳，貂珥雍容，寻盟漳水，加牢贬馆，随势污隆，瞻望乡关，诚均休戚。
现代文：何况臣等明显地承奉皇帝的恩宠，亲身承受朝廷的顾命，珪璋特别显达，互通聘问于河阳，貂尾珥饰雍容华贵，不久又在漳水结盟，加牢于贬馆，随世风的好坏而浮沉，远望乡关，确实与他们同悲欢。
English: What's more, the vassals, etc. obviously followed the emperor's grace and personally accepted the imperial court's order, and they were particularly distinguished. They exchanged visits with each other in Heyang, and were adorned with grace and splendor in Shanwei. They soon made an alliance in Surabaya, and became more and more attached to Jieguan. They fluctuated with the ups and downs of the world, and looked forward to their hometowns. They truly shared the same joys and sorrows.

古文：但轻生不造，命与时乖。
现代文：但是臣轻微的生命不能有所成就，命运与时代相背离。
English: But the life of a minor vassal cannot achieve anything, and his fate is out of step with the times.

古文：忝一介之行人，同三危之远摈。
现代文：愧为一个行人，同为三危的远弃之人。
English: I am ashamed to be a pedestrian and an outcast of the Three Dangers.

古文：承闲内殿，事绝耿弇之恩；封奏边城，私等刘琨之哭。
现代文：承蒙恩惠能位列内殿中间，此事超过了耿弁所受的恩惠；封奏于边城，私下裹舆刘琨一样悲哭。
English: He was placed in the middle of the inner hall thanks to the grace and favor, which exceeded the grace received by Geng Ben; he was sealed in the border city, and wept in private like Liu Wei.

古文：不胜区区之至，谨拜表以闻。
现代文：不能表达尽臣极为诚挚的情怀，谨跪拜进表让陛下知晓。
English: I cannot express my sincere feelings, but I would like to kneel at the table and let His Majesty know.

古文：九月甲戌，司空、镇东将军、扬州刺史南平王恪薨。
现代文：九月甲戌，司空、镇束将军、扬州刺史南平王萧恪去世。
English: In September, Gao Jia, Sikuo, Zhenzoku Gen and Yangzhou statesman Nanping Wang Xiao passed away.

古文：冬十月乙未，前梁州刺史萧循自魏至于江陵，以循为平北将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：冬十月乙未，前梁州刺史萧循从魏到了江陵，世祖任命萧循为平北将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Xun, the former Liangzhou chief of staff, came from Wei to Jiangling. The founder appointed Xiao Xun as the general of Pingbei and the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Decrees.

古文：戊申，执湘州刺史王琳于殿内，琳副将殷晏下狱死。
现代文：戊申，在宫殿内拘捕湘州刺史王琳，王琳的副将殷晏下狱而死。
English: Wushin, in the palace, arrested Wang Lin, the vice-governor of Hunan Province, and Wang Lin's second-in-command, Yin Xi, died in prison.

古文：辛酉，以子方略为湘州刺史。
现代文：辛酉，世祖任命儿子萧方略为湘州刺史。
English: Sincerely, the ancestor appointed his son, Xiao Fangliu, as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：庚戌，琳长史陆纳及其将潘乌累等举兵反，袭陷湘州。
现代文：庚戌，王琳的长史陆纳及其部将潘乌累等举兵造反，袭击并攻陷湘州。
English: Geng Yao, Wang Lin's Long Shiluna, and his subordinate, Pan Wulei, raised an army and rebelled, attacking and capturing Hunan.

古文：是月，四方征镇，王公卿士复劝世祖即尊号，犹谦让未许。
现代文：这个月，四方征镇以及王公卿士又劝世祖即位，世祖仍然谦让不同意。
English: This month, Shifang Seizhen and Wang Gongqing also urged the ancestor to ascend to the throne, but the ancestor still humbly disagreed.

古文：表三上，乃从之。
现代文：奏表上了三次，世祖这才听从他们的规劝。
English: The report was submitted three times, and only then did the patriarch heed their advice.

古文：承圣元年冬十一月丙子，世祖即皇帝位于江陵。
现代文：承圣元年冬十一月丙子，世祖在江陵即皇帝位。
English: In the winter of November of the first year of Emperor Sheng's reign, Emperor Xizhi, the founder of the dynasty, ascended the throne in Gangneung.

古文：诏曰： 夫树之以君，司牧黔首。
现代文：下诏说： 树立君主，是为了管理百姓。
English: The next edict said: To establish a monarch is to manage the people.

古文：帝尧之心，岂贵黄屋，诚弗获已而临莅之。
现代文：帝尧的心志，难道是看重黄屋，实际上是不得已才登上帝位。
English: The emperor's ambition, is it to value Huangya, in fact, he had no choice but to ascend to the throne.

古文：朕皇祖太祖文皇帝积德岐、梁，化行江、汉，道映在田，具瞻斯属。
现代文：朕皇祖太祖文皇帝积德于蛙、銮，化行于辽、选，政道辉映在田野，所有人都心向着他。
English: Emperor Wen, the great-great-grandfather of the Chinese emperors, accumulated virtue in frog and tadpole, transformed it into action in Liao and Zheng, and reflected the political road in the field. Everyone's heart turned to him.

古文：皇考高祖武皇帝明并日月，功格区宇，应天从民，惟睿作圣。
现代文：皇考高祖武皇帝与月一样光明，功业与天同高与地同大，顺应天意依从民心，既睿智又圣明。
English: Emperor Gaozongwu was as bright as the moon, his achievements were as high as the heavens and as great as the earth, he obeyed the will of heaven and the hearts of the people, and he was both wise and holy.

古文：太宗简文皇帝地侔启、诵，方符文、景。
现代文：太宗简文皇帝地同启、诵，正符合文、景之治。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Qianwen Emperor's reign coincided with the opening and chanting, which was in line with the rule of the text and the scene.

古文：羯寇凭陵，时难孔棘。
现代文：羯族贼寇欺凌中原，时世艰难十分危急。
English: The Qiang bandits are bullying the Central Plains. Times are tough and the situation is very critical.

古文：朕大拯横流，克复宗社。
现代文：朕大拯逆流，克复宗社。
English: I'm from the opposite side of the river, from Kofu Sosha.

古文：群公卿士、百辟庶僚，咸以皇灵眷命，归运斯及，天命不可以久淹，宸极不可以久旷。粤若前载，宪章令范，畏天之威，算隆宝历，用集神器于予一人。
现代文：各位公卿士子、诸侯众官，都以皇天神灵眷宠顾命，国运现在已归属于朕，上天的命令不能够长久拖延，皇宫不可以长久地空旷，如同前些年，宪章好的规范，害怕天威，计算出兴隆宝贵的即位时间，因而把国家的神器集中在我一人身上。
English: Your highnesses, lords, princes, and officials, all of whom are favored by the spirit of the emperor and the gods, the national fortune now belongs to me. The order of heaven cannot be delayed for a long time, and the imperial palace cannot be empty for a long time. As in previous years, the charter of good norms, fear of heaven, calculated the precious enthronement time, and thus concentrated the national artifact on me alone.

古文：昔虞、夏、商、周，年无嘉号，汉、魏、晋、宋，因循以久。
现代文：从前虞、夏、商、周，没有好的年号，汉、魏、晋、宋，因循守旧已经很久。
English: From the Former Yu, Xia, Shang, Zhou, there is no good year, Han, Wei, Jin, Song, it has been a long time since the old rules have been followed.

古文：朕虽云拨乱，且非创业，思得上系宗祧，下惠亿兆。
现代文：朕虽然说是拨乱反正，但不是创业开国，想着能上继承宗庙，下施惠万民。
English: Although I say that it is necessary to set things right, it is not about starting a business and founding a country. I want to be able to inherit the ancestral temple and benefit the people.

古文：可改太清六年为承圣元年。
现代文：可改太清六年为承圣元年。
English: It can be changed from the sixth year of Taiching to the first year of consecration.

古文：逋租宿责，并许弘贷；孝子义孙，可悉赐爵；长徒鏁士，特加原宥；禁锢夺劳，一皆旷荡。 
现代文：拖欠的租税旧曰的欠债，都允许宽免；孝子贤孙，都可赐给爵位；犯罪之人，特别加以原谅饶恕；被禁锢夺去劳动机会的人，全部解除禁锢。 
English: Tax arrears and old debts can be forgiven; children and grandchildren can be given a title of nobility; those who have committed crimes can be specially pardoned and forgiven; and those who have been deprived of the opportunity to work by imprisonment can all be released from imprisonment.

古文：是日世祖不升正殿，公卿陪列而已。
现代文：这一天世祖不升正殿，公卿衹是陪列罢了。
English: On this day, the ancestor did not ascend to the main hall, and the court noble was just an escort.

古文：丁丑，以平北将军、开府仪同三司萧循为骠骑将军、湘州刺史，余如故。
现代文：丁丑，任命平北将军、开府仪同三司萧循为骠骑将军、湘州刺史，其余如旧。
English: Ding Yuxi, appointed General Pingbei, Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Xiao Xun as the cavalry generals, Hunan Zhishi, and the rest as before.

古文：己卯，立王太子方矩为皇太子，改名元良。
现代文：己卯，立王太子萧方矩为皇太子，改名为元良。
English: At the same time, the crown prince, Prince Xiao Fang, was made crown prince, and his name was changed to Yuan Liang.

古文：立皇子方智为晋安郡王，方略为始安郡王。
现代文：立皇子方智为晋安郡王，方略为始安郡王。
English: The crown prince Fang Zhi was the king of Jinan County, and Fang Liang was the king of Shi'an County.

古文：追尊所生妣阮修容为文宣太后。
现代文：追赠亲生母亲阮脩容尊号为文宣太后。
English: She was posthumously given the title of Empress Dowager Mun Xuan by her biological mother, Nguyn Th Rng.

古文：是月，陆纳遣将潘乌累等攻破衡州刺史丁道贵于渌口，道贵走零陵。
现代文：这个月，陆纳派遣部将潘乌累等攻破了衡州刺史丁道贵的阵营于渌，道贵逃到零陵。
English: This month, the dispatching department of Lu Na broke through the camp of Heng Zhou Jian Shi Ding Dao Gui in Handan, and Dao Gui fled to Luling.

古文：十二月壬子，陆纳分兵袭巴陵，湘州刺史萧循击破之。
现代文：十二月壬子，陆纳分兵袭击巴陵，湘州刺史萧循击破了他们。
English: In December, Lu Na's detachment attacked Baling, and the Xiangzhou cutter Shi Xiao Gang defeated them.

古文：是月，营州刺史李洪雅自零陵率众出空云滩，将下讨纳，纳遣将吴藏等袭破洪雅，洪雅退守空云城。
现代文：这个月，营州刺史李洪雅从零陵率兵众出击空灵滩，将要向下讨伐陆纳，陆纳派遣将领吴藏等袭击攻破李洪雅军，李洪雅退守空灵城。
English: In this month, Li Hongya, the general of Yingzhou, led an army to attack the Kuoling Beach from the Zero Mausoleum. He was going to fight Lu Na. Lu Na sent the general Wu Zang to attack and defeat Li Hongya's army. Li Hongya retreated to defend the Kuoling City.

古文：二年春正月乙丑，诏王僧辩率众军士讨陆纳。
现代文：承圣二年春正月乙丑，世祖韶令王僧辩率领众军向上讨伐陆纳。
English: In the second month of the first month of the spring of the second year of his consecration, the founder of the Jurchen Order, Wang Sofen, led the army to fight Lu Na.

古文：戊寅，以吏部尚书王褒为尚书右仆射，刘为吏部尚书。
现代文：戊寅，世祖任命吏部尚书王褒为尚书右仆射，刘彀为吏部尚书。
English: In Wu Yin, the founder appointed the officials Shang Shu Wang Bao as Shang Shu's right-hand man, and Liu Wei as Shang Shu's official.

古文：西魏遣大将尉迟迥袭益州。
现代文：此时西魏派遣大将尉迟迥袭击益州。
English: At this time, the Western Wei Dynasty dispatched the general, Lieutenant Lai Xuan, to attack Yizhou.

古文：三月庚午，诏曰： 食乃民天，农为治本，垂之千载，贻诸百王，莫不敬授民时，躬耕帝籍。
现代文：三月庚午，世祖下诏说： 民以食为天，发展农业是治国之本，此言流传千年，遗留给百位帝王，他们没有谁不敬授农时，亲自在帝王的籍田上耕作。
English: On the afternoon of the third month of the year, the founder of the dynasty issued an edict saying, "The people's livelihood is the most important thing, and the development of agriculture is the foundation of governing the country." This edict has been passed down for thousands of years and has been left to hundreds of emperors, none of whom disrespected the emperor by farming on the emperor's ancestral land.

古文：是以稼穑为宝，《周颂》嘉其乐章；禾麦不成，鲁史书其方册。
现代文：所以稼穑是宝，《周颂》以乐章嘉奖它；禾麦没有收成，鲁史把它写在方册裹。
English: Therefore, making money is a treasure, and "Zhou Song" awards it with a musical composition; when there is no harvest of wheat and barley, Lu Shi wrote it in a square book.

古文：秦人有农力之科，汉氏开屯田之利。
现代文：秦人有农力科取，汉氏广开屯田利益。
English: The Qin people had the advantage of agricultural science, while the Han people had the advantage of vast farmlands.

古文：顷岁屯否，多难荐臻，干戈不戢，我则未暇。
现代文：近年来聚积了很多恶运，多灾多难频频来到，干戈不止，我则无暇。
English: In recent years, a lot of bad luck has accumulated, many disasters and difficulties have come frequently, there are more and more wars, and I have no time.

古文：广田之令，无闻于郡国；载师之职，有陋于官方。
现代文：扩大田地的命令，不在郡国中传扬；载师的职责，在执行官府方略时有所疏陋。
English: The order to expand the fields was not spread throughout the county; the duties of the division commander were somewhat diluted when the executive officer was ousted.

古文：今元恶殄歼，海内方一，其大庇黔首，庶拯横流。
现代文：今天元凶已被歼灭，海内正在统一，希望能大大地庇护百姓，也许能力挽横流。
English: Today, the culprit has been annihilated, the country is being unified, and it is hoped that the people will be greatly protected, and it may be able to turn the tide.

古文：一廛旷务，劳心日仄；一夫废业，舄卤无遗。
现代文：一家店铺废弃了商务，就会劳心费神每不安心；一个农夫废弃了农业，地就会像咸卤地一样无遗存的庄稼。
English: If a store abandons business, it will work hard and worry; if a farmer abandons agriculture, the land will be like a salt land with no remaining crops.

古文：国富刑清，家给民足。
现代文：国家富足刑法清廉，家庭丰足人民富裕。
English: The country is rich, the criminal law is clean, the family is rich, and the people are rich.

古文：其力田之身，在所蠲免。
现代文：那些从事田地体力劳作的人，在当地免除赋税。
English: Those who engage in manual labor in the fields are exempt from local taxation.

古文：外即宣勒，称朕意焉。 
现代文：外地立即宣扬本韶书并加以约束，就可以称朕的心意了。 
English: It is my intention to immediately publicize and restrict this book.

古文：辛未，李洪雅以空云城降贼，贼执之而归。
现代文：辛未，李洪雅在空灵城投降贼人，贼人拘囚他回去。
English: Soon after, Li Hongya surrendered to the thief in the empty city, and the thief detained him to go back.

古文：初，丁道贵走零陵投洪雅，洪雅使收余众。与之俱降。
现代文：当初，逃到蔓医投奔奎送堕，选整让他收集余众，和他一起投降。
English: At first, he fled to Cangyi, and then to Pengkui, and then to Zhengde. Zhengde asked him to gather the rest of the people and surrender with him.

古文：洪雅既降贼，贼乃害道贵。
现代文：洪雅降贼后，贼人就杀害了丁道贵。
English: After Hong Ya surrendered to the bandits, the bandits killed Ding Daogui.

古文：丙子，贼将吴藏等帅兵据车轮。
现代文：丙子，贼将吴藏等率兵占据车轮。
English: Bongzi, the thief will Wu Zang and other soldiers to occupy the wheel.

古文：庚寅，有两龙见湘州西江。
现代文：庚寅，有两条龙出现在湘州西江。
English: In Hunan, two dragons appeared in the Xijiang River.

古文：夏四月丙申，僧辩军次车轮。
现代文：夏季的四月丙申，王僧辩的军队驻扎在车轮。
English: In the summer of April, Wang Sangye's army was stationed at the wheel.

古文：五月甲子，众军攻贼，大破之。
现代文：五月甲子，官军攻打贼寇，大破他们。
English: In May, the government army attacked the bandits and defeated them.

古文：乙丑，僧辩军至长沙。
现代文：乙丑，王僧辩的军队到达长沙。
English: Second ugly, Wang Sangyan's army arrived in Changsha.

古文：甲戌，尉迟迥进逼巴西，潼州刺史杨虔运以城降，纳迥。
现代文：甲戌，尉迟迥进逼巴西，潼州刺史杨干运献城投降，接纳了尉迟迥。
English: Armor and cavalry entered Brazil, and Zhangzhou Sisi Yang Ganjun surrendered the city and accepted cavalry.

古文：己丑，萧纪军至西陵。
现代文：己丑，萧纪的军队到达西陵。
English: As ugly as they are, Xiao Ji's army reached Xiling.

古文：六月乙卯，湘州平。
现代文：六月乙卯，湘州平定。
English: In June, Honshu was pacified.

古文：是月，尉迟迥围益州。
现代文：这个月，尉迟迥包围益州。
English: This month, the Liao besieged Yizhou.

古文：秋七月辛未，巴人苻升、徐子初斩贼城主公孙晁，举城来降。
现代文：秋季的七月辛未，巴束人苻升、徐子初斩贼城主公孙晃，举城来投降。
English: In the late autumn of July, when the people of Ba Sok were on the rise and Xu Zi was the first to defeat the thieves, the lord of the city, Sun Ao, called for the city to surrender.

古文：纪众大溃，遇兵死。
现代文：萧纪军队大败，萧纪遇到官兵死去。
English: Xiao Ji's army suffered a crushing defeat, and Xiao Ji met with the death of officers and soldiers.

古文：乙未，王僧辩班师江陵，诏诸军各还所镇。
现代文：乙未，王僧辩班师回到江陵，世祖韶令各路军马各自回到所镇守的地方去。
English: At the end of the year, Wang Sang, the debating team leader, returned to Gangneung, and King Sejong ordered the soldiers and horses to return to their respective garrisons.

古文：八月戊戌，尉迟迥陷益州。
现代文：八月戊戌，尉迟迥攻陷益州。
English: In August, after a long delay, I was able to capture Yizhou.

古文：庚子，诏曰： 夫爰始居毫，不废先王之都；受命于周，无改旧邦之颂。
现代文：庚子，世祖下韶说： 开始居住在亳，不弃先王的都城；受命于周，不改对旧邦的歌颂。
English: Geng Zi, the ancestor said: "I began to live in Handan, I will not abandon the capital city of the former king; I was ordered by Zhou, I will not change the praise of the old state.

古文：顷戎旃既息，关柝无警。
现代文：近来戎事已经停息，关隘深夜无用警戒。
English: Recently, military affairs have ceased, and there is no need for vigilance in Guanqiao late at night.

古文：去鲁兴叹，有感宵分，过沛殒涕，实劳夕寐。
现代文：离开鲁兴发感叹，有感于夜分，经过沛感怀落泪，实在有劳夜眠。
English: I left Lu Xing with a sigh, feeling at night, after a feeling of tears, I really had a hard night's sleep.

古文：仍以潇、湘作乱，庸、蜀阻兵，命将授律，指期克定。
现代文：仍然因为潇、湘作乱，庸、蜀被贼兵所阻，所以任命将领授给律令，指定日期攻克平定。
English: Still, because Xiao and Hunan made a riot, and Yong and Shu were blocked by the thief soldiers, the appointment of generals was awarded to the ritsuryo, and the designated date was conquered and pacified.

古文：今八表乂清，四郊无垒，宜从青盖之典，言归白水之乡。
现代文：现在四面八方安定太平，京城四郊没有了堡垒，应该按照赐乘青盖车的旧典去做，言归白水的故乡。
English: Now there is peace and stability in all directions, and there are no fortresses in the four suburbs of Beijing. It should be done in accordance with the old tradition of giving the Qinghai-Tibet Railway, and return to the hometown of Baishui.

古文：江、湘委输，方船连舳，巴峡舟舰，精甲百万，先次建鄴，行实京师，然后六军遄征，九旂扬旆，拜谒茔陵，修复宗社。
现代文：江、湘运输，用的是并连的大船，巴峡的舟舰，载有精锐的甲兵上百万，先驻扎建邺，再行充实京城；然后六军迅速出征，九旗飘扬，拜谒先帝陵寝，修复宗庙社庙。
English: The transportation of the Yangtze River and the Hunan River was carried out with the use of large ships in parallel, the ships of the Ba Gorge, carrying millions of elite soldiers, first stationed in Jianye, and then proceeded to enrich the capital city; then the six armies quickly went to war, nine flags fluttered, paid homage to the former imperial mausoleum, and restored the family temple.

古文：主者详依旧典，以时宣勒。 
现代文：主宰者要详细地依照旧典，按时宣传和约束。 
English: The person in charge should carry out detailed publicity and restriction in accordance with the old code.

古文：九月庚午，司徒王僧辩旋镇。
现代文：九月庚午，司徒王僧辩回到原防地镇守。
English: In the late afternoon of September, King Sidu's monks returned to their original garrison town.

古文：丙子，以护军将军陆法和为郢州刺史。
现代文：丙子，世祖任命护军将军陆法和为郢州刺史。
English: He Zi, the founder of the Chinese nation, appointed the general of the army to protect the country and write the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙酉，以晋安王方智为江州刺史。
现代文：乙酉，又任命晋安王萧方智为江州刺史。
English: and appointed the King of Jin'an, Xiao Fangzhi, as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：是月，魏遣郭元建治舟师于合肥，又遣大将邢杲远、步六汗萨、东方老率众会之。
现代文：这个月，齐派郭元建在合肥训练水师，又派大将邢呆速、步大汗萨、东方老率军与郭元建会师。
English: This month, Qi sent Guo Yuanjian to train sailors in Hefei, and also sent the generals Zhen Dinghuo, Bu Da Khan Sa, Dongfang Lao to lead the army and Guo Yuanjian to lead the division.

古文：冬十一月辛酉，僧辨次于姑孰，即留镇焉。
现代文：冬季的十一月辛酉，王挝率军驻扎在姑塾，就留下来镇守在那裹。
English: In the bitter cold of winter in November, the king and his army were stationed in the old school, and they stayed there to guard the town.

古文：遣豫州刺史侯瑱据东关垒，征吴兴太守裴之横帅众继之。
现代文：派遣建议刺史翅进据墓迩堡垒。征召昱兴太守裴之护率众接续他。
English: He sent a proposal to stab Shi Ying into the tomb of the tomb fortress. He called for the protection of the Baizhong Emperor Baizhong to succeed him.

古文：戊戌，以尚书右仆射王褒为尚书左仆射，湘东太守张绾为尚书右仆射。
现代文：戊戌，任命尚书右仆射王褒为尚书左仆射，湘束太守退绾为尚书右仆射。
English: Wuzhen, appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaowang Bo, as Shangshu's left-hand man, and Hunan's regent, Taishu, as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：十二月，宿预土民东方光据城归化，魏江西州郡皆起兵应之。
现代文：十二月，宿预土民东方光献城归顺，魏江西州郡都起兵响应他。
English: In December, Dongguang Guangxiancheng, a prefecture-level aboriginal town, surrendered to Shun, and the county of Xizhou in Weijiang Province raised an army to respond to him.

古文：三年春正月甲午，加南豫州刺史侯瑱征北将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：承圣三年春季的正月甲午，世祖加南豫州刺史侯填为征北将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of consecration, the ancestor Kanan Yuzhou Zhi Shi Hou was filled in as the Northern General, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：陈霸先帅众攻广陵城。
现代文：陈霸先率军攻打广陵城。
English: Chen Ba first led the army to attack Guangling City.

古文：秦州刺史严超达自秦郡围泾州，侯瑱、张彪出石梁，为其声援。
现代文：秦州刺史严超达从秦郡包围泾州，侯填、张彪前出到石梁，作为他的声援。
English: Yan Chaoda, Qin prefect of Qin, encircled Zhangzhou from Qin County. Hou Jian and Zhang Biao went to Shiliang to support him.

古文：辛丑，陈霸先遣晋陵太守杜僧明率众助东方光。
现代文：辛丑，陈霸先派晋陵太守杜僧明率众援助东方光。
English: Sincerely, Chen Baxian sent Du Mengming, the governor of the Jin Mausoleum, to lead the crowd to help Dongfangguang.

古文：三月甲辰，以司徒王僧辩为太尉、车骑大将军。
现代文：甲辰，世塑任命司徒王坛丰为太尉、车骑大将军。
English: At that time, World Plastics appointed Szeto Wang Tanfeng as a lieutenant and general of the cavalry.

古文：丁未，魏遣将王球率众七百攻宿预，杜僧明逆击，大破之。
现代文：丁未，魏派大将王茎率兵七百人攻窒玺，丝世塱迎击，大败他们。
English: At dinnertime, Wei dispatched the general Wang Ci and seven hundred soldiers to attack the Jiuquan. The Jiuquan counterattacked and defeated them.

古文：戊申，以护军将军、郢州刺史陆法和为司徒。
现代文：戊申，一任命护军将军、竖蛆刺史陆运逛为司徒。
English: Wushin, once appointed the general of the escorting army, and Zhaozhu Shishi, the general of the escorting army, were appointed as the guards.

古文：夏四月癸酉，以征北大将军、开府仪同三司陈霸先为司空。
现代文：夏季的四月癸酉，世担又任命征北大将军、开府仪同三司速玺先为司空。
English: At the end of April in the summer, the world council also appointed the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Kaifu Yi, and the three departments of the Rapid Deployment Force.

古文：六月壬午，魏复遣将步六汗萨率众救泾州。
现代文：六月壬午，毯又派大将步大汗萨率军救迳塑。
English: In the afternoon of June, General Baek again sent General Bao Da Khan Sa to lead the army to rescue Jinsuo.

古文：癸未，有黑气如龙，见于殿内。
现代文：癸未，有黑气如龙，出现在宫殿裹。
English: Suddenly, a black dragon appears in the palace.

古文：秋七月甲辰，以都官尚书宗懔为吏部尚书。
现代文：秋季的七月甲辰，世担任命都官尚书塞坏为吏部尚书。
English: In the first hour of July in autumn, the person in charge of the capital city, Shang Shuxu, became Shang Shuxu of the cadre department.

古文：九月辛卯，世祖于龙光殿述《老子》义，尚书左仆射王褒为执经。
现代文：九月辛卯，世塑在龙光殿讲述老子》经义，尚书左仆射王壹为他执经书。
English: In September, Shisaku recited the sutras of Laozi in the Longguang Hall. His left-hand servant, Shaowang, was the one to hold the sutras for him.

古文：乙巳，魏遣其柱国万纽于谨率大众来寇。
现代文：乙巳，垫派它的柱国万纽于谨率大批军队前来侵扰。
English: Suddenly, the Mat dispatched its pillar country, Van Nuys, to invade with a large number of troops.

古文：冬十月丙寅，魏军至于襄阳，萧察率众会之。
现代文：冬季的十月丙寅，魏军到达襄阳，萧察率军舆他们会合。
English: In the winter of October, the Wei army arrived in Xiangyang, and Xiao Zha led the army to meet.

古文：丁卯，停讲，内外戒严，舆驾出行都栅。
现代文：丁卯，双方停战谈判，内外都戒严，车驾出来巡行各都栅。
English: Dingwu, the two sides of the armistice negotiations, both at home and abroad are under martial law, driving out to parade each capital.

古文：是日，大风拔木，丙子，征王僧辩等军。
现代文：逭天，大风拔起树木。丙子，世祖征召王僧辩等人的军队。
English: On a stormy day, a strong wind uprooted trees. Bongzi, the ancestor conscripted the army of Wang Sangye and others.

古文：十一月，以领军胡僧祐都督城东城北诸军事，右仆射张绾为副；左仆射王褒都督城西城南诸军事，直殿省元景亮为副。
现代文：十一月，令领军胡僧佑都督城东城北诸军事，右仆射张绾为他的副职；左仆射王褒都督城西城南诸军事，直殿省元景亮为副职。
English: In November, he ordered the leader of the army, Hu Xiangyou, to lead the military of the eastern and northern parts of the capital, and his right-hand man, Zhaozhang, to be his deputy; his left-hand man, Zhaowang, to lead the military of the southern part of the western part of the capital, and the vice-minister of the provincial capital, Yuan Jingliang.

古文：王公卿士各有守备。
现代文：王公卿士各有守备的责任。
English: Every member of the imperial court and nobility has the duty to be on the alert.

古文：丙戌，世祖遍行都栅，皇太子巡行城楼，使居民助运水石，诸要害所，并增兵备。
现代文：丙戌，到处巡行都栅，皇太子巡行城楼，使居民帮助运送木料和石头，各要害处所，都增加了兵备。
English: The pro-regime troops patrolled the capital everywhere, and the crown prince made a tour of the city towers, asking the residents to help transport wood and stone. At each important place, the troops were increased.

古文：丁亥，魏军至栅下。
现代文：丁亥，魏军进至都栅下。
English: Dinghai, the Wei army entered the capital.

古文：丙申，征广州刺史王琳入援。
现代文：丙申，征召广州刺史王琳前来增援。
English: Bing Shen called for reinforcements from Wang Lin, the mayor of Guangzhou.

古文：丁酉，大风，城内火。
现代文：丁酉刮起大风，城内起火。
English: A gale blew up in Dingyao, and a fire broke out in the city.

古文：以胡僧祐为开府仪同三司，巂州刺史裴畿为领军将军。
现代文：世祖任命胡僧佑为开府仪同三司，岭州刺史裴畿为领军将军。
English: The founder appointed Hu Xiangyou as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Lingzhou Zishi Pei Qi as the leading general.

古文：庚子，信州刺史徐世谱、晋安王司马任约军次马头岸。
现代文：庚子，信州刺史逮世谱、晋安王司马任约军队驻扎在马头岸。
English: Geng Zi, Shinshu Zhishi Fang Shifu, Jinan Wang Sima Ren Rong troops stationed in the horse's head shore.

古文：戊申，胡僧祐、硃买臣等率兵出战，买臣败绩。
现代文：戊申，胡僧佑、朱买臣等人率兵出战，朱买旦失败。
English: Boshen, Hu Sangyou, Zhu Meichen and others led the troops into battle, but Zhu Meidan failed.

古文：己酉，降左仆射王褒为护军将军。
现代文：己酉，世塑降左仆射王童为护军将军。
English: Ji Yao, the world's plastic falling left-handed shot Wang Tong as the escort general.

古文：辛亥，魏军大攻，世祖出枇杷门，亲临阵督战。
现代文：辛亥，魏军大举进攻，世担从批幽出，亲自临阵督战。
English: In Xinhai, the Wei army launched a large-scale attack, and the world's warden came out from Biyu to personally supervise the battle.

古文：胡僧祐中流矢薨。
现代文：胡僧佑中流箭阵亡。
English: Hu Xiangyou was killed in the middle of the battle.

古文：六军败绩。
现代文：六军惨败。
English: The Sixth Army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：反者斩西门关以纳魏师，城陷于西魏。
现代文：反叛的军士斩断西门的门闩来接纳魏军，城被玺垫攻陷。
English: The rebel sergeant cut off the lintel of the West Gate to receive the Wei army, and the city was captured by the cormorant.

古文：世祖见执，如萧察营，又迁还城内。
现代文：世担被拘囚，押到盖督的兵营，后又迁回到城裹。
English: The steward was taken prisoner, marched to the governor's camp, and then moved back to the city.

古文：十二月丙辰，徐世谱、任约退戍巴陵。
现代文：十二月丙辰，徐世谱、任约退守巴陵。
English: In December, Xu Shifu retreated to Baling.

古文：辛未，西魏害世祖，遂崩焉，时年四十七。
现代文：辛未，西魏杀害世祖，于是世祖驾崩，时年四十七岁。
English: Soon after, the Western Wei Dynasty killed the patriarch, and he died at the age of forty-seven.

古文：太子元良、始安王方略皆见害。
现代文：太子元良、始安王方略都被杀害。
English: Prince Motoyoshi and Prince Shiong were both killed.

古文：乃选百姓男女数万口，分为奴婢，驱入长安；小弱者皆杀之。
现代文：西魏军于是挑选百姓中男女数万人，分为奴婢，驱赶入长安；幼小体弱的人都杀掉了。
English: The Western Wei army then selected tens of thousands of men and women from the people, divided them into slaves and chattels, and drove them into Chang'an; all the small and weak people were killed.

古文：明年四月，追尊为孝元皇帝，庙曰世祖。
现代文：第二年四月，世祖被追谧为孝元皇帝，庙号为世祖。
English: In April of the following year, Sheshu was crowned Emperor Xiaoyuan and given the temple name Sheshu.

古文：世祖聪悟俊朗，天才英发。
现代文：世祖聪明颖悟英俊爽朗，天才英发。
English: The ancestor of the world was clever, brilliant, handsome, cheerful, and a genius.

古文：年五岁，高祖问： 汝读何书？ 
现代文：年龄祇有五岁时，高祖问他： 你读什么书? 
English: When he was only five years old, Gaozu asked him, "What books do you read?"

古文：对曰： 能诵《曲礼》。 
现代文：世祖回答说： 能背诵《曲礼》。 
English: The patriarch replied, "I can recite the Song of Songs."

古文：高祖曰： 汝试言之。 
现代文：高祖说： 你试着说说。 
English: Gaozu said, "Try to say it."

古文：即诵上篇，左右莫不惊叹。
现代文：世祖就背诵上篇，左右的人没有不惊叹的。
English: The patriarch recited the first chapter, and people on both sides were amazed.

古文：初生患眼，高祖自下意治之，遂盲一目，弥加愍爱。
现代文：当初世祖眼睛生病，高祖自然用心去为他治疗，世祖仍然有一只眼睛盲了，高祖更加怜悯疼爱他。
English: At the beginning, Shizu's eyes were sick, and Gaozu naturally went to treat him with all his heart. Shizu was still blind in one eye, and Gaozu pitied and loved him even more.

古文：既长好学，博综群书，下笔成章，出言为论，才辩敏速，冠绝一时。
现代文：长大后更加好学，博览群书，下笔成章，出言有条理，才思敏捷应辩迅速，冠盖一时。
English: When they grow up, they will be more eager to learn, have a good knowledge of books, be able to write a complete sentence, have a well-organized speech, be able to think quickly, be able to argue quickly, and be able to finish a book in a short time.

古文：高祖尝问曰： 孙策昔在江东，于时年几？ 
现代文：高祖曾经问他说： 孙策从前在江束，当时年龄是多少? 
English: Gao Zu once asked him: Sun Ce was once in Jiangzhu, how old was he then?

古文：答曰： 十七。 
现代文：世祖回答说： 十七岁。 
English: The patriarch replied, "Seventeen years old."

古文：高祖曰： 正是汝年。 
现代文：高祖说： 正是你现在的年龄。 
English: Gaozu said, "Exactly the age you are now."

古文：贺革为府谘议，敕革讲《三礼》。
现代文：贺革是府谘议，世祖令贺革讲论《三礼》。
English: Hege is a prefectural advisory council, and the patriarch ordered Hege to give a lecture on the "Three Rites."

古文：世祖性不好声色，颇有高名，与裴子野、刘显、萧子云、张缵及当时才秀为布衣之交，著述辞章，多行于世。
现代文：世祖性情不好声色，很有好的名声，舆裴子野、刘显、萧子云、张缆以及当时的才子们成为布衣之交，写作的辞章，多盛行于世。
English: The ancestor of the world had a bad temperament, but a good reputation. Mubei Zino, Liu Xian, Xiao Ziyun, Zhang Cables and the talented people at that time became friends of cloth, and the words of writing were more prevalent in the world.

古文：在寻阳，梦人曰： 天下将乱，王必维之。 
现代文：在寻阳，世祖梦见别人说： 天下将要混乱，您必须维持它。 
English: In the search for the sun, the ancestor dreamed of others saying: The world will be in chaos, you must maintain it.

古文：又背生黑子，巫媪见曰： 此大贵兆，当不可言。 
现代文：世祖背上又生黑痣，巫媪看见后说： 这是大贵的征兆，富贵当无法言说。 
English: The ancestor also had a black mole on his back. Seeing this, the sorceress said, "This is a sign of great nobility. One should not say that one is rich."

古文：初，贺革西上，意甚不悦，过别御史中丞江革，以情告之。
现代文：当初，贺革西上，心裹很不高兴，拜别御史中丞江革，把实情告诉了他。
English: At first, He Ge Xi Shang, feeling very unhappy, bid farewell to the imperial historian Zhongzheng Jiang Ge and told him the truth.

古文：革曰： 吾尝梦主上遍见诸子，至湘东王，手脱帽授之。
现代文：江革说： 我曾经梦见主上到处召见各位皇子，到湘束王那裹，亲手脱去帽子给湘束王。
English: Jiang Ge said: I once had a dream that the Lord was calling all the princes everywhere to come to Hunan King and personally take off their hats to Hunan King.

古文：此人后必当璧，卿其行乎！ 
现代文：这个人以后必定大富大贵，您应该前去啊! 
English: This man will certainly be very rich in the future, you should go ahead!

古文：革从之。
现代文：贺革听从了他的话。
English: He Ge listened to his words.

古文：及太清之难，乃能克复，故遐迩乐推，遂膺宝命矣。
现代文：等到太清之难，世祖竟然能够取胜收复，所以远近乐于推崇他，世祖于是接受了最宝贵的任命。
English: When it was too late, Shizu was able to win and recover, so people from near and far were happy to praise him. Shizu then received the most precious appointment.

古文：所著《孝德传》三十卷，《忠臣传》三十卷，《丹阳尹传》十卷。
现代文：世祖所写的作品有《孝德传》三十卷，《忠臣传》三十卷，《丹阳尹传》十卷。
English: The works written by the ancestor include "Biography of Filial Piety" with 30 volumes, "Biography of Loyal Subjects" with 30 volumes, and "Biography of Danyang Yin" with 10 volumes.

古文：《注汉书》一百一十五卷，《周易讲疏》十卷，《内典博要》一百卷，《连山》三十卷，《洞林》三卷，《玉韬》十卷，《补阙子》十卷，《老子讲疏》四卷，《全德志》、《怀旧志》、《荆南志》、《江州记》、《贡职图》、《古今同姓名录》一卷，《筮经》十二卷，《式赞》三卷，文集五十卷。
现代文：又《注汉书》一百一十五卷，《周易讲疏》十卷，《内典博要》一百卷，《连山》三十卷，《洞林》三卷，《玉韬》十卷，《补阙子》十卷，《老子讲疏》四卷，《全德志》、《怀旧志》、《荆南志》、《江州记》、《贡职圆》、《古今同姓名绿》各一卷，《筮经》十二卷，《式赞》三卷，文集五十卷。
English: There are also 115 volumes of "Commentary on the Han Dynasty," 10 volumes of "Commentary on the Zhou Dynasty," 100 volumes of "Introduction to the Inner Texts," 30 volumes of "Lianshan," 3 volumes of "Donglin," 10 volumes of "Jade Urn," 10 volumes of "Commentary on the Zhou Dynasty," 4 volumes of "Commentary on the Laozi Dynasty," 1 volume each of "Commentary on the Zhou Dynasty," "Commentary on the Zhou Dynasty," "Commentary on the Zhou Dynasty," "Commentary on the Gong Dynasty," and "Commentary on the Gong Dynasty," 12 volumes of

古文：史臣曰：梁季之祸，巨寇凭垒，世祖时位长连率，有全楚之资，应身率群后，枕戈先路。
现代文：史臣曰：梁末的灾祸，就是强大的贼寇依据壁垒作乱，世祖当时位置比各位连续率军的人位尊，有保全楚的资望，应该亲身率领各位侯王，枕戈待旦做开路先锋。
English: Shichen said, "The scourge of Liangmai is that the powerful bandits make trouble based on the barrier. At that time, the position of the ancestor was higher than that of the successive leaders of the army, and he had the reputation of preserving Chu. He should personally lead the princes and kings, and wait to be the pioneer.

古文：虚张外援，事异勤王，在于行师，曾非百舍。
现代文：虚张声势去外援，事情不同于勤王，在于调动军队，不在于百舍国土的得失。
English: Bluffing to go to foreign aid, things are different from the diligent king, in the mobilization of the army, not in the gains and losses of the country.

古文：后方歼夷大憝，用宁宗社，握图南面，光启中兴，亦世祖雄才英略，绍兹宝运者也。
现代文：后来才歼灭平定了大恶之人的叛乱，因而使宗庙社稷宁静，掌握龙图南面称帝，使梁国祥光出现国家中兴，也是世祖雄才大略，能够接续梁这宝贵的运脉。
English: It was only later that the rebellion of the people of great evil was annihilated and quelled, thus making the ancestral temple and shrine peaceful, mastering the southern face of the dragon and calling it an emperor, and making Liang Guo Xiangguang appear as a national rejuvenation. He was also a great talent, able to continue Liang's precious lineage.

古文：而禀性猜忌，不隔疏近，御下无术，履冰弗惧，故凤阙伺晨之功，火无内照之美。
现代文：但是世祖禀性猜忌，不能区分疏近，驾驭部下又无好的方法，走在薄冰上不知恐惧，所以凤连伺晨的功绩也没有，火也没有内照的美名。
English: However, the ancestor of the world was suspicious, unable to distinguish between estrangement and closeness, and there was no good way to control his subordinates. He did not know fear when walking on thin ice. Therefore, there was no merit of the phoenix and the morning, and there was no reputation of the fire.

古文：以世祖之神睿特达，留情政道，不怵邪说，徙跸金陵，左邻强寇，将何以作？
现代文：按照世祖的神明和特别通达，如能留心为政的道理，不怕邪说，移驾金陵，那么左近的强贼，将能如何作乱。
English: According to the gods of the ancestors and their special wisdom, if you can pay attention to the principles of politics, do not be afraid of evil sayings, and move to Jinling, then the nearest strong thief will be able to make trouble.

古文：是以天未悔祸，荡覆斯生，悲夫！
现代文：所以上天没有因后悔而不降灾祸，荡灭覆没了他的生命，可悲啊!
English: Therefore, Heaven did not, out of regret, not bring down disaster and ruin upon his life. How sad!

