古文：贾谊上疏文帝曰： 生为明帝，没为明神。
现代文：贾谊上书汉文帝说： 活着做英明的皇帝，死后做圣明的神灵。
English: Emperor Wenzong of the Han Dynasty said: "Live as a wise emperor, and die as a holy deity."

古文：使顾成之庙，称为太宗，上配太祖，与汉亡极。
现代文：要使顾成庙的庙号称为太宗，上面可跟太祖相配，那么汉朝兴旺就没有尽头了。
English: If the temple name of Gu Cheng Temple is called Taizong, which can be matched with Taizu, then there will be no end to the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.

古文：虽有愚幼不光之嗣，犹得蒙业而安；植遗腹，朝委裘，而天下不乱。 
现代文：即使有愚顽幼小的不成器的后代，仍然可以承蒙您留下的基业而平安。即使扶植为出世的太子，朝拜您留下的衣服，天下也不会动乱。 
English: Even if there are foolish, small, and immature descendants, they can still inherit the inheritance you left behind and be safe. Even if they are raised to be princes and worship the clothes you left behind, the world will not be disturbed.

古文：又云： 万年之后，传之老母弱子。 
现代文：又说： 您死了以后，传位给老母亲或弱小的太子。 
English: He also said, "After you die, pass the throne to your old mother or a weak prince."

古文：此既于生时谈死事，至云： 传之老母 ，则是言其当终于太后之前，又目其嗣为 愚幼不肖 ，可谓指斥，而帝不以为过，谊不以为疑。
现代文：这既是在帝王活着的时候谈他死后的事，甚至说到 传位给老母亲 ，又是说皇帝会死在太后的前面，又把他的后代看成是 愚顽不成器 ，可以说是当面指责了，可是汉文帝不认为是罪过，贾谊也不因此而疑虑。
English: This was not only talking about the emperor's death while he was alive, and even talking about passing the throne to his old mother, but also saying that the emperor would die in front of the empress dowager, and seeing his descendants as "foolish and incompetent," which can be said to be blaming them in person, but Emperor Hanwen did not think it was a sin, and Jiaoyi did not have any doubts about it.

古文：刘向上书成帝谏王氏事曰： 王氏与刘氏，且不并立，陛下为人子孙，守持宗庙，而令国祚移于外亲，降为皂隶，纵不为身，奈宗庙何？ 
现代文：刘向上书给汉成帝进谏王氏的事说： 王氏和刘氏，将不能并立，陛下作为汉室的子孙，守护维持宗庙，却让国家的权位转移到外姓亲戚手里，自己地位下降为奴仆，即使不为自己考虑，难道不为宗庙考虑吗？ 
English: Liu Shang wrote to Emperor Hancheng about the Wang clan: The Wang clan and the Liu clan will not be able to stand side by side. Your Majesty, as the descendant of the Han family, guards and maintains the ancestral temple, but allows the power of the country to be transferred to the hands of foreign relatives. Your own status is reduced to that of a slave. Even if you don't think about yourself, don't you think about the ancestral temple?

古文：又云： 天命所授者博，非独一姓。 
现代文：又说： 接受天命的人很多，不仅仅是一姓的人。 
English: He also said: There are many people who accept the fate of heaven, not just people with the same surname.

古文：此乃于国存时说亡语，而帝不以为过，向不以为疑，至乞援近宗室，几于自售，亦不以为嫌也。
现代文：这是在国家还存在的时候说亡国的话，可是汉成帝不以此为罪过，刘向不因此而疑虑。说到请求帮助和自己相近的宗室，几乎是自我举荐，也不认为是涉嫌。
English: This was said when the country was still in existence, but Emperor Han Chengdu did not take it as a sin, and Liu Xiang did not doubt it. When it comes to asking for help from a family that is similar to his own, it is almost self-recommendation, and it is not considered to be suspicious.

古文：两人皆出于忠精至诚，故尽言触忌讳而不自觉。
现代文：这两个人都是出于最高最纯的忠心和诚意，因为畅所欲言，触犯了忌讳也没有自我觉察。
English: Both of them were motivated by the highest and purest loyalty and sincerity, because they spoke freely, broke taboos and were not self-conscious.

古文：文帝以宽待下，圣德固尔；而成帝亦能容之，后世难及也。
现代文：汉文帝以宽厚的态度对待下属，他圣明的德行固然如此；而汉成帝也能容忍触犯忌讳，这是后代难以企及的。
English: Emperor Hanwen treated his subordinates with a lenient attitude, which was certainly true of his saintly virtue; and Emperor Hancheng could also tolerate breaking taboos, which is difficult for future generations to achieve.

