古文：《五代会要》：三年九月二十三日，封为魏王。三年，伐蜀，以继岌为都统，郭崇韬为招讨使。十月戊寅，至凤州，武兴军节度使王承捷以凤、兴、文、扶四州降。
现代文：魏王李继岌，是庄宗的儿子。庄宗在魏州即帝位后，任李继岌为北都留守，以后以镇州为北都，又命李继岌为留守。同光三年，讨伐蜀地，任李继岌为都统，任郭崇韬为招讨使，十月十九日，到凤州，武兴军节度使王承捷以凤、兴、文、扶四州投降。
English: Li Jizhao, the king of Wei, was the son of Zhuangzong. After Zhuangzong became emperor of Wei, he left Li Jizhao as the northern capital. Later, he made Zhenzhou the northern capital, and ordered Li Jizhao to stay. In the same year, Li Jizhao was appointed as the general and Guo Chongyi was appointed as the envoy. On October 19th, he went to Fengzhou to celebrate the festival of the Wuxing Army and made Wang Chengjie surrender to Feng, Xing, Wen and Fu four states.

古文：甲申，至故镇，康延孝收兴州。
现代文：二十五日，到故镇，康延孝收复兴州。
English: On the 25th, Kang Yanxiao went to Fuxing County from the old town.

古文：时伪蜀主王衍率亲军五万在利州，令步骑亲军三万逆战于三泉，康延孝、李严以劲骑三千犯之，蜀军大败，斩首五千级，余皆奔溃。
现代文：此时伪蜀主王衍率领亲军五万在利州，令步骑亲军三万在三泉迎战，康延孝、李严以劲骑三千攻击，蜀军大败，斩首五千级，其余的溃散逃命。
English: At this time, the false Shu lord Wang Yan led 50,000 of his relatives' troops in Lizhou, and ordered 30,000 of his relatives' troops to march and ride to fight in Sanquan. Kang Yanxiao and Li Yan vigorously rode 3,000 to attack. The Shu army was defeated, 5,000 were beheaded, and the rest scattered and fled for their lives.

古文：王衍闻其败也，弃利州奔归西川，断吉柏津，浮梁而去。
现代文：王衍听说败讯，放弃利州奔回西川，断绝吉柏津桥而去。
English: When Wang Yan heard of the defeat, he abandoned Lizhou and rushed back to the West River, abandoning the Jibatin Bridge.

古文：己丑，继岌至兴州，伪蜀东川节度使宋光葆以梓、潼、剑、龙、普等州来降；武定军节度使王承肇以洋、蓬、壁三州符印降；兴元节度使王宗威以梁、开、通、渠、麟等五州符印送降；阶州王承岳纳符印；秦州节度使王承休弃城而遁。
现代文：三十日，李继岌到兴州，伪蜀东川节度使宋光葆以梓、绵、剑、龙、普等州投降；武定军节度使王承肇以洋、蓬、壁三州符印献上投降；兴元节度使王宗威以梁、开、通、渠、麟等五州符印送上投降；阶州王承岳献上符印；秦州节度使王承休弃城逃走。
English: On the 30th, Li Jizhe went to Xingzhou. The pseudo-Shu Dongchuan Festival made Song Guangya surrender to Zizhi, Mian, Jian, Long and Pu; the Wuding Army Festival made Wang Chengzhao surrender to Yang, Peng and Wei; the Xingyuan Festival made Wang Zongwei surrender to Liang, Kai, Tong, Qu and Lin; the Chaozhou Festival made Wang Chengyue surrender; and the Qin State Festival made Wang Chengyu abandon the city and flee.

古文：辛丑，继岌过利州。
现代文：十二日，李继岌经过利州。
English: On the 12th, Li Jizhou passed through Lizhou.

古文：戊申，至剑州。
现代文：十九日，到剑州。
English: On the 19th, to Jianzhou.

古文：己酉，至绵州，王衍遣使上笺乞降。
现代文：二十日，到绵州，王衍派使者上笺表求降。
English: On the 20th, Wang Yan sent an envoy to Mianzhou to appeal for surrender.

古文：丁巳，入成都。
现代文：二十七日，进入成都。
English: On the 27th, it entered Chengdu.

古文：天成初，赠太保。秦王从荣，明宗第二子也。
现代文：从发兵离开洛阳到平定蜀地，一共七十五日，势如破竹，前代所未见。回师到渭南，听说庄宗败亡，军队溃散，自缢而死。秦王李从荣是明宗第二个儿子。
English: From the departure of the troops from Luoyang to the pacification of Shu, a total of seventy-five days, the situation is unprecedented, unprecedented in the previous generation. Back to the south of Luzhou, I heard that Zhuangzong was defeated, the army was dispersed, and he died of suicide. Qin King Li Congrong was the second son of Mingzong.

古文：明宗践阼，天成初，授鄴都留守、天雄军节度使。
现代文：明宗登上皇位，于天成初年，授李从荣为邺都留守、天雄军节度使。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, in the first year of Tiancheng, Li Congrong stayed in the capital to serve as the envoy of the Emperor's army.

古文：三年，移北京留守，充河东节度使。
现代文：三年，调任北京留守，兼河东节度使。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to Beijing to stay, and also served as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：四年，入为河南尹。
现代文：四年，任河南尹。
English: He served as Henan Yin for four years.

古文：一日，明宗谓安重诲曰： 近闻从荣左右有诈宣朕旨，令勿接儒生，儒生多懦，恐钝志相染。
现代文：一天，明宗对安重诲说： 最近听说从荣左右的人伪宣朕的诏书，命他不要接近儒生，儒生多懦弱，担心受他们迟钝性格的影响。
English: One day, Mingzong said to An Chongyun, "Recently, I heard that people around Rong have forged the edict of Xuanwen, ordering him not to approach the Confucians. The Confucians are too cowardly and are afraid of being influenced by their dull character.

古文：朕方知之，颇骇其事。
现代文：朕刚才知道，有些吃惊。
English: I just found out, and I'm a little surprised.

古文：余比以从荣方幼，出临大籓，故先儒雅，赖其裨佐。
现代文：我以前因从荣年幼，出去管理大藩属地，所以选了儒雅之士，靠他们辅佐。
English: In the past, because I was too young to go out and manage the territory of a large domain, I chose people with refined manners and relied on them for support.

古文：今闻此奸憸之言，岂朕之所望屯。 
现代文：现在听到这种奸邪的话，这哪里是朕希望的呢？ 
English: Now, when I hear of such treachery, what do I hope for?

古文：鞫其言者将戮之，重诲曰： 若遽行刑，又虑宾从难处，且望严诫。 
现代文：追究说这话的人准备杀掉他们，安重诲说 ：如仓促行刑，又担心宾客随从难以处置，且望严加训诫。 
English: Investigating the person who said this was going to kill them, An Chong said: If the execution is hasty, and they are worried that the guests will be difficult to deal with, they should be severely reprimanded.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是停止没杀。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：从荣为诗，与从事高辇等更相唱和，自谓章句独步于一时，有诗千余首，号曰《紫府集》。长兴中，以本官充天下兵马大元帅。从荣乃请以严卫、捧圣步骑两指挥为秦府衙兵，每入朝，以数百骑从行，出则张弓挟矢，驰骋盈巷。既受元帅之命，即令其府属僚佐及四方游士，各试《檄淮南书》一道，陈己将廓清宇内之意。初，言事者请为亲王置师傅，明宗顾问近臣，执政以从荣名势既隆，不敢忤旨，即奏云： 王官宜委。 
现代文：长兴年中，李从荣以秦王身份兼任天下兵马大元帅。李从荣便请以严卫、捧圣步骑两指挥为秦王府衙兵，每次上朝，以数百骑兵随行，出行就张弓挟箭，满街奔驰。接受元帅一职后，便令其府属僚佐以及四方游士，各写《檄淮南书》一篇，陈述自己将扫清天下之意。起初，有言事的人请为亲王设立一名师傅，明宗向近臣询问，管事的人因李从荣名声势力日益隆盛，不敢违抗旨意，便上奏说 ：王官适宜委任。 
English: In the middle of the Changxing era, Li Congrong, in his capacity as the King of Qin, concurrently served as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses. Li Congrong then asked the two commanders, Yan Wei and Huxing, to ride as the Qin King's palace guards. Every time he went to the court, he was accompanied by hundreds of cavalrymen. They would travel with bows and arrows, filling the streets. After accepting the post of marshal, he ordered his subordinates from the government and the wanderers from the four directions to each write a "Letter to Huainan," stating his intention to clear the world. At first,

古文：从荣乃奏刑部侍郎刘赞为王傅，又奏翰林学士崔棁为元帅府判官。
现代文：李从荣乃奏请刑部侍郎刘赞为秦王师傅，又奏请翰林学士崔为元帅府判官。
English: Li Congrong invited Liu Zan, the attendant of the criminal department, to be the Qin King's teacher, and invited Hanlin Baccalaureate Cui to be the marshal's magistrate.

古文：明宗曰： 学士代予诏令，不可拟议。 
现代文：明宗说 ：学士代我拟诏令，不可拟议。 
English: Mingzong said, "It is not possible for a scholar to draft the edict on my behalf.

古文：命复旧官，仍赠太保。许王从益，明宗之幼子也。
现代文：李从荣不高兴，退下后对身边的人说： 既然委任元帅一职，却又阻止我请僚佐，又不明白制旨。 再奏请刑部侍郎任赞，明宗同意了。后来发兵侵犯皇室，失败而死，废为庶人。
English: Unhappy, Li Congrong retreated and said to those around him, "Since you have appointed me to the position of marshal, you have also prevented me from appointing a lieutenant colonel, and you do not understand the directive. You again asked the sergeant of the criminal investigation department for an appointment, and Mingzong agreed. Later, you sent troops to encroach on the royal family, died in defeat, and became a commoner.

古文：宫嫔所生。
现代文：许王李从益是明宗的幼子。
English: Xu Wang Li Congyi is the youngest son of Mingzong.

古文：明宗命王淑妃母之，尝谓左右曰： 惟此兒生于皇宫，故尤所钟爱。 
现代文：是宫嫔所生，明宗命王淑妃抚养他。曾对身边人说 ：只有这个儿子出生在皇宫，所以我特别喜爱他。 
English: He was born to the Imperial Household Agency, and raised by the daughter of Emperor Mingzong, Empress Dowager Wang Shuxuan. She once said to those around her, "Only this son was born in the Imperial Palace, so I love him very much."

古文：长兴末，封许王。
现代文：长兴末年，封为许王。
English: In the last years of Changxing, he was given the title of Xu Wang.

古文：晋高祖即位，以皇后即其姊也，乃养从益于宫中。
现代文：晋高祖即位后，因为皇后就是他的姐姐，便把李从益养在宫中。
English: After Emperor Jinguo ascended the throne, because the empress was his sister, he raised Li Congyi in the palace.

古文：晋天福中，以从益为二王后，改封郇国公，食邑三千户。
现代文：晋天福中，因为李从益是二王之后，改封郇国公，食邑三千户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, because Li Congyip was the second king, he was given the title of Duke of Shandong Province, and he ruled over 3,000 households.

古文：其后与母归洛阳。
现代文：后来与母亲回洛阳看守陵墓。
English: Later, he and his mother returned to Luoyang to guard the mausoleum.

古文：及开运末，契丹主至汴，以从益遥领曹州节度使，后封许王，与王妃寻归西京。
现代文：开运末年，契丹国主到汴州，以李从益遥任曹州节度使，再次封为许王，不久与王妃回西京。
English: At the end of the year, the ruler of Khitan went to Zhangzhou and appointed Li Congyi Yao as the envoy of Caozhou Festival. He was named King Xu again, and soon he and his queen returned to Xijing.

古文：会契丹主死，其汴州节度使萧翰谋归北地，虑中原无主，军民大乱，则己亦不得按辔徐归矣；乃诈称契丹主命，遣人迎从益于洛阳，令知南朝军国事。
现代文：遇上契丹主去世，契丹任命的汴州节度使萧翰打算回北方，但担心中原无主，军民大乱，不能安心平稳地回去，于是诈称契丹主的命令，派人到洛阳迎接李从益，令他掌管南方军国事务。
English: Upon the death of the Khitan lord, the Bozhou Festival appointed by the Khitan made Xiao Han plan to return to the north. However, he was worried that there would be no ruler in the Central Plains and the military and people would be in turmoil, so he could not return safely and smoothly. Therefore, he pretended to be the order of the Khitan lord, sent someone to Luoyang to meet Li Congyi, and put him in charge of the military affairs in the south.

古文：从益与王妃逃于徽陵以避之，使者至，不得已而赴焉。
现代文：李从益和王妃逃到徽陵以避开此事，使者赶到，不得已才赴任。
English: Li Congyi and the empress fled to Hailing Mausoleum to avoid the incident. An envoy arrived, and Li Congyi was forced to take office.

古文：从益于崇元殿见群官。萧翰率蕃首列拜于殿上，群官趋于殿下，乃伪署王松为左相，赵上交为右丞相。李式、翟光鄴为枢密使，王景崇为宣徽使，余官各有署置。
现代文：李从益在崇元殿会见众官，萧翰率部众在殿上排列朝拜，众官在殿下趋拜，于是伪任王松为左丞相，赵上交为右丞相，李式、翟光邺为枢密使，王景崇为宣徽使，其余官员各有安置。
English: Li Congyi met with the officials in the Chongyuan Hall, Xiao Han and his subordinates lined up in the hall to pay homage, and the officials paid homage to their royal highnesses. As a result, Wang Song was appointed as the minister of the left, Zhao Shangjia as the minister of the right, Li Shih and Zou Guangyao as the envoys of the privy council, and Wang Jingsong as the envoy of the imperial seal, and the remaining officials were placed in their respective positions.

古文：又以北来燕将刘祚为权侍卫使，充在京巡检。
现代文：又任北方来的燕将刘祚为临时侍卫使，兼在京巡检。
English: In addition, Yan, who came from the north, appointed Liu Wei as a temporary bodyguard, and also carried out inspections in Beijing.

古文：翰北归，从益饯于北郊。
现代文：萧翰回到北方时，李从益在北郊为他饯行。
English: When Xiaohan returned to the north, Li Congyi accompanied him in the northern suburbs.

古文：及汉高祖将离太原，从益召高行周、武行德欲拒汉高祖，行周等不从，且奏其事。
现代文：到汉高祖将离开太原时，李从益召见高行周、武行德准备抗拒汉高祖，高行周等人不同意，又上奏这件事。
English: When Han Gaozhu was about to leave Taiyuan, Li Congyi summoned Gao Xingzhou and Wu Xingde to prepare to resist Han Gaozhu. Gao Xingzhou and others disagreed and brought up the matter again.

古文：汉高祖怒，车驾将至阙，从益与王妃俱赐死于私第，时年十七；时人哀之。
现代文：汉高祖发怒，车驾将到京城，李从益与王妃都被赐死在家中，年仅十七岁，当时人都哀悼他。
English: Han Gao Zu was angry and drove to Beijing. Li Congyi and Wangfei both died at home, only seventeen years old. At that time, everyone mourned him.

