古文：宋子曰：狱讼日繁，酒流生祸，其源则何辜！
现代文：宋先生说：因酗酒闹事而惹起的案件一天比一天多，这确实是酗酒造成的祸害，然而话又说回来，对于酒曲本身又谈得上有什么罪过呢？
English: Mr. Song said, "There are more and more cases caused by drunkenness and disorderly conduct every day. This is indeed a scourge caused by alcoholism, but then again, what kind of crime can we talk about for the song itself?

古文：祀天追远，沉吟《商倾》、《周雅》之间，若作酒醴之资曲蘖也，殆圣作而明述矣。
现代文：在祭祀天地追怀先祖的仪式上，在吟咏诗篇朋友欢宴的时候，都需要有酒。这时就得靠酒曲来造酒了，关于这一点，古代的圣人已经说得很清楚了。
English: The ancient sages were very clear about the fact that wine was needed for the ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth to the ancestors, as well as for the feast of the friends of the Song of Songs. In this case, the wine had to be made from the wine songs.

古文：惟是五谷菁华变幻，得水而凝，感风而化，供用岐黄者神其名，而坚固食羞者丹其色。
现代文：酒曲原本就是用五谷的精华，通过水凝及风化的作用而变化成功的。供医药上用的曲名叫神曲，而用以保持珍贵食物美味的则是红曲。
English: Originally, sakoku was made from the essence of grain, but it has been successfully transformed through the effects of water condensation and weathering. The one used for medicinal purposes is called shiniku, and the one used to keep precious foods delicious is hongiku.

古文：君臣自古配合日新，眉寿介而宿痼怯，其功不可殚述。
现代文：自古以来制作曲糵的主料和配料的调制配方不断改进，既能延年益寿又能医治各种痼疾顽症，其间的功效真是一言难尽。
English: Since ancient times, the recipe of the main ingredient and the ingredients for the preparation of the cucumber have been continuously improved. It can not only prolong life, but also cure various maladies and diseases. The effect is truly inexhaustible.

古文：自非炎黄作祖、末流聪明，乌能竟其方术哉。
现代文：如果没有我们祖先的创造发明和后人的聪明才智，如何能够使酿酒的技巧达到这样完善呢？
English: Without the inventions of our ancestors and the ingenuity of our descendants, how could we have perfected the art of winemaking?

古文：○酒母
现代文：酒母
English: Mother of Wine

古文：凡酿酒必资曲药成信。无曲即佳米珍黍，空造不成。
现代文：酿酒必须要用酒曲作为酒引子，没有酒曲，即便有好米好黍也酿不出酒。
English: The brewing of wine must use the wine melody as the wine introduction. Without the wine melody, even if there is good rice and good malt, the wine cannot be brewed.

古文：古来曲造酒，蘖造醴，后世厌醴味薄，遂至失传，则并蘖法亦亡。
现代文：古时候人们用曲酿黄酒，用蘖酿甜酒，但后来的人嫌甜酒的味道太淡，不容易广泛流传，结果酿甜酒的技术都失传了。
English: In ancient times, people used to brew yellow wine with a melody and sweet wine with a gong, but later people thought that the taste of sweet wine was too light and it was not easy to spread widely. As a result, the technology of making sweet wine was lost.

古文：凡曲，麦、米、面随方土造，南北不同，其义则一。
现代文：制作酒曲可以因地制宜用麦子、面粉或米粉为原料，南方和北方做法不同，但原理同出一辙。
English: Wheat, flour or rice flour can be used as raw materials to make sake tunes according to local conditions. The practice is different in the south and the north, but the principle is the same.

古文：凡麦曲，大、小麦皆可用。
现代文：做麦曲，大麦、小麦都可以选用。
English: Barley and wheat can both be used to make wheat noodles.

古文：造者将麦连皮，井水淘净，晒干，时宜盛暑天。
现代文：制作酒曲的人，最好选在炎热的夏天，把麦粒带皮都用井水洗净、晒干。
English: It is best to choose the hot summer for those who make liquor, and wash and dry the wheat grains and skins with well water.

古文：磨碎，即以淘麦水和作块，用楮叶包扎，悬风处，或用稻秸罨黄，经四十九日取用。
现代文：把麦粒磨碎，就用淘麦水拌和做成块状，再用楮叶包扎起来，悬挂在通风的地方，或者用稻草覆盖使它变黄，这样经过四十九天之后便可以取用了。
English: Grind the grains of wheat, mix them with de-malted water and make them into blocks, then wrap them with reeds and hang them in a ventilated place, or cover them with straw to turn them yellow, so that they can be used after forty-nine days.

古文：造面曲用白面五斤、黄豆五升，以蓼汁煮烂，再用辣蓼末五两、杏仁泥十两和踏成饼，楮叶包悬与稻秸罨黄，法亦同前。
现代文：制作面曲，是用白面五斤、黄豆五升，加入蓼汁一起煮烂，再加辣蓼末五两、杏仁泥十两，混合踏压成饼状，再用楮叶包扎悬挂或用稻草覆盖使它变黄，方法跟麦曲相同。
English: To make the noodles, five catties of white noodles and five liters of soybeans are used, simmered together with ginger juice, five dashes of spicy ginger paste and ten dashes of almond paste are added, and the mixture is pressed into a cake shape. It is then wrapped with ginger leaves and hung or covered with straw to turn it yellow. The method is the same as for wheat noodles.

古文：其用糯米粉与自然蓼汁溲和成饼，生黄收用者，罨法与时日，亦无不同也。
现代文：拿着用糯米粉加蓼汁搓和揉成饼，覆盖使它变黄让它长出黄毛后才取用，方法和时间也跟前述的相同。
English: Take the glutinous rice powder, add ginger juice and knead it into a cake, cover it to make it yellow and let it grow yellow hairs before using it. The method and time are the same as mentioned above.

古文：其入诸般君臣草药，少者数味，多者百味，则各土各法，亦不可殚述。
现代文：在酒曲中加入主料、配料和草药，少的只有几种，多的可达上百种，各地的做法不同，难以一一详尽论述。
English: There are only a few main ingredients, ingredients, and herbs that can be added to sake, but there are more than a hundred. The practices vary from place to place, and it is difficult to discuss them in detail.

古文：近代燕京，则以薏苡仁为君，入曲造薏酒。浙中宁、绍则以绿豆为君，入曲造豆酒。
现代文：近代，北京用薏米为主要原料制作酒曲后再酿造薏酒，浙江的宁波和绍兴则用绿豆为料制作酒曲后再酿造豆酒。
English: In modern times, Beijing uses glutinous rice as the main raw material to make liquorice and then brew ginger wine, while Ningbo and Shaoxing in Zhejiang use green beans as the material to make liquorice and then brew soy wine.

古文：二酒颇擅天下佳雄。
现代文：这两种酒都被列为名酒。
English: Both of these wines are classified as famous wines.

古文：凡造酒母家，生黄未足，视候不勤，盥拭不洁，则疵药数丸动辄败人石米。
现代文：制作酒曲时，如果生黄不足，看管不勤，洗抹得不干净，都会出岔子。几粒坏的酒曲轻易地就能败坏人们上百斤的粮食。
English: When making liquorice, if the yolk is insufficient, the supervision is not diligent, and the washing is not clean, there will be defects. A few bad grains of liquorice can easily spoil hundreds of pounds of grain.

古文：故市曲之家必信著名闻，而后不负酿者。
现代文：所以，卖酒曲的人必须要守信用、重名誉，这样才不会对不起酿酒的人。
English: Therefore, people who sell liquor must keep their word and honor, so as not to offend the people who make the liquor.

古文：凡燕、齐黄酒曲药，多从淮郡造成，载于舟车北市。
现代文：河北、山东一带酿造黄酒用的酒曲，大部分都是在江苏淮安造好后用车船运去贩卖的。
English: Most of the liquor used for brewing yellow wine in Hebei and Shandong was transported to Huai'an, Jiangsu, for sale.

古文：南方曲酒，酿出即成红色者，用曲与淮郡所造相同，统名大曲。但淮郡市者打成砖片，而南方则用饼团。
现代文：南方酿造红酒所用的酒曲跟淮安造的相同，都叫做大曲。但淮安卖的酒曲是打成砖块状，而南方的酒曲则是做成饼团状。
English: Nanfang's red wine is made from the same grapes as Huai'an's, and both are called daquan. However, Huai'an's red wine is made into bricks, while Nanfang's red wine is made into cakes.

古文：其曲一味，蓼身为气脉，而米、麦为质料，但必用已成曲、酒糟为媒合。
现代文：制作酒曲，加进辣蓼粉末以便于通风透气，用稻米或麦子作为基本原料，还必须加入已制成酒曲的酒糟作为媒介。
English: To make a wine jingle, spicy ginger powder is added to facilitate ventilation, rice or wheat is used as the basic raw material, and the lees that have been made into a wine jingle must be added as a medium.

古文：此糟不知相承起自何代，犹之烧矾之必用旧矾滓云。
现代文：这种酒糟不清楚是从哪个年代开始流传下来的，就像烧矾必须使用旧矾滓来掩盖炉口一样。
English: It is not clear from which era this kind of lees has been passed down, just as the use of old straw must be used to cover the grate when making a fire.

古文：○神曲
现代文：神曲
English: The Divine Comedy

古文：凡造神曲所以入药，乃医家别于酒母者。
现代文：制作神曲是专供医药上用的，把它称为神曲是因为医家为了与酒曲相区别。
English: The production of Shenqu is exclusively for medical use, and it is called Shenqu because doctors want to distinguish it from wine.

古文：法起唐时，其曲不通酿用也。
现代文：神曲的制作方法开始于唐代，这种曲不能用来酿酒。
English: The production method of Shenqu began in the Tang Dynasty, and this kind of music cannot be used to make wine.

古文：造者专用白面，每百斤入青蒿自然汁、马蓼、苍耳自然汁相和作饼，麻叶或楮叶包罨如造酱黄法。待生黄衣，即晒收之。
现代文：制作时只用白面，每百斤加入青蒿、马蓼和苍耳三种东西的原汁，拌匀制成饼状，再用麻叶或楮叶包藏覆盖着，像制作豆酱黄曲的方法一样，等到曲面颜色变黄就晒干收藏起来。
English: Only white noodles are used in the production, and the original juice of three kinds of things such as green onion, horse radish and parsley is added to every hundred pounds, mixed and made into a cake shape, and then covered with hemp leaves or camphor leaves. Like the method of making bean paste yellow, wait until the color of the surface turns yellow, then dry and collect it.

古文：其用他药配合，则听好医者增入，苦无定方也。○丹曲
现代文：至于要用其他什么药配合，则要按医生的不同经验而加以酌定，很难列举出固定的处方。丹曲
English: As for what other drugs should be used, it should be determined according to the different experiences of doctors, and it is difficult to list a fixed prescription.

古文：凡丹曲一种，法出近代。其义臭腐神奇，其法气精变化。
现代文：有一种红曲，制作方法是近代才研发出来的，它的效果就在于能 化腐朽为神奇 ，它的巧妙之处是利用空气和白米的变化。
English: There is a kind of hongqu, the production method of which was only developed in modern times. Its effect is that it can turn decay into magic, and its cleverness is to use the change of air and white rice.

古文：世间鱼肉最朽腐物，而此物薄施涂抹，能固其质于炎暑之中，经历旬日蛆蝇不敢近，色味不离初，盖奇药也。
现代文：在自然界中，鱼和肉是最容易腐烂的东西，但是只要将红曲薄薄地涂上一层，即便是在炎热的暑天也能保持它原来的样子，放上十来天，蛆蝇都不敢接近，色泽味道都还能保持原样。这真是一种奇药啊！
English: In the natural world, fish and meat are the most perishable things, but as long as Hongqu is thinly coated with a layer, it can maintain its original appearance even on a hot day. If it is placed for ten days, flies will not dare to approach, and the color and taste can remain unchanged. This is really a wonder drug!

古文：凡造法用灿稻米，不拘早晚。
现代文：制造红曲用的是籼稻米，不管早晚稻米都可以用。
English: Red yeast rice is used to make red yeast rice, and rice can be used sooner or later.

古文：舂杵极其精细，水浸一七日，其气臭恶不可闻，则取入长流河水漂净。
现代文：制造红曲要选择有黏性的籼稻米，不分早稻和晚稻。米要求舂得非常干净，用水浸泡七天后，散发出的气味实在臭得不能再闻，这时就把它放在流动的河水中漂洗干净，必须要用山溪的流动水源，而不能用河水。
English: To make red yeast rice, sticky glutinous glutinous rice should be selected, regardless of early rice and late rice. The rice should be very clean. After soaking in water for seven days, the odor emitted is so bad that it can no longer be smelled. At this time, it is rinsed in flowing river water. It is necessary to use the flowing water source of mountain streams, but not river water.

古文：漂后恶臭犹不可解，入甑蒸饭则转成香气，其香芬甚。
现代文：漂洗之后臭味还不能完全消除，把米放入饭甑里面蒸成饭，就会变得香气四溢了。
English: After rinsing, the smell cannot be completely eliminated. If rice is put into a rice cooker and steamed to make rice, it will become fragrant.

古文：凡蒸此米成饭，初一蒸半生即止，不及其熟。出离釜中，以冷水一沃，气冷再蒸，则令极熟矣。
现代文：蒸饭时，先将稻米蒸到半生半熟的状态，然后就从锅中取出，用冷水淋浇一次，等到冷却以后再次将稻米蒸到熟透。
English: When steaming rice, first steam the rice until it is half-cooked, then remove it from the pot, douse it with cold water once, and wait until it has cooled down before steaming the rice again until it is fully cooked.

古文：熟后，数石共积一堆拌信。
现代文：这样蒸熟了好几石米饭以后，再堆放在一起拌进曲种。
English: After several stones of rice have been steamed in this way, they are then stacked together and mixed into the mixture.

古文：凡曲信必用绝佳红酒糟为料，每糟一斗入马蓼自然汁三升，明矾水和化。
现代文：曲种一定要选最好的红酒糟作为原料，每一斗酒糟加入马蓼汁三升，再加明矾水拌和调匀。
English: The best red wine dregs must be selected as the raw material for the song. Add three liters of horse manure juice to each barrel of wine dregs, then add alum water, mix and adjust.

古文：每曲饭一石入信二斤，乘饭热时，数人捷手拌匀，初热拌至冷。
现代文：每石熟饭中加入曲种二斤，趁热几个人一起迅速拌匀，直到饭冷为止。
English: Each stone of cooked rice is mixed with two catties of buckwheat noodles, and several people quickly mix it together while it is still hot, until the meal is cold.

古文：候视曲信入饭，久复微温，则信至矣。
现代文：然后再注意观察曲种与熟饭相互作用的情况。过一段时间之后，饭的温度又会逐渐上升，这就说明曲种发生作用了。
English: Then pay attention to observe the interaction between the music and the cooked rice. After a period of time, the temperature of the meal will gradually rise, which indicates that the music has an effect.

古文：凡饭拌信后，倾入箩内，过矾水一次，然后分散入篾盘，登架乘风。
现代文：饭拌入曲种后，倒进箩筐里面，用明矾水淋过一次后，再分开放进篾盘中，放到架子上通风。
English: After the rice is mixed into the seeds, it is poured into the basket, rinsed once with alum water, then separated and opened into a baking dish, and placed on a shelf for ventilation.

古文：后此风力为政，水火无功。
现代文：这以后就主要是做好通风工作，而水火也就派不上什么用场了。
English: After this, the main task is to do a good job of ventilation, and water and fire are of little use.

古文：凡曲饭入盘，每盘约载五升。
现代文：曲饭放入篾盘中时，每个篾盘大约装载五升。
English: When placed in a bowl, each bowl holds about five litres.

古文：其屋室宜高大，防瓦上暑气侵逼。
现代文：安放这些曲饭的房屋要比较高大宽敞，以防屋顶瓦面上的热气侵入。
English: The houses where these dishes are placed should be relatively tall and spacious to prevent hot air from penetrating the roof tiles.

古文：室面宜向南，防西晒。
现代文：屋向应该朝南，用以防止太阳西晒。
English: The roof should face south to prevent the sun from setting.

古文：一个时中翻拌约三次。
现代文：每两个小时之中大约要翻拌三次。
English: Stir about three times every two hours.

古文：候视者七日之中，即坐卧盘架之下，眠不敢安，中宵数起。
现代文：观察曲饭的人，在七天之内都要日夜守护在盘架之下，不能熟睡，即便在深更半夜里也要起来好几次。
English: For seven days, the person who observes the song and dance has to stay under the table, day and night. They can't sleep well, and even in the middle of the night, they have to get up several times.

古文：其初时雪白色，经一二日成至黑色。
现代文：曲饭要做到起先一看颜色雪白，经过一两天后就变成黑色了。
English: The curry rice should have a snow-white color at first glance, and after a day or two it will turn black.

古文：黑转褐，褐转赭，赭转红，红极复转微黄。
现代文：以后的颜色会继续变化，由黑色转为褐色，又由褐色转为赭色，再由赭色转为红色，到了最红的时候再转回微黄色。
English: Later, the color will continue to change, from black to brown, and from brown to dark brown, and then from dark brown to red, and then back to light yellow at the reddest time.

古文：目击风中变幻，名曰生黄曲，则其价与入物之力皆倍于凡曲也。
现代文：通风过程中所看到的这一系列的颜色变化，叫做 生黄曲 。这样制成的红曲，其价值和功效都比一般的红曲要高好几倍。
English: This series of color changes seen during the ventilation process is called "raw yellowing," and the value and efficacy of red songs made in this way are several times higher than that of ordinary red songs.

古文：凡黑色转褐，褐转红，皆过水一度。
现代文：当黑色变褐色、褐色又变成红色时，都要淋浇一次水。
English: When the black turns brown and the brown turns red, it should be watered once.

古文：红则不复入水。
现代文：变红以后就不需要再加水了。
English: You don't need to add any more water after it turns red.

