古文：杂编程邈已下邯郸淳已下姜诩已下王羲之王慄潞州卢桓玄褚遂良
现代文：杂编程邈已下邯郸淳已下姜诩已下王羲之王慄潞州卢桓玄褚遂良
English: 

古文：兰亭真迹王方庆二王真迹八体李都东都乞儿卢弘宣岭南兔
现代文：兰亭真迹王方庆二王真迹八体李都东都乞儿卢弘宣岭南兔
English: Lanting, Wang Fangqing, Wang Er, Li Du Dongdu, Lu Hongxuanling, Nanhu

古文：程邈已下
现代文：程邈已下
English: Cheng Ye has stepped down

古文：秦狱吏程邈善大篆，得罪始皇，囚于云阳狱。
现代文：秦狱吏程邈擅长大篆，获罪秦始皇，被囚禁在云阳狱中。
English: The Qin warden Cheng Yao, who was good at raising prisoners, was convicted by Qin Shi Huang and imprisoned in Yunyang Prison.

古文：增减大篆篆体，去其繁复。
现代文：他在狱中精心研究文字，对当时的大篆的字体进行改造，或增或减，删去繁琐重复的笔划。
English: While in prison, he meticulously studied the script, modifying, adding to, or subtracting from the typeface of the Great Seal of the time, and deleting the cumbersome and repetitive strokes.

古文：始皇善之，出为御史。
现代文：秦始皇知道这件事情后，对他的态度改变了，重新起用他，任他为御史。
English: After Emperor Qin Shi Huang learned of this, he changed his attitude towards him, reinstated him, and appointed him as imperial historian.

古文：名书曰隶书。扶风曹喜，后汉人，不知其官。
现代文：因为这种书体，是一个罪犯在狱中研究出来的，于是称它为隶书。
English: Because this type of book was developed by a criminal in prison, it was called "li shu."

古文：善篆隶，小异李斯，见师一时。
现代文：扶风曹喜，后汉人，不知道他任过什么官职，擅长篆书，跟李斯的书体稍有不同，曾风行一时，被人效仿。
English: Fu Feng Cao Xi, a post-Han Chinese, does not know what official position he held, is good at copying books, slightly different from Li Si's typeface, and was popular for a while, and was imitated.

古文：陈留蔡邕，后汉人，左中郎将。善篆，采喜之法。
现代文：陈留蔡邕，后汉人，官任左中郎将，擅长篆书，承继的是曹喜的书体。
English: Chen Liu Cai Qi, a later Han Chinese, was appointed to the position of General of the Left, and excelled at calligraphy. He succeeded Cao Xi's style of calligraphy.

古文：真定直父碑文，犹传于世，篆者师焉。
现代文：蔡邕书写的真定直文碑文，流传后世，研究篆书的人都研究、临摹它。
English: The inscriptions written by Cai Jian are handed down from generation to generation. People who study Jianshu have studied and copied it.

古文：杜陵陈遵，后汉人，不知官。
现代文：杜陵陈遵，后汉人，不知道任过什么官职，擅长篆书、隶书。
English: Duling Chen Zun, a post-Han Chinese, does not know what official post he has held, and is good at transcribing documents.

古文：善篆隶，每书，一坐皆惊。时人谓为陈惊坐。
现代文：每次书写，在坐的人都大吃一惊，当时人称他为陈惊坐。
English: Every time he wrote, the people sitting there were taken aback. At that time, people called him Chen Shuizhao.

古文：上谷王次仲，后汉人，作八分楷法。师宜官，后汉，不知何许人。
现代文：上谷王次仲，后汉人，擅作八分楷书，师宜官，后汉人，不知道他是哪个地方的人。
English: Shangguo Wang Jizhong, a post-Han person, is good at making eight-point capital letters, and his teacher, a post-Han person, does not know where he is from.

古文：宜官为大字方一丈，小字方寸千言。
现代文：师宜官书大字，大到长、宽各有一丈；书小字，小到方寸大的地方可以书写一千个学。
English: It is advisable to learn the big characters of the official book, from large to long and wide, each has a height; the small characters of the book, from small to square, can write a thousand schools.

古文：耿球碑是宜官书。
现代文：流传后世的耿球碑文是师宜官书写的。
English: The Gengqiu inscription, which has been passed down to later generations, was written by Shi Yi.

古文：甚自矜重。或空至酒家，先书其壁，观者云集，酒因大售。至饮足，削书而退。安定梁鹄，后汉人，官至选部尚书。乃师宜官法。
现代文：待到师宜官的酒喝足了，他就将写在墙壁上的字削掉回家。安定梁鹄，后汉人，官至选部尚书，他的书法学的是师宜官书体。
English: When his teacher had had enough to drink, he would whittle away the writing on the wall and go home. Stable Liang Jun, a Han Chinese, was the most senior official in the selection committee, and his calligraphy was in the style of his teacher.

古文：魏武重之，常以书悬帐中。
现代文：魏武帝曹操非常看重梁鹄的书法，常将他的书法墨迹悬挂在帐中。
English: Emperor Cao Cao attached great importance to Liang Qi's calligraphy, often hanging his calligraphy ink blots in his account books.

古文：宫殿题署，多是鹄手也。
现代文：宫殿的匾额题署，也多是梁鹄的手笔。
English: The frontispiece of the palace is also mostly the handwriting of Liang Qi.

古文：邯郸淳已下
现代文：邯郸淳已下
English: 淳 has come down

古文：陈留邯郸淳为魏临淄侯文学。得次仲法，名在鹄后，毛弘，鹄弟子。秘书八分，皆传弘法。
现代文：陈留邯郸淳，官任魏临淄侯文学，学得王次仲的书体，排名在梁鹄之后，毛弘，梁鹄的学生，他书写的八分楷字体特别新奇，后人都研练毛弘的八分书法。
English: Chen Liuqiu Chun, a Wei official, studied Wang Jizhong's calligraphy, ranking after Liang Jiu, and Mao Hong, a student of Liang Jiu, wrote in a particularly novel octavo font. Later generations studied Mao Hong's octavo calligraphy.

古文：又有左子邑，与淳小异，亦有名。
现代文：还有个左子邑，他的书法跟邯郸淳稍有不同，也很有名。
English: There is also a Zuo Zi, whose calligraphy is slightly different from that of Zou Jun, and he is also famous.

古文：京兆杜度为魏齐相，始有草名。
现代文：京都地区的杜度官任魏、齐宰相，开始时是以擅长草书而闻名。
English: Kyoto region's Dudokan served as Wei and Qi's prime minister, and was initially known for being good at cursive.

古文：安平崔瑗，后汉济北相，亦善草书。
现代文：安平崔瑗，官任后汉济北相，也擅长草书。
English: Anping Cui Rong, who became the Northern Hanseatic Minister after taking office, was also good at cursive.

古文：平符坚，得摹崔瑗书，王子敬去，极似张伯英。
现代文：平符坚，临摹崔瑗的书帖，王献之去看，觉得很象张芝的书体。
English: Ping Fu Jian, a copy of Cui Yao's book posts, Wang Xianzhuo to see, feel very much like Zhang Zhi's book body.

古文：瑗子湜官至尚书，亦能草。
现代文：崔瑗的儿子崔湜官至尚书，也能书草书。
English: Cui Yongkang, the son of Cui Yongkang, was an accomplished calligrapher and could also write in cursive.

古文：弘农张芝高尚不仕，善草书，精劲绝伦。
现代文：弘农张芝，品德高尚不出来做官，擅长草书，笔力精道遒劲，无以伦比。
English: Hongnong Zhangzhi, with a high moral character, was not able to become an official. He was good at cursive, and his penmanship was excellent. He was incomparable.

古文：家之衣帛，必先书而后练。
现代文：家中做衣服的布料，必定是先用它练习书法，然后再煮洗漂染。
English: The fabric used to make clothes at home must first be used to practice calligraphy, and then boiled, washed and dyed.

古文：临池学书，池水尽墨。
现代文：张芝在池塘边练习书法，池塘里的水都被他染黑了。
English: Zhang Zhi was practicing calligraphy by the pond, and the water in the pond was dyed black by him.

古文：每书云，匆匆不暇草。时人谓为草圣。
现代文：每次写字都说：匆忙没有空闲，写得字迹潦草当时人称他为草圣。
English: Every time he wrote, he said, "I am in a hurry and have no free time. My handwriting is sloppy." People called him the Grass Saint at the time.

古文：芝弟昶，汉黄门侍郎，亦能草。
现代文：张芝的弟弟张昶，官任汉黄门侍郎，也能书草书。
English: Zhang Zhi's younger brother, Zhang Qian, who held the official position of Han Huangmen waiter, could also write cursive.

古文：今世人所云芝书者，多是昶也。
现代文：今天人们所说的张芝的书法真迹，多数都是张昶墨迹。
English: Today, most of what people call Zhang Zhi's authentic calligraphy traces are Zhang Xuan's ink blots.

古文：姜诩已下
现代文：姜诩已下
English: Jiang Chen has stepped down

古文：姜诩、梁宣、田彦和及司徒韦诞，皆伯英弟子，并善草。
现代文：姜诩、梁宣、田彦和及司徒韦诞，都是张芝的学生，都擅长草书。
English: Jiang Yu, Liang Xuan, Tian Yanhe, and Stue Weixi, all students of Zhang Zhi, are good at cursive.

古文：诞最优，魏宫馆宝器，皆是诞书。
现代文：其中韦诞造诣最高。魏时的宫殿楼馆的匾额，都是韦诞的手迹。
English: Among them, Wei Xing is the most accomplished. The plaques of the palace buildings in the Wei Dynasty are all the handprints of Wei Xing.

古文：魏明帝起凌云台，误先钉榜，而未之题。
现代文：魏明帝造一座凌云台，错误地先将台匾钉在上面，没有题书。
English: Emperor Wei of the Ming Dynasty built a Lingyun table, but mistakenly nailed the table rivets onto it first. There was no inscription.

古文：以笼盛诞，辘轳引上书之，去地二十五丈。
现代文：明帝让人用笼盛韦诞，再用辘轳摇牵绳索将他带到台上钉匾的地方去书题署。很高，离地约十五丈。
English: Emperor Ming had someone hold Wei Zhao in a cage, and then used a shovel to swing a rope to take him to the place where he nailed the shovel on the stage to go to the title office. It is very high, about fifteen feet above the ground.

古文：诞甚危惧，乃戒子孙，绝此楷法。
现代文：韦诞危惧万分，以后告诫子孙：再也不要研习大楷了。
English: Wei Xing was very afraid, and later warned his children and grandchildren: Don't study capital letters anymore.

古文：子少季亦有能称。
现代文：他的儿子少季的书法，也有值得称道的长处。
English: His son Shoseki's calligraphy also has commendable strengths.

古文：罗晖、赵恭不详何许人，与伯英同时，见称西州。而矜许自与，众颇惑之。
现代文：罗晖、赵恭不知道他们是什么人，与张芝是同时代人，在西州很有名气，但是他们高傲自大，经常夸耀自己，人们都很不理解。
English: Luo Wei and Zhao Gong do not know who they are. They are contemporaries of Zhang Zhiwu and are very famous in Xizhou. However, they are arrogant and often boast about themselves. People do not understand them.

古文：伯英与朱宽书自叙云：上比崔、杜不足，下方罗、赵有余。
现代文：张芝在写给朱宽的书信中，评价自己的书法说：上面跟崔瑗、杜陵比较，我不如二位；下面跟罗晖、赵恭比较，我的书法在他们之上绰绰有余。
English: In his letter to Zhu Guang, Zhang Zhi evaluated his own calligraphy, saying: "Compared with Cui Wei and Du Ling above, I am not as good as two; compared with Luo Wei and Zhao Gong below, my calligraphy is more than enough above them.

古文：河间张起亦善草书，不及崔张。
现代文：河间张起也擅长草书，没有崔瑗、张芝的造诣深。
English: Kawama Zhangqi is also good at cursive, but not as good as Choi Min and Zhang Zhi.

古文：刘德升善为行书，不详何许人。
现代文：刘德升擅长行书，不知道他是干什么的。
English: Liu Desheng is good at calligraphy. I don't know what he does.

古文：颍川钟繇，魏太尉。
现代文：颖川钟繇，官任魏国太尉。
English: Yingchuan Zhongyao, the official Wei Guotaijun.

古文：同郡胡昭、公车徵，二家俱学于德升。
现代文：他的同郡人胡昭、公车徵，二人都学的是刘德升书体。
English: His compatriots, Hu Zhao and Bus Zheng, both learned from Liu Desheng.

古文：而胡书肥，钟书瘦。
现代文：但是胡昭的书法字体偏肥，钟繇的书法字体偏瘦。
English: However, Hu Zhao's calligraphy fonts tend to be fat and Zhong Qi's calligraphy fonts tend to be thin.

古文：有三体，一曰铭石之书，最妙者也；二曰章程书；三曰狎书。
现代文：书有三体：一叫铭石书体，是最妙的。二叫章、程书体。三叫狎书。
English: There are three types of books: the first is the inscribed stone type, which is the most wonderful; the second is the chapter and chapter type; and the third is the block type.

古文：相闻者也。
现代文：都是听说来的。
English: It's all hearsay.

古文：繇子会，镇西将军。
现代文：钟繇的儿子钟会，官任镇西将军，他的拿手本事是能模仿他人的书体。
English: Zhong Hui's son, Zhong Hui, was appointed to the post of Zhenxi General. He was good at imitating other people's typefaces.

古文：绝能学人书，改易邓艾上章，事莫有知者。
现代文：钟会改写过的邓艾上奏朝廷的奏章，没有人能识破。
English: No one can decipher Deng Ai's transcription of the imperial anthem, which was rewritten by the Bell Association.

古文：河东魏觊，魏尚书仆射。
现代文：河东魏觊、官任魏尚书仆射，擅长草书和古文，全部通晓它们的精妙。
English: He is proficient in cursive and ancient texts, and is familiar with all their subtleties.

古文：善草及古文，略尽其妙，草体微瘦，而笔迹精熟。觊子瓘为晋太保，采芝法，以觊法参之。
现代文：魏觊的草书字体略微瘦些，而笔法非常熟练。魏觊的儿子魏瓘官任晋国太保，他习的是张芝体，同时参照他父亲魏觊的字体，以他父亲的书法为蓝本。
English: Wei Yao's cursive script is slightly thinner, but his penmanship is very skillful. Wei Yao's son, Wei Yao Guan, was appointed as the State Counselor of the Jin Dynasty. He learned the Zhang Zi typeface, while referring to his father Wei Yao's script and using his father's handwriting as a model.

古文：更为草藁，藁是相闻书也。
现代文：以他父亲的书法为蓝本这件事，也是听人传说的。
English: It is also said that his father's handwriting was the inspiration for this.

古文：瓘子恒亦善书，博识古文字。
现代文：魏瓘的儿子魏恒也擅长书法，精通古文字。
English: Wei Heng, the son of Wei Xuan, was also good at calligraphy and familiar with ancient characters.

古文：燉煌索靖，张芝姊子孙，晋征西司马，亦善草。
现代文：敦煌索靖，是张芝姐姐的儿子的孙子，官任晋征西司马，也擅长草书。
English: Dunhuang Sojing, the grandson of the son of Zhang Zhi's sister, was appointed to the post of Jinzheng Xi Sima, and was also good at cursive.

古文：陈国何元公亦善草书。
现代文：陈国何元公也擅长草书。
English: Chen Guohe Yuan Gong is also good at cursive.

古文：吴人皇象能草，世称沉著痛快。
现代文：吴人皇象能草书。世人称赞他的草书笔力沉着有力，淋漓酣畅。
English: Emperor Wuzhenxiang was able to write cursive. The world praised his cursive handwriting for its poise, power and fluency.

古文：荥阳陈畅，晋秘书令史，善八分。
现代文：荥阳陈畅，官任晋国秘书令史，擅长八分。
English: Shenyang Chen Chang, the official secretary of the Jin Dynasty, is good at eight points.

古文：王羲之
现代文：王羲之
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：王羲之《告誓文》，今之所传即其藁本。不具年月日朔。
现代文：王羲之的《告誓文》，现今所见到的帖本，是它的底稿，没有标明年、月、日、朔。
English: Wang Xizhi's "Oath of Allegiance," the loose-leaf copy of which we are seeing now, is the original draft. It does not indicate the year, month, day, or new moon.

古文：其真本维永和十年三月癸卯九月辛亥，而书亦真。
现代文：它的真本上面标有维永和十年三月癸卯九日辛亥的字样。
English: Its original is marked above with the words Wei Yong and the 10th day of the 3rd month of the 9th day of the 9th month of the year.

古文：开元初，润州江宁县瓦棺寺修讲堂，匠人于鸱吻内竹筒中得之，与一沙门。
现代文：但是，这个帖本也确实是王羲之的墨迹。唐太宗开元初年，润州江宁县瓦棺寺修建学堂，工匠师傅拆迁旧屋时，在房脊鸱吻内的一只竹筒中发现了这本字帖，交给了一个和尚。
English: In the first year of the first century, when Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty was building a schoolhouse at the Wafang Temple in Rongzhou, Jiangning County, and craftsmen were demolishing the old house, they found this writing tablet in a bamboo tube in the alcove of the house and gave it to a monk.

古文：至八年，县丞李延业求得。上歧王，王以献上。
现代文：到开元八年，县丞李延业得到了这个帖本，上献给岐王，岐王又进献给玄宗皇帝。
English: In the eighth year of the first century, the county magistrate, Li Yanye, obtained this copy, which he presented to King Qi, who in turn presented it to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：留内不出。
现代文：从此，这本字帖留存在宫内了。
English: Since then, the diary has been kept in the palace.

古文：或云，其后却借歧王。
现代文：另有一说是，后来又让岐王借阅出来。
English: Another said yes, and later let Qi Wang borrow it.

古文：十二年，王家失火，图书悉为灰烬，此书已见焚矣。
现代文：开元十二年岐王府上发生一场大火灾，府内藏书全都烧光了，这本帖本也在其中。
English: In the twelfth year of the first century, a great fire broke out in the palace of the king of Qi, and all the books in the palace were burned out, including this copy.

古文：王慄
现代文：王慄
English: Wang Yao

古文：王慄，羲之之叔也，善书画。
现代文：王慄，王羲之的叔父，擅长书画。
English: Wang Xizhi, Wang Xizhi's uncle, is good at calligraphy and painting.

古文：尝谓右军曰：吾诸事不足道，唯书画可法。
现代文：一次王慄对王羲之说：我所做的一些事情不值得一提，唯有书与画可供他人学习效法。
English: Wang Yao once said to Wang Xizhi: Some things I have done are not worth mentioning, only books and paintings can be used by others to learn from.

古文：晋明帝师其画，王右军学其书。
现代文：晋明帝司马绍学习过王慄的绘画，王羲之学他的书法。
English: Jinming Desi Massau studied Wang Xizhi's painting, and Wang Xizhi studied his calligraphy.

古文：潞州卢
现代文：潞州卢
English: Luzhou Lu

古文：东都顷年创造防秋馆，穿掘多蔡邕鸿都学所书石经，后洛中人家往往有之。
现代文：东都洛阳有一年建造防秋馆，挖掘出许多蔡邕在鸿都学书时所书刻的经文石，以后洛阳人往往家家都藏这些石经文。
English: Luoyang, the eastern capital, built an autumn prevention hall one year, and many scriptures carved by Cai Qi when he was studying in Hongdu were excavated. Since then, Luoyang people have often kept these stone scriptures in their homes.

古文：王羲之《借船帖》，书之尤工者也。
现代文：王羲之的《借船帖》，它的书法尤其工稳精妙。
English: Wang Xizhi's "Boat Charter," its calligraphy is particularly stable and exquisite.

古文：故山北卢匡，宝惜有年。
现代文：因此，山北卢匡珍藏它有年月了。
English: Therefore, Shanbei Lu Kuang has been treasuring it for years.

古文：卢公致书借之，不得。
现代文：卢公写封书信给他说要借《借船帖》一读，没有借到。
English: Lu Gong wrote a letter to him saying that he wanted to borrow the "Boat Charter" for the first reading, but did not borrow it.

古文：云：只可就看，未尝借人也。
现代文：卢匡回信说：《借船帖》是可以到我家中来观赏，从未借出去给人看。
English: Lu Kuang replied in a letter: "You can come to my home to watch "The Chartering of a Ship," I have never lent it out to anyone.

古文：卢除潞州，旌节在途，才数程，忽有人将书帖就卢求售。
现代文：后来，卢公官拜潞州，打着旌节等仪仗上路赴任，才走了几程，忽然有人拿着一本书帖向卢公出售。
English: Later, Lu Gongguan went to Baizhou to take part in the Lantern Festival and other ceremonial events on his way to his post. He had only walked a few miles when someone suddenly took a book to sell to Lu Gong.

古文：阅之，乃《借船帖》也。
现代文：卢公观之。是《借船帖》啊！
English: It's from Lu Gongguan. It's from "Boat Charter"!

古文：惊异问之，云：卢家郎君要钱，遣卖耳。
现代文：惊异地询问出售书帖的人：这书帖是谁家的？出售书帖的人说：卢家公子需用钱，派我拿出来卖的。
English: Surprised, he asked the seller of the bookmark: Whose bookmark is this? The seller of the bookmark said: The Lu family needed money and sent me to take it out and sell it.

古文：卢叹异移时，不问其价，还之。
现代文：卢公感叹时过境迁，不问售价，将书帖退还给出售帖人。
English: Lu Gong lamented the passage of time and returned the book to the seller, regardless of the selling price.

古文：后不知落于何人。
现代文：后来就再也不知道《借船帖》的下落了。
English: After that, the whereabouts of the "Boat Charter" were no longer known.

古文：京师书侩孙盈者，名甚著。
现代文：京都书侩孙盈，名满京师。
English: Kyoto calligrapher Sun Yat-sen, famous as a master of Kyoto calligraphy.

古文：盈父曰仲容，亦鉴书画，精于品目。
现代文：孙盈父亲叫孙仲客，会鉴赏书画，特别精通名贵书画的品目。
English: Sun Ying's father, Sun Zhongke, was a connoisseur of calligraphy and painting, and was particularly proficient in the items of famous calligraphy and painting.

古文：豪家所宝，多经其手，真伪无所逃焉。
现代文：京中富豪家中收藏的书画，许多都经他给鉴定过，是真伪都逃不过他的眼睛。
English: Many of the paintings and calligraphy in the collection of a wealthy family in Kyoto have been authenticated by him. Whether they are real or fake, they cannot escape his eyes.

古文：公《借船帖》，是孙盈所蓄，人以厚价求之，不果。
现代文：卢公的《借船帖》，是孙盈收藏的。以前，有人出高价购买，没有买到手。
English: Lu Gong's "Boat Charter" was collected by Sun Ying. In the past, some people paid a high price to buy it, but did not get their hands on it.

古文：卢公时其急切，减而赈之，日久满百千，方得。
现代文：待卢公购买时，正赶上它的主人急切需用钱，减价出售这本书帖，用来筹集度过困难的钱款。等候了很久，直到筹集到了成千上万的钱，才得到这本《借船帖》。
English: At the time of Lu Gong's purchase, its owner was in urgent need of money, so he sold the book at a reduced price to raise money to get through the difficulties. He waited for a long time until he raised thousands of money to get this "Boat Charter."

古文：卢公韩太仲外孙也，故书画之尤者，多阅而识焉。
现代文：卢公，是韩太仲的外孙，因此他的书与画都很有功夫。
English: Lu Gong is the grandson of Han Taizhong, so his books and paintings are very hard work.

古文：桓玄
现代文：这就是读书多了，必然见识广博。桓玄
English: Kangen

古文：晋书中有饮食名寒具者，亦无注解处。
现代文：晋书中记载有一种食物名叫寒具，书中没有注释说明。
English: In the Book of Jin, there is a food called "cold tool," but there is no explanation in the book.

古文：后于《齐民要术》并《食经》中检得，是今所谓糫饼。
现代文：后来在贾思勰的《齐民要求》和《食经》中查到了，就是今天用油炸着吃的一种粘食小吃，叫糫饼。
English: Later, I found it in "Qi Min Requirements" and "Food Scripture" by Jia Szu, which is a kind of sticky snack that is fried today, called wonton cake.

古文：桓玄尝盛陈法书名画，请客观之。
现代文：桓玄有一次热情地将自家收藏的书法字帖，名画陈列出来给一位客人看。
English: Once, Kuan Xuan enthusiastically displayed his collection of calligraphy and famous paintings to a guest.

古文：客有食寒具，不濯手而执书画，因有污，玄不怿。
现代文：这位客人一边吃着糫饼一边欣观这些字画，没有洗手就翻阅看，见字画污上了油渍，桓玄非常不高兴。
English: The guest was enjoying the calligraphy and painting while eating gingerbread. He flipped through it without washing his hands. When he saw that the calligraphy and painting were stained with grease, he was very unhappy.

古文：自是会客不设寒具。
现代文：从此以后，再有客人来，不摆设糫饼招待客人。
English: From then on, guests would come again, and the gingerbread would not be set out to welcome them.

古文：褚遂良
现代文：褚遂良
English: Zou Suiliang

古文：贞观十年，太宗谓魏征曰：世南没后，无人可与论书。
现代文：贞观十年，太宗跟魏征说：从打虞世南去世后，没有人可与我谈论书法了。
English: In the tenth year of Zhenguan, Taizong said to Wei Zheng: "Since the death of Dazhu Shennan, no one can talk to me about calligraphy."

古文：征曰：褚遂良后来书流，甚有法则。
现代文：魏征说：褚遂良后来在法书上很有些造诣。
English: Wei Zheng said: Zou Suiliang later made some achievements in the law book.

古文：于是召见。
现代文：于是，太宗召见褚遂良。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong summoned Gong Suiliang.

古文：太宗尝以金帛购王羲之书迹，天下争赍古书，诣阙以献，时莫能辨其真伪。
现代文：唐太宗曾经用重金购买王羲之书法的真迹，天下士人争着购买古书，进宫献给皇上。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty once paid a large sum of money to purchase the authentic calligraphy of Wang Qian. Scholars around the world competed to purchase the ancient book and bring it to the palace to present it to the emperor.

古文：遂良备论所出，咸为证据，一无舛误。
现代文：当时没有人能辨识出古书的真伪，褚遂良对每件古书的鉴定评论就是根据，从来没有出过差误。
English: At that time, no one could identify the authenticity of ancient books. Zou Suiliang's appraisal comments on each ancient book are the basis, and there has never been a mistake.

古文：十四年四月二十三日，太宗为真草书屏风，以示群臣。
现代文：贞观十四年四月二十三日，太宗用真草书屏风给群臣观看。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the 14th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong used a real cursive screen to show it to his courtiers.

古文：笔力遒利，为一时之绝。
现代文：笔力遒劲有力，在一段时间里，这是绝好的书法了。
English: The handwriting is vigorous and powerful, and for a while it's excellent penmanship.

古文：购求得人间真行，凡二百九十纸，装为七十卷，草书二十纸，装为八十卷。
现代文：太宗收集、购买得到流传在世间的真行字帖，二百九十纸，装订成七十卷；草书字帖二十纸，装订成八十卷。
English: Taizong collected and purchased authentic calligraphy works that have been passed down in the world, 290 pieces of paper, bound into 70 volumes; 20 pieces of cursive calligraphy works, bound into 80 volumes.

古文：每听政之暇，时阅之。
现代文：每到处理完政务的空闲时间里，经常取出来观赏、把玩。
English: Whenever he has free time after handling government affairs, he often takes it out to watch and play.

古文：尝谓朝臣曰：书学小道，初非急务。
现代文：太宗曾对朝臣们说过：书法是小道，刚开始学习时不要着急。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang once said to his subordinate ministers: "Calligraphy is a small learning, and when you first learn it, you should not be in a hurry to achieve it.

古文：时或留心，亦胜弃日。
现代文：每天都抽出一点时间来学习，比三天打鱼两天晒网的效果要好得多。
English: Taking a little time out every day to study is much more effective than fishing for three days and drying the net for two days.

古文：凡诸艺，未尝有学而不得者也。
现代文：各种技艺，没有你用心学了而没有收获的。
English: There are all kinds of skills that you have not learned by heart and have not gained.

古文：病在心力懈怠，不能专精耳。
现代文：问题出在你思想不集中，不能集中精力钻进去。
English: The problem is that your thoughts are not concentrated, and you can't focus your energy to get into it.

古文：今人学古人之书，殊不学其形势，唯在求其骨力。
现代文：今人学习古人的书法，不要特注重它的形体结构，而把主要精力用在摸透它的风骨上面。
English: When modern people study ancient calligraphy, they should not pay special attention to its shape and structure, but put their main energy into getting to know its spirit.

古文：得其形势，笔力自生。
现代文：得其骨，笔力自然而然就有了。
English: Once you get the hang of it, penmanship comes naturally.

古文：兰亭真迹
现代文：兰亭真迹
English: The True Story of Lanting

古文：太宗酷学书法。
现代文：唐太宗酷爱学习书法。
English: Tang Taizong loved to study calligraphy.

古文：有大王真迹三千六百纸，率以一丈二尺为一轴。
现代文：有王羲之的书法真迹三千六百纸，都以一丈二尺为轴。
English: Wang Xizhi's original calligraphy is on 3,600 pieces of paper, all with a height of 1.2 meters as the axis.

古文：宝惜者独《兰亭》为最，置于座侧，朝夕观览。
现代文：最珍贵的是《兰亭序》，将它挂在旁边，不论早晨还是晚上都要欣赏把玩。
English: The most precious is the "Lanting Sequence," which hangs next to it, whether in the morning or in the evening.

古文：尝一日，附耳语高宗曰：吾千秋万岁后，与吾《兰亭》将去也。
现代文：有一天，太宗附在太子李治的耳边说：我去世之后，将兰亭序让我带去。
English: One day, Emperor Taizong whispered in the ear of Prince Li Zhi and said: "After I die, let me take the Orchid Pavilion to you."

古文：及奉讳之日，用玉匣贮之，藏于昭陵。
现代文：到了太宗病逝时，高宗李治将《兰亭序》用玉匣盛着，随葬在太宗昭陵墓内。
English: When Emperor Taizong died of illness, Gaozong Li Zhi placed the "Lanting Prologue" in a jade box and buried it in Emperor Taizong's mausoleum.

古文：王方庆
现代文：王方庆
English: Wang Fangqing

古文：龙朔二年四月，高宗自书与辽东诸将。
现代文：龙朔二年四月，唐高宗亲自写信给辽东诸位将领。
English: In April of the second year of Long Shuo, Tang Gaozong personally wrote a letter to the generals of Liaodong.

古文：上谓凤阁侍郎王方庆曰：卿家合有书法。
现代文：高宗对凤阁侍郎王方庆说：你家共有多少书法字帖？
English: Gao Zong said to Wang Fangqing, a Fengge attendant: How many calligraphy books are there in your home?

古文：方庆奏曰：臣十代再从伯祖羲之，先有四十余纸。
现代文：王方庆说：我十代再从伯祖羲之，先有四十余纸。
English: Wang Fangqing said: I am the tenth generation from my great-grandfather, and there are more than forty pieces of paper.

古文：贞观十二年，先臣进讫。
现代文：贞观十二年，先祖将它们全都进献给太宗皇帝。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, the ancestors dedicated them all to Emperor Taizong.

古文：有一卷，臣近已进讫。
现代文：有一卷，我近日已进献皇上了。
English: There is one volume, which I have recently presented to the emperor.

古文：臣十一代祖导，十代祖洽，九代祖询，八代祖昙首，七代祖僧绰，六代祖仲宝，五代祖骞，高祖规，曾祖褒，并九代三从伯祖晋中书令献之。以下二十八人书，共十卷，见在。
现代文：臣十一代祖导，十代祖洽，九代祖询，八代祖昙首，七代祖僧绰，六代祖仲宝，五代祖骞，高祖规，曾祖褒，同九代三从伯祖晋中书令献之，以下二十八人书，共十卷，现在还保存着呢。
English: The following twenty-eight books, ten volumes in total, were presented to the emperor by his eleven-generation forefathers, ten-generation forefathers, nine-generation forefathers, eight-generation forefathers, seven-generation forefathers, six-generation forefathers, five-generation forefathers, great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfathers,

古文：上御武成殿召群臣，取而观之。
现代文：高宗皇帝在武成殿召集群臣，让王方庆将这十卷书帖取来给大家看。
English: Emperor Gaozong gathered a group of courtiers in Wucheng Hall and asked Wang Fangqing to take the ten volumes of the book for everyone to see.

古文：仍令凤阁舍人崔融作序，自为宝章集，以赐方庆，朝野荣之。
现代文：又令凤阁舍人崔融作序，亲手用玉玺给十卷帖集盖印，用此赏赐王方庆。朝野上下都感到荣幸。
English: He also had Fengge's housekeeper, Cui Rong, make the sequence and personally seal the ten-volume collection of posts with a jade seal, using this to reward Wang Fangqing. Both the emperor and the court felt honored.

古文：二王真迹
现代文：二王真迹
English: The True Story of the Two Kings

古文：开元十六年五月，内出二王真迹及张芝、张昶等书，总一百六十卷，付集贤院。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十六年五月，宫内取出王羲之、王献之真迹，及张芝、张昶等人的书帖，共一百六十卷，交付集贤院。
English: In May of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, a total of one hundred and sixty volumes of Wang Xuan's and Wang Xian's original manuscripts, as well as Zhang Zhi's and Zhang Xuan's books, were taken out of the palace and delivered to Shixian Academy.

古文：令集字拓两本进，赐诸王。
现代文：令集贤院拓两本进献，赐给褚王。
English: Zhi Xianyuan ordered that two copies of the book be given to the king.

古文：其书皆是贞观中，太宗令魏征、虞世南、褚遂良等定其真伪。
现代文：这些书帖都是贞观中年，唐太宗命令魏徽、虞世南、褚遂良等大臣审定真伪的。
English: These books were all written by the middle-aged Zhenguan, and Tang Taizong ordered Wei Hui, Yu Shennan, Zou Suiliang and other ministers to verify their authenticity.

古文：右军之迹，凡得真行二百九十纸，装为七十卷；草书二千纸，装为八十卷。
现代文：王羲之的真迹。共收集到真书、行书；二百九十纸，装订成七十卷，草书二千纸，装订成八十卷。
English: Wang Xizhi's authentic works. A total of authentic books and calligraphy books were collected; 290 pieces of paper, bound into 70 volumes, and 2,000 pieces of cursive paper, bound into 80 volumes.

古文：小王张芝等迹，各随多少勒帙。
现代文：王献之、张芝等人的真迹，各自根据它们数量的多少编纂成卷。
English: The true accounts of Wang Xianzhi, Zhang Zhi and others were compiled into volumes according to their respective numbers.

古文：以贞观字为印，印缝及卷之首尾。
现代文：用贞观二字治印，印在书卷缝及头里。
English: It is stamped with the word "Zhenguan" and printed on the seams of the scroll and in the head.

古文：其草迹，又令褚遂良真书小字，帖纸影之。
现代文：他们的草书真迹，又令褚遂良用真书体写成小字，帖纸拓影，附在后面。
English: Their cursive handwriting was also made into small characters in the authentic script by Zou Suiliang, with a tracing on the poster attached to the back.

古文：其中古本，亦有是梁隋官本者。
现代文：其中的古本，有的是梁、隋官本。
English: Among the old books, some are from the Liang and Sui dynasties.

古文：梁则满骞、徐僧权、沈炽文、朱异，隋则江总、姚察等署记。
现代文：梁朝的有满骞、徐僧权、沈炽文、朱异；隋朝的有江总、姚察等签署的印记。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, there are seals signed by Man Min, Xu Sang Quan, Shen Blaowen and Zhu Yi; in the Sui Dynasty, there are seals signed by Jiang Zong and Yao Zha.

古文：太宗又令魏褚等，卷下更署名以记之。
现代文：太宗又让魏征、褚遂良等，在卷下再签署姓名。
English: Taizong also asked Wei Zheng, Zou Suiliang and others to sign their names under the scroll.

古文：其《兰亭》本，相传云在昭陵玄宫中。
现代文：其中的《兰亭序》，传说随太宗陪葬在昭陵中。
English: One of them, "Lanting Sequence," is said to be buried with Taizong in the Zhaoling.

古文：《乐毅论》，长安中太平公主奏借出外拓写，因此遂失所在。
现代文：《乐毅论》，上太平公主上奏借出去拓写，后来就失去下落了。
English: "The Theory of Musical Fortitude" was borrowed by Princess Shang Taiping to expand and later lost its place.

古文：五年，陆元悌、魏哲、刘怀信等检校换褾。
现代文：五年后，玄宗皇帝又敕陆之悌、魏哲、刘怀信等人查核察看，重新改换装裱。
English: Five years later, Emperor Xuanzong sent Lu Zhixuan, Wei Zhe, Liu Huaxin and others to inspect and change the decoration.

古文：每卷分为两卷，总见在有八十卷，余并失坠。
现代文：原来的一卷分为两卷，总计还有八十卷，其余的都散失了。
English: The original one volume was divided into two volumes, with a total of eighty volumes remaining, and the rest were lost.

古文：元悌又割去前代记署，以己之名氏代焉。
现代文：陆元悌又割去以前朝代的记署，将自己的名字签署在上面取而代之。
English: Lu Yuanzhang also removed the record office of the previous dynasty and signed his name on it to replace it.

古文：玄宗自书开元二字，为印记之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝亲自书写开元二字，治印，印在上面作为标志。
English: Emperor Xuanzong personally wrote the two characters "开元" and "治印" and stamped them on it as a symbol.

古文：右军凡一百三十卷，小王二十八卷，张芝、张昶各一卷。
现代文：总计有王羲之真迹一百三十卷，王献之十八卷，张芝、张昶各一卷。
English: In total, there are one hundred and thirty volumes of Wang Xi's authentic works, eighteen volumes of Wang Xian's works, and one volume each of Zhang Zhi and Zhang Xi.

古文：右军真行书，惟《黄庭》、《告誓》等卷存焉。
现代文：王羲之的真书、行书，只有《黄庭经》、《告誓文》等卷尚存在。
English: Of Wang Xizhi's authentic books and practice books, only "Huangtingjing" and "Jiewen" and other volumes still exist.

古文：又得滑州人家所藏右军《扇上真尚书宣示》，及小王行书《白骑遂》等二卷。
现代文：又得到滑州人家收藏的王羲之《扇上真尚书宣示》，及王献之行书《白骑遂》等卷。
English: He also obtained the "Declaration of Fan Shang Zhen Shang Shu" by Wang Xi, which is in the collection of people in Slum, and the book "White Horse" by Wang Xian, and other volumes.

古文：其书有贞观年旧摽织成字。
现代文：这二卷书帖上面都记有贞观年的旧标志。八体
English: The two volumes of the book are inscribed with the old emblem of the Zhenguan Year.

古文：八体张怀瓘《书断》曰：篆、籀、八分、隶书、章草、草书、飞白、行书，通谓之八体，而右军皆在神品。
现代文：张怀瓘在他撰写的《书断》中说：篆、籀、八分、隶书、章草、草书、飞白、行书，通常人们管这八种书称为 八体 而王羲之的书法都列在 神品 之内。
English: Zhang Huaiqi said in his "Book-Breaking":,, 八分,隶書,章草,草書,飞白,行書, usually people refer to these eight books as 八体, and Wang Hui's calligraphy are all listed in 神品.

古文：右军尝醉书数字，点画类龙爪，后遂有龙爪书。
现代文：王羲之有一次喝醉后书写了几个字，点划象龙爪，后来就有 龙爪书 。
English: Once, after getting drunk, Wang Yanzhi wrote a few words, which were like the claws of a dragon, and later there was the Dragon Claw Book.

古文：如科斗、玉箸、偃波之类，诸家共二十五般。
现代文：再如蝌蚪、玉筋、偃波一类的书法，这些流派共有二十五种。
English: Then there are calligraphy styles such as Xing, Yamsuji, and Xingbo, with a total of twenty-five styles.

古文：李都
现代文：李都
English: Li Du

古文：李都荆南从事时，朝官亲熟。
现代文：李都任荆南从事时，跟京师中的朝官都很密切。
English: When Li Du was engaged by Jing Nan, he was very close to the imperial officials in Beijing.

古文：自京寓书，踪甚恶。
现代文：可笑钟繇、张芝二位老生先，比起他的后人李都的书法，你们算白用力气了。
English: Compared to the calligraphy of his descendants, Li Du, you are wasting your energy.

古文：李寄诗戏曰：草缄千里到荆门，章草纵横任意论。
现代文：你李都的书法让二王父子都自愧不如，一生白努力了。
English: Your Li Du's calligraphy has made the two kings, father and son, ashamed of themselves. All their life's efforts have been in vain.

古文：应笑钟张虚用力，却教羲、献枉劳魂。惟堪爱惜为珍宝，不敢留传误子孙。
现代文：只有你的书法才可堪爱惜视为珍宝，可是这么好的书法，我们可不敢将它流传后世贻误子孙。
English: Only your calligraphy can be cherished as a treasure, but such a good calligraphy, we dare not pass it on to future generations.

古文：深荷故人相厚处，天行时气许教吞。
现代文：但是，它却载着故人的深厚情谊寄到了我面前，上天时运允许我一口将它吞到肚子里。
English: However, it was sent to me with the profound affection of the deceased, and God's providence allowed me to swallow it into my stomach.

古文：东都乞儿
现代文：东都乞儿
English: The East is begging

古文：大历中，东都天津桥有乞儿，无两手，以右足夹笔，写经乞钱。
现代文：大历年间，东都洛阳天津桥有个讨饭的小孩，没有双手，用右足夹笔书写经卷讨钱。
English: In the year of the great calendar, there was a begging child in Tianjin Bridge, the eastern capital of Luoyang. He had no hands and used his right foot to write a scroll to ask for money.

古文：欲书时，先用掷笔高尺余，以足接之，未尝失落。
现代文：想书写时，先用脚将笔扔起来，高有一尺多，再用脚将笔接住，没有接不住的时候。
English: When you want to write, first throw the pen up with your foot, more than a foot high, then catch the pen with your foot, there is no time to catch it.

古文：书迹官楷书不如也。
现代文：这个讨饭小孩用脚写的字，一些官府中的人写的楷书都赶不上他。
English: The child beggar's handwriting and the cursive handwriting of some people in the government can't keep up with him.

古文：卢弘宣
现代文：卢弘宣
English: Lu Hongxuan

古文：李德裕作相日，人献书帖。
现代文：李德裕作宰相时，有人进献给他一书帖。
English: When Li Deyu was the prime minister, someone donated a book to him.

古文：德裕得之执玩，颇爱其书。
现代文：他得到后常拿出来观赏把玩，很是爱惜。
English: After he got it, he often took it out to watch and play with it, which was a great pity.

古文：卢弘宣时为度支郎中，有善书名。
现代文：卢弘宣当时官任度支郎中，他擅长书法的名声传播在外。
English: Lu Hongxuan was a junior official at the time, and his reputation for being good at calligraphy spread far and wide.

古文：召至，出所获者书帖，令观之。
现代文：李德裕将卢弘宣召到家中，拿出人家送给他的这一书帖让卢看。
English: Li Deyu called Lu Hong to his home and took out this booklet that was given to him for Lu to read.

古文：弘宣持帖，久之不对。
现代文：卢将书帖拿在手中，过了很久时间一言不发。
English: Lu held the book in his hands and did not say a word for a long time.

古文：德裕曰：何如。
现代文：李德裕问：怎么样？
English: Li Deyu asked: How is it?

古文：弘宣有恐悚状曰：是某顷年所临小王帖。
现代文：卢弘宣有些慌恐地说：这副书帖是我早年临的王献之的书帖。
English: Lu Hongxuan said with a bit of panic: This bookcase is the bookcase that I dedicated to Wang in my early years.

古文：太尉弥重之。
现代文：李德裕更加珍惜这付书帖。
English: Li Deyu cherishes this bookmark even more.

古文：岭南兔
现代文：岭南兔
English: Lingnan Rabbit

古文：岭南兔，尝有郡牧得其皮。使工人削笔，醉失之。
现代文：岭南有兔，曾经有一个郡牧得到一张岭南兔的皮，让一工匠用兔毫做笔。
English: There is a rabbit in Lingnan. Once upon a time, a county herdsman obtained a piece of skin from a Lingnan rabbit and asked a craftsman to make a pen out of rabbit hair.

古文：大惧。因剪己须为笔，甚善。
现代文：这位工匠喝醉酒后将兔皮丢失了，非常恐惧，剪下自己的胡须做成笔。郡牧用这只笔写字，觉得很好使。
English: The craftsman got drunk and lost his rabbit skin. Terrified, he cut off his own whiskers to make a pen. Guan Mu used this pen to write, and found it easy to use.

古文：更使为之，工者辞焉。
现代文：让工匠再做一只这样的笔，工匠推辞不做。
English: Let the craftsman make another one of these pens, and the craftsman will not do it.

古文：诘其由，因实对。
现代文：郡牧动怒了，责备地问他不做的原因？
English: The county herdsman became angry and reproachfully asked him why he didn't do it?

古文：遂下令，使一户输人须。
现代文：工匠不得以，将事情的缘由告诉了郡牧。
English: The craftsman had no choice but to tell the county magistrate the reason for the incident.

古文：或不能致，辄责其直。
现代文：于是郡牧下令让各家送来人须，有不能送来的，就责令用钱来代替人须。
English: As a result, the county magistrate ordered that each family should send necessities, and if they could not send them, they were ordered to use money to replace the necessities.

