古文：亨人掌共鼎镬，以给水、火之齐。
现代文：亨人掌管供给鼎、镬，掌握用水的多少和火候的大小。
English: Hen people control the supply of tritium and tungsten, and control the amount of water and the size of the fire.

古文：职外，内饔之爨亨煮，辨膳羞之物。
现代文：负责将外饔和内饔在灶上烹煮，辨别所烹煮的各种牲肉和美味。
English: In charge of cooking the outer and inner yakitori on the stove, distinguishing the various types of meat and delicacies cooked.

古文：祭祀，共大羹、鉶羹。
现代文：祭祀时供给大羹和铡羹。
English: Large yakitori and bean curd yakitori are served during the ritual.

古文：宾客，亦如之。
现代文：款待宾客时也这样。
English: The same applies when entertaining guests.

古文：甸师掌帅其属而耕耨王藉。以时入之，以共齐盛。
现代文：甸师负责率领下属耕种王的借田，按时进献收获物，以供给祭祀所需的谷物。
English: Tien Shi was in charge of leading his subordinates to cultivate the king's leased fields and timely donate the harvest to supply the grain needed for the sacrifice.

古文：祭祀，共萧茅、共野果、瓜之荐。
现代文：祭祀，供给所需的香蒿和白茅，并供给野生的瓜果。
English: They also provided the necessary champagne and white mayonnaise, as well as wild melons and fruits.

古文：丧事，代王受眚灾。
现代文：王丧，就代后王受灾祸。
English: When a king dies, his queen suffers the same fate.

古文：王之同姓有罪，则死刑焉。
现代文：王的同姓如果有罪，判决后就到甸师的官府那里去处死或施刑。
English: If Wang's namesake is found guilty, after the verdict, he will go to the government office of Dian Shi to be executed or punished.

古文：帅其徒以薪蒸，役外，内饔之事。
现代文：率领徒属用薪柴供给外饔、内饔，做替外饔和内饔服役的事。
English: He led the disciples to supply firewood to the outer yakitori and inner yakitori to serve the outer yakitori and inner yakitori.

古文：兽人掌罟田兽，辨其名物。
现代文：兽人掌管用网捕获野兽，辨别所捕野兽的名称和毛色。
English: The orc in charge catches the beast with a net and distinguishes the name and fur color of the beast caught.

古文：冬献狼，夏献麋，春秋献兽物。
现代文：冬季献狼，夏季献麋鹿，春秋凡兽都可献。
English: Wolves can be offered in winter, elk in summer, and all kinds of beasts in spring and autumn.

古文：时田，则守罟。
现代文：四季田猎时，就守候着捕兽的网。
English: When hunting in the fields in the four seasons, they wait for the trapping net.

古文：及弊田，令禽注于虞中。
现代文：到停止田猎时，就命令把捕获的野兽聚集到树有虞旗的田猎处的中央。
English: When the hunting stopped, he ordered the captured beasts to be gathered in the center of the hunting ground, where there was a tree with a banner.

古文：凡祭祀、丧纪、宾客，共其死兽、生兽。
现代文：凡祭祀、丧事、款待宾客，就供给死兽和活兽。
English: For all sacrifices, funerals, and receptions, both dead and living animals are served.

古文：凡兽入于腊人，皮、毛、筋、角入于玉府。
现代文：凡所捕获的兽交给腊人，兽的皮毛筋角交给玉府。
English: All the animals caught were handed over to the La people, and the horns of the animals were handed over to the Yufu.

古文：凡田兽者，掌其政令。
现代文：凡捕猎野兽的，都由兽人掌管有关政令。
English: In all cases of hunting wild animals, orcs are in charge of the relevant decrees.

古文：渔人掌以时渔为梁。
现代文：渔人掌管按照一定的季节捕鱼，修筑鱼梁。
English: Fishermen are in charge of catching fish according to a certain season and building fish traps.

古文：春献王鲔，辨鱼物，为鲜薨，以共王膳羞。
现代文：春季进献大鲔鱼。辨别各种鱼的名称和性状，用鲜鱼或制成干鱼，以供给王膳食的美味所用。
English: In the spring, large eels are offered. The names and characteristics of various fish are distinguished, and fresh fish or dried fish are used to provide the delicacy of the king's meal.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客、丧纪，共其鱼之鲜薨。
现代文：凡祭祀、款待宾客和丧事，供给所需的鲜鱼和干鱼。
English: It is used for rituals, entertaining guests and funerals, and to supply the fresh and dried fish needed.

古文：凡渔者，掌其政令。
现代文：凡捕鱼的，掌管有关政令。
English: Anyone who catches fish is subject to the relevant decree.

古文：凡渔征入于玉府。
现代文：凡所征收的渔业税，交入玉府。
English: All fishery taxes collected shall be paid to Tamafu.

古文：鳖人掌取互物，以时簎鱼、鳖、龟、蜃，凡狸物。
现代文：鳖人掌管捕取有甲壳的动物，按季节叉取鱼鳖龟蛤等，凡埋藏在泥中的动物。
English: The herdsmen are in charge of catching animals with carapaces, forking out fish, turtles and other animals buried in the mud according to the season.

古文：春献鳖蜃，秋献龟鱼。
现代文：春季献鳖蛤，秋季献龟鱼。
English: In the spring, they offer bream, and in the fall, turtle fish.

古文：祭祀，共蠯、蠃、蚳，以授醢人。
现代文：祭祀时供给蛤、蜗牛和蚁卵，交给醢人。
English: At the time of the ritual, the egrets, snails and ant eggs are provided and given to the egrets.

古文：掌凡邦之簎事。
现代文：掌管凡王国中有关叉取鱼鳖龟蛤等的事。
English: In charge of all the kingdom's fish-hooking, turtle-hooking and other matters.

古文：腊人，掌乾肉。凡田兽之脯腊膴胖之事，凡祭祀，共豆脯，荐脯、膴、胖，凡腊物，宾客、丧纪，共脯腊凡乾肉之事。
现代文：腊人掌管干肉，凡将猎获的野兽做成脯，或整体风干，或薄切成大肉片、或做成不干的咸肉片的事。凡祭祀，供给加馔的脯、正馔的脯、大肉片、不干的咸肉片等，以及供给凡所需用的干肉。款待宾客、丧事，供给脯，以及凡所需用的干肉。
English: The Latins are in charge of dried meat, and of making the beasts of prey into stew, or whole dried, or thinly sliced into large pieces of meat, or made into non-dry salty pieces of meat; of offering sacrifices, of supplying gallons of stew, whole stew of stew, large pieces of meat, non-dry salty pieces of meat, etc., and of supplying dry meat for any need; of entertaining guests, of funerals, of supplying stew, and of supplying dry meat for any need.

古文：医师掌医之政令，聚毒药以共医事。
现代文：医师掌管有关医药方面的政令，收集药物以供医疗所用。
English: Physicians administer medical decrees and collect medicines for medical use.

古文：凡邦之有疾病者，疕疡者，造焉，则使医分而治之。
现代文：凡王国中有患疾病的，有头上长疮或身上有创伤的，都到医师的官府来看病，医师派医者对他们分别进行治疗。
English: All those in the kingdom who were ill, or who had sores on their heads or wounds on their bodies, came to the office of the physician to be examined, and the physician sent doctors to treat them separately.

古文：岁终，则稽其医事，以制其食。十全为上，十失一次之，十失二次之，十失三次之，十失四为下。
现代文：年终，考核医者医疗的成绩，以确定给予他们食粮：凡病都能准确诊断的为上等，有十分之一不能诊断准确的为次等，有十分之二不能诊断准确的又次一等，有十分之三不能诊断准确的又次一等，有十分之四不能诊断准确的为下等。
English: At the end of the year, the doctor's medical results were evaluated to determine the best food to give them: those who could accurately diagnose any disease were ranked higher, those who could not accurately diagnose one tenth were ranked lower, those who could not accurately diagnose two tenths were ranked lower, those who could not accurately diagnose three tenths were ranked lower, and those who could not accurately diagnose four tenths were ranked lower.

古文：食医掌和王之六食，六饮、六膳、百羞、百酱、八珍之齐。
现代文：食医掌管调和王的六种饭食、六种饮料、六种牲肉、各种美味、各种酱类、八种珍肴。
English: The gourmand presides over the king's six kinds of meals, six kinds of drinks, six kinds of meat, various delicacies, various sauces, and eight kinds of delicacies.

古文：凡食齐眡春时，羹齐眡夏时，酱齐眡秋时，饮齐眡冬时。
现代文：凡调和饭食应比照春天，羹汤应比照夏天，酱类应比照秋天，饮料应比照冬天。
English: All meals should be prepared according to the spring, soup should be prepared according to the summer, sauces should be prepared according to the autumn, and drinks should be prepared according to the winter.

古文：凡和，春多酸，夏多苦，秋多辛，冬多咸，调以滑甘。
现代文：凡调和食物的滋味，春天应多一些酸味，夏天应多一些苦味，秋天应多一些辛味，冬天应多一些成味，调和一些能使之变得柔滑和甘甜的食品。
English: If you want to harmonize the taste of food, spring should have more sourness, summer should have more bitterness, autumn should have more spiciness, and winter should have more seasoning, seasoning and foods that can make it silky and sweet.

古文：凡会膳食之宜，牛宜稌，羊宜黍，豕宜稷，犬宜梁，雁宜麦，鱼宜蓏。
现代文：凡调配牲肉和饭食，牛肉宜配合稻饭，羊肉宜配合黍饭，猪肉宜配合稷饭，狗肉宜配合梁饭，鹅肉宜配合麦饭，鱼肉宜配合菰米饭。
English: When mixing livestock meat and meals, beef should be combined with rice, mutton should be combined with risotto, pork should be combined with risotto, dog meat should be combined with ginger rice, goose meat should be combined with wheat rice, and fish meat should be combined with sticky rice.

古文：凡君子之食恒放焉。
现代文：凡君子的膳食都依照这种调配原则。
English: Every gentleman's meal is prepared according to this principle.

古文：疾医掌养万民之疾病。
现代文：疾医掌管治疗万民的疾病。
English: The doctor of diseases is in charge of curing the diseases of all people.

古文：四时皆有疠疾：春时有瘠首疾，夏时有痒疥疾，秋时有疟寒疾，冬时有嗽上气疾。
现代文：四季都有因气不调和而引起的疾病：春季有头痛病，夏季有皮肤长痒疥的病，秋季有寒疟病，冬季有咳嗽气喘病。
English: There are diseases caused by the imbalance of qi in all four seasons: headache in spring, itchy skin in summer, malaria in autumn, and cough and asthma in winter.

古文：以五味、五谷、五药，养其病；以五气、五声、五色，眡其死生。
现代文：用五味、五谷、五药治疗患者的疾病。
English: Five tastes, five grains, and five medicines are used to treat patients' diseases.

古文：两之以九窃之变，参之以九藏之动。凡民之有疾病者，分而治之。死终，则各书其所以，而入于医师。
现代文：根据患者著的五气、五声和五色来观察患者是必死还是可以治好，第二步观察患者九窍的变化，第三步诊断患者九脏的活动情况，凡民众有疾病的，就分别加以治疗，患者死了就分别记载死亡的原因，上报给医师。
English: According to the patient's five qi, five tones and five colors to observe whether the patient is mortal or can be cured, the second step is to observe the changes in the patient's nine acupoints, the third step is to diagnose the activity of the patient's nine viscera. If people have diseases, they will be treated separately, and if the patient dies, the cause of death will be recorded separately and reported to the doctor.

古文：疡医掌肿疡、溃疡、金疡、折疡之祝，药、劀、杀之齐。
现代文：疡医掌管按一定剂量和分寸为肿疡、溃疡、金疡和折疡患者敷药，以及刮去脓血、销蚀腐肉。
English: According to a certain dose and proportion, the doctor in charge will apply medicine to patients with abscesses, ulcers, gold abscesses and fractures, as well as scrape off blood stains and erode carrion.

古文：凡疗疡，以五毒攻之。以五气养之，以五药疗之，以五味节之。
现代文：凡治疗疡疮，用五种药性酷烈的药来敷治，用五谷来调养，用五药来治疗，用五味来调节药效。
English: In the treatment of sores, five kinds of extremely strong drugs should be used to treat, five grains should be used to raise, five drugs should be used to treat, and five flavors should be used to adjust the effect of drugs.

古文：凡药以酸养骨，以辛养筋，以咸养脉，以苦养气，以甘养肉，以滑养窃。
现代文：凡用药，以酸味补养骨骼，以辛味补养筋腱，以咸味凡患有疡疮的人，都可以接受疡医的药物治疗。
English: Anyone who uses medicine, with sour taste to replenish bones, with pungent taste to replenish tendons, with salty taste Anyone who suffers from acne can receive drug treatment from the doctor of their choice.

古文：凡有疡者，受其药焉。兽医掌疗兽病，疗兽疡。
现代文：兽医掌管治疗家畜的疾病，治疗家畜的疡疮。
English: Veterinarians are in charge of treating livestock diseases, treating livestock sores.

古文：凡疗兽病，灌而行之，以节之，以动其气，观其所发而养之。
现代文：凡治疗畜病，先灌药使它行走，节制它行走的快慢，以发动它的脉气，再观察所发的脉气而加以治疗。
English: When treating an animal disease, first give it medicine to make it walk, control the speed of its walking, start its pulse, and then observe the pulse to treat it.

古文：凡疗兽疡，灌而劀之，以发其恶，然后药之，养之，食之。
现代文：凡治疗家畜的疡疮，先灌药而后刮去浓血和腐肉，以挖出患处的坏死部分，然后敷上药，加以疗养，喂以饲料。
English: When treating the sores of livestock, first fill the medicine and then scrape off the thick blood and carrion to dig out the dead part of the affected area, then apply the medicine, cure it, and feed it with feed.

古文：凡兽之有病者，有疡者，使疗之。死，则计其数以讲退之。
现代文：凡家畜有疾病的，有疡疮的，就使兽医进行治疗，死了就统计死畜的数量，以决定兽医俸禄的增减。
English: If any livestock has diseases or abscesses, it shall be treated by a veterinarian, and if it dies, the number of dead animals shall be counted to determine the increase or decrease of the veterinarian's salary.

