古文：殷始咎周，周人乘黎。
现代文：殷商开始责怪周国的时候，是在周人凌驾黎国之时。
English: When Yin merchants began to blame Zhou Guo, it was when Zhou Ren overtook Li Guo.

古文：祖伊恐，奔告于受，作《西伯戡黎》。
现代文：祖伊惊恐，赶紧报告于商纣王，史官记录作成《西伯戡黎》。
English: Zui was alarmed, and quickly reported to the king of Shangguan, and the historian's record was made into "Xibei Xili."

古文：西伯既戡黎，祖伊恐，奔告于王。
现代文：周文王打败了黎国以后，祖伊十分恐慌，赶紧跑来告诉纣王。
English: After Zhou Wen Wang defeated Li Guo, Zui was very panicked and quickly ran to tell Zou Wang.

古文：曰： 天子！天既讫我殷命。
现代文：祖伊说： 天子，上天恐怕要终止我们殷商的国运了！
English: Zui said: Son of heaven, I'm afraid the heavens are about to end our prosperous merchant's national fortune!

古文：格人元龟，罔敢知吉。非先王不相我后人，惟王淫戏用自绝。
现代文：占卜的圣人用大龟来卜，始终没有遇上吉兆，不是先王不扶助我们后人，而是大王沉溺于酒色之中而自绝于先王。
English: The soothsayer's sage used a large turtle to tell fortunes, but never met with a good omen. It was not that the former king did not help our descendants, but that the great king indulged in alcohol and cut himself off from the former king.

古文：故天弃我，不有康食。
现代文：所以上天抛弃了我们，不让我们得到糟糠之食。
English: That is why God has abandoned us and does not allow us to eat rotten food.

古文：不虞天性，不迪率典。
现代文：大王不揣度天性，不遵循法律。
English: The great king does not think about nature and does not follow the law.

古文：今我民罔弗欲丧，曰： 天曷不降威？ 
现代文：如今天下百姓没有不希望国家灭亡的，他们说： 老天为什么还不降威罚呢？ 
English: If today there is no one among the people who does not want the country to perish, they say: Why doesn't God give up his punishment?

古文：大命不挚，今王其如台？ 
现代文：天命不再归向我们了，现在大王将要怎么办呢？ 纣王说： 哎！
English: The Mandate of Heaven no longer belongs to us. What will the great king do now? The king said: Alas!

古文：我生不有命在天？ 
现代文：我的一生不有福命在天吗？ 
English: Isn't my whole life a blessing from heaven?

古文：祖伊反曰： 呜呼！
现代文：祖伊反驳说： 唉！
English: Zui retorted: Alas!

古文：乃罪多，参在上，乃能责命于天？
现代文：您的过失太多，又懒惰懈怠，高高在上，这些上天都了解，难道还能向上天祈求福命吗？
English: Your faults are too many, you are lazy and slack, and you are high and mighty. Heaven understands all of this. Can you still pray to heaven for good fortune?

古文：殷之即丧，指乃功，不无戮于尔邦！ 
现代文：国家就要灭亡了，这从你的所作所为就可以看出，怎么能够不被周国消灭呢？ 
English: The country is about to perish, which can be seen from your actions. How can you not be destroyed by Zhou?

