古文：应侯谓昭王曰： 亦闻恒思有神丛与？
现代文：应侯对秦昭王说： 您也听说过在恒思那个地方的丛林中有一座神祠吗？
English: Ying Hou said to Qin Zhao Wang: Have you also heard that there is a shrine in the jungle of Hengsi?

古文：恒思有悍少年，请与丛博，曰： 吾胜丛，丛籍我神三日；不胜丛，丛困我。 
现代文：恒思有一个凶顽的少年要求与祠主掷骰子，他说： 我如果胜了你，你就要把神位借给我三天；如果不能胜你，你可以置我于困境。 
English: In Hengsi, there was a ferocious boy who demanded to play dice with the head of the ancestral hall. He said, "If I beat you, you have to lend me the god's throne for three days; if I don't beat you, you can put me in a difficult situation."

古文：乃左手为丛投，右手自为投，胜丛，丛籍其神。
现代文：于是，他用左手替祠主掷骰子，用右手为自己投骰子，最后他取胜了，祠主借给了他丛祠的神位。
English: So he used his left hand to throw the dice for the ancestor, and his right hand to throw the dice for himself. In the end, he won, and the ancestor lent him the shrine's deity.

古文：三日，丛往求之，遂弗归。
现代文：三天之后，神柯派人取神位，竟没有取回去。
English: Three days later, God sent someone to retrieve the god's throne, but it was not retrieved.

古文：五日而丛枯，七日而丛亡。
现代文：五天之后，这片树林全开始干枯，七目之后，这片树林全死了。
English: After five days, the entire forest began to wither, and after the seventh day, the entire forest died.

古文：今国者，王之丛；势者，王之神。
现代文：现在可以说，国家就好比是大王的丛林；权势就好比是大王的神位。
English: Now it can be said that the country is like the jungle of the great king; power is like the throne of the great king.

古文：籍人以此，得无危乎？
现代文：如果把这些东西借给别人：能没有危险吗？
English: If you lend these things to someone else: is it safe?

古文：百人舆瓢而趋，不如一人持而走疾。
现代文：我从来没有听说过手指比胳膊粗的，更没有听说过胳膊比大腿粗的：若是有这种事，那一定是病得太严重了。
English: I have never heard of fingers thicker than an arm, still less of an arm thicker than a thigh: if there is such a thing, it must be a very serious illness.

古文：百人诚舆瓢，瓢必裂。
现代文：假使真的一百个人驮着瓢跑，那么瓢非摔碎不可。
English: If there are really a hundred people running with the plough, then the plough must be broken.

古文：今秦国，华阳用之，穰侯用之，太后用之，王亦用之。
现代文：现在的秦国，华阳君掌政，穰侯掌政，太后掌政，大王也掌政。
English: In the present Qin State, Huayangjun is in power, Zhouhou is in power, the Empress Dowager is in power, and the Great King is also in power.

古文：不称瓢为器，则已；已称瓢为器，国必裂矣。
现代文：不把国家比做盛水的瓢也就算了；如果把国家比做盛水的瓢，那么国家也必然会因分五裂的了。
English: If you don't compare the country to a bucket of water, forget it; if you compare the country to a bucket of water, then the country will inevitably be torn apart.

古文：臣闻之也： 木实繁者枝必披，枝之披者伤其心。
现代文：我曾经听到过这样一句话： 果实累累的树，树枝必定要折断，树枝一折断，树心必定受到损伤。
English: I once heard such a sentence: A tree with a lot of fruit, the branches must be broken, and once the branches are broken, the heart of the tree must be damaged.

古文：都大者危其国，臣强者危其主。 
现代文：都城大的诸侯就将危及他的国家，权势过强的臣子必将危及他的君主。 
English: Princes with large capitals will endanger their countries, and powerful courtiers will endanger their monarchs.

古文：且令邑中自斗食以上，至尉、内史及王左右，有非相国之人者乎？
现代文：秦国城邑中从一斗俸禄的小官吏以上，一直到军尉、内史以及大王左右的近臣。有哪个不是穰侯灼亲信呢？
English: In the cities and towns of Qin, from minor officials with a salary of more than a dowry, all the way up to military lieutenants, court historians, and close vassals around the great king. Which one is not a close confidant of Zhou Jiao?

古文：国无事，则已；国有事，臣必闻见王独立于庭也。
现代文：国家没有什么战乱，还没有什么，国家万一有什么战乱发生，我一定能看到大王在朝廷上受到孤立。
English: There is no war in the country, there is nothing yet. In the unlikely event that there is a war in the country, I can definitely see the king being isolated in the court.

古文：臣窃为王恐，恐万世之后有国者，非王子孙也。
现代文：我私下里替大王害怕，唯恐万世之后掌握国家大权的不是大王的子孙了。
English: Privately, I fear for the great king. I am afraid that it will not be the great king's descendants who will hold the power of the state after all eternity.

古文： 臣闻古之善为政也，其威内扶，其辅外布，四治政不乱不逆，使者直道而行，不敢为非。
现代文： 我听说古代那些善于治理国家的君主，他的威权掌握在自己手里：他的亲信遍布全国各处，政治安定，没有祸乱没有叛逆，使臣们按政策办事，不敢为非作歹。
English: I have heard that the ancient monarchs who were good at governing the country, his authority was in his own hands: his cronies were all over the country, political stability, no disaster, no rebellion, the envoys followed the policy and did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：今太后使者分裂诸侯，而符布天下，操大国之势，强征兵，伐诸侯。
现代文：观在太卮的使臣分裂各地诸侯，虎符流布天下，操纵大国的权利，征聚强壮的兵士，诛伐诸侯。
English: Watching the envoys of Emperor Taizong divide the princes of various regions, spread the tiger's paw all over the world, manipulate the power of great powers, gather strong soldiers, and attack princes.

古文：战胜攻取，利尽归于陶；国之币帛，竭入太后之家；竟内之利，分移华阳。
现代文：每至战胜攻取，财物全部归到陶地，国家财物搜刮干净就都送往太后的私室，境内的资产，也全部运往华阳。
English: After each victory, all the property was returned to Taodi, the state property was sent to the empress dowager's private quarters, and the assets in the territory were all transported to Huayang.

古文：古之所谓危主灭国之道，必从此起。
现代文：古人所说 使君主危险让国家走向灭亡之路 必将从这里开始。
English: As the ancients said, the road that leads a monarch to danger and a country to ruin must begin here.

古文：三贵竭国以自安，然则令何得从王出，权何得毋分，是我王果处三分之一也。 
现代文：太后、穰侯、华阳君这三个显贵刮取国家财富求得自己的安乐。既然这样，那么国家的政令怎么能从大王这里发出，权利也会分散，这确实使大王处在三贵包围一王的地位了。 
English: The empress dowager, the eunuchs, and Huayangjun, the three dignitaries, scraped the country's wealth to seek their own happiness. In this case, how could the country's decrees be issued from the great king, and the power would be dispersed, which indeed put the great king in the position of the three nobles encircling a king.

