古文：上章困敦，一年。
现代文：上章困敦，一年。
English: The last chapter is a year old.

古文：高宗宣皇帝下之上太建十二年
现代文：陈宣帝太建十二年
English: The 12th year of Emperor Chen Xuan's reign

古文：春，正月，癸巳，周天元祠太庙。
现代文：春季正月，癸巳，北周天元皇帝到太庙癸祀祖先。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan went to the Great Temple to pay homage to his ancestors.

古文：戊戌，以左卫将军任忠为南豫州刺史，督缘江军防事。
现代文：戊戌，陈朝任命左卫将军任忠为南豫州刺史，负责沿江一带的军事防务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of Wu and Emperor Chen, General Ren Zhong of the Left Division was appointed as the prefect of South Henan Province, responsible for military defense along the Yangtze River.

古文：乙卯，周税入市者人一钱。
现代文：乙卯，北周朝廷向出入集市的人每人征税一文钱。
English: Second, the Northern Zhou court levied a tax of one penny per person entering and leaving the bazaar.

古文：二月，丁巳，周天元幸露门学，释奠。
现代文：二月，丁巳，北周天元皇帝驾幸露门学，陈设酒食祭祀孔子。
English: In February, Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty traveled to Confucius' hometown to hold a food and wine festival in honor of Confucius.

古文：戊午，突厥入贡于周，且迎千金公主。
现代文：戊午，突厥国派人向北周朝廷进贡，并来迎娶千金公主。
English: At noon, the Turkic countries sent people to pay tribute to the Northern Zhou Dynasty and to marry Princess Qianjin.

古文：乙丑，周天元改制为天制，敕为天敕。
现代文：乙丑，北周天元皇帝将自己所下的制书改称天制，敕书改称天敕。
English: In the second century, the Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan changed the name of his book-making system to Tian system, and the book-making system to Tianyu.

古文：壬午，尊天元皇太后为天元上皇太后，天皇太后为天元圣皇太后。
现代文：壬午，北周尊称天元皇太后为天元上皇太后，天元太后为天元圣皇太后。
English: In Renpo, North Zhou called Empress Dowager Tianyuan as Empress Dowager Tianyuan, Empress Dowager Tianyuan as Empress Dowager Tianyuan.

古文：癸未，诏杨后与三后皆称太皇后，司马后直称皇后。
现代文：癸未，又下诏书令对皇后杨氏与朱氏、元氏、陈氏三位皇后一样都称为太皇后，司马皇后直称皇后。
English: At the same time, the imperial rescript ordered that the empress Yang, like the three empresses of the Zhu, Yuan and Chen dynasties, be called the great empress, and the empress Sima was directly called the empress.

古文：行军总管杞公亮，天元之从祖兄也。
现代文：北周行军总管杞公宇文亮是天元皇帝的从祖堂兄。
English: The general manager of the Northern Zhou marches, Gongguan Yu Wenliang, was an ancestral cousin of Emperor Tianyuan.

古文：其子西阳公温妻尉迟氏，蜀公迥之孙，有美色，以宗妇入朝。天元饮之酒，逼而淫之。
现代文：宇文亮的儿子西阳公宇文温的妻子尉迟氏是蜀公尉迟迥的孙女，容貌美艳，以皇族大夫妇人的身份入朝，天元皇帝让她喝酒，强迫奸污了她。
English: Yu Wenliang's son, Xiyang Gong, and U Wenwen's wife, Fei Chi Rong, are the granddaughters of Shu Gongfei, both of whom are beautiful and married into the imperial family. Emperor Tianyuan forced her to drink alcohol and raped her.

古文：亮闻之，惧；三月，军还，至豫州，密谋袭韦孝宽，并其众，推诸父为主，鼓行而西。
现代文：宇文亮得知此事后，心中恐惧。三月，他率军从淮南返回，军到豫州时，密谋袭击征南行军元帅韦孝宽，把他的部队夺过来，然后再推举自己父辈的人为首领，拥兵击鼓西进。
English: When Yu Wenliang learned of this, he was terrified. In March, he led the army back from Huainan, and when the army arrived in Yuzhou, he plotted to attack the southward marching army marshal Wei Xiaokuan, take over his troops, and then promote the people of his own fathers as leaders, and march west with soldiers beating drums.

古文：亮国官茹宽知其谋，先告孝宽，孝宽潜设备。
现代文：宇文亮的国官茹宽得悉了他的计谋，事先告知了韦孝宽，韦孝宽就暗中作了部署。
English: Yu Wenliang's state official, Ru Kuan, learned of his scheme and informed Wei Xiaokuan in advance. Wei Xiaokuan then secretly made arrangements.

古文：亮夜将数百骑袭孝宽营，不克而走。
现代文：一天夜晚，宇文亮带领数百名骑兵偷袭韦孝宽军营，没有得手，被迫退走。
English: One night, Yu Wenliang led hundreds of cavalry in a surprise attack on Wei Xiaokang's military camp, but failed and was forced to retreat.

古文：戊子，孝宽追斩之，温亦坐诛。
现代文：戊子，韦孝宽领兵追击，将宇文亮斩首，宇文温也受牵连被杀。
English: Wu Zi and Wei Xiaokang led the troops in pursuit and beheaded Uwen Liang. Uwen Wen was also implicated and killed.

古文：天元即召其妻入宫，拜长贵妃。
现代文：天元皇帝随即把宇文温的妻子召入后宫，册封为长贵妃。
English: Emperor Tengen then summoned Uwenwen's wife into the harem and had her crowned as the first noble consort.

古文：辛卯，立亮弟永昌公椿为杞公。
现代文：辛卯，天元皇帝又立宇文亮的弟弟永昌公宇文椿为杞公。
English: Soon after, Emperor Tengen also appointed Uwenliang's younger brother, Yongchanggong Uwenchong, as the regent.

古文：周天元如同州，增候正、前驱、式道候为三百六十重。自应门至于赤岸泽，数十里间，幡旗相蔽，音乐俱作。
现代文：北周天元皇帝巡幸同州，增派负责候望车贺的候正、负责先行安排的前驱以及负责在车驾前面开路的式道候等多达三百六十重，从皇宫应门一直到长安北面的赤岸泽，数十里间，幡旗相连，遮天蔽日；音乐大作，响彻云天。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan made a tour of Tongzhou. As many as three hundred and sixty attendants were additionally assigned to be in charge of waiting for the arrival of the car, the forerunner responsible for the advance arrangements, and the style of waiting responsible for opening the road in front of the car. From the imperial palace to the door to the north of Chang'an, the flags were connected for dozens of miles, blocking the sun; the music was a masterpiece, resounding through the clouds.

古文：又令虎贲持钑马上，称警跸。
现代文：又命令虎贲卫士持戟乘马，沿路戒严，禁止过往行人通行。
English: He also ordered the tiger cub guards to hold the yoke and ride on horseback, along the road of martial law, prohibiting the passage of pedestrians.

古文：乙未，改同州宫为成天宫。
现代文：乙未，天元皇帝下令将他居住的同州宫改称成天宫。
English: However, Emperor Tengen ordered that the Tongzhou Palace, where he lived, be renamed the Heavenly Palace.

古文：庚子，还长安。
现代文：庚子，天元皇帝回到长安。
English: Emperor Tengen returned to Chang'an.

古文：诏天台侍卫之官，皆著五色及红、紫、绿衣，以杂色为缘，名曰 品色衣 ，有大事，与公服间服之。
现代文：又下诏书命令在天台内的侍卫官吏，都须穿五色和红色、紫色、绿色衣服，以杂色为边缘装饰，名叫 品色衣 ，遇到重大事情，可与公服轮换穿戴。
English: The imperial edict also ordered that the guards and officials in the rooftop must wear five-color and red, purple, and green clothes, with mixed colors as the edge decoration, called the color dress. In the event of a major event, it can be rotated with the official uniform.

古文：壬寅，诏内外命妇皆执笏，其拜宗庙及天台，皆俯伏如男子。
现代文：壬寅，天元皇帝又下诏书命令宫廷内外有封号的妇人上朝时都要手持笏板，朝拜宗庙或天台时，都要像男人一样俯身跪拜。
English: In addition, Emperor Tianyuan issued an edict ordering all women with seal numbers inside and outside the court to hold a tablet in their hands when going to the palace, and to bow down and kneel like men when worshiping the ancestral temple or rooftop.

古文：天元将立五皇后，以问小宗伯狄道辛彦之。
现代文：天元皇帝准备册立五位皇后，征询小宗伯狄道人辛彦之的意见。
English: Emperor Tengen was preparing to appoint five empresses, and he asked the opinion of Shoson Bodi Daoist Shinhiko.

古文：对曰： 皇后与天子敌体，不宜有五。 
现代文：辛彦之回答说： 皇后与天子同样尊贵，不应该有五位。 
English: Shin Hanzhi replied, "The empress is as important as the emperor. There should not be five empresses."

古文：太学博士西城何妥曰： 昔帝喾四妃，虞舜二妃。
现代文：太常博士西城人何妥说： 古时候帝喾有四个妃子，虞舜有两个妃子。
English: "In ancient times, emperors had four concubines, while statesmen had two concubines," said Dr. He Zuo, a native of Xicheng.

古文：先代之数，何常之有！ 
现代文：可见前代在皇后的数目上，并没有一成不变的规定。 
English: It can be seen that the previous generation did not have a fixed rule on the number of queens.

古文：帝大悦，免彦之官。
现代文：天元皇帝听了何妥的话非常高兴，就罢免了辛彦之的官。
English: Emperor Tengen was very pleased to hear such words, and dismissed Shinhiko from his post.

古文：甲辰，诏曰： 坤仪比德，土数惟五，四太皇后外，可增置天中太皇后一人。 
现代文：甲辰，天元皇帝下诏书说： 妇人取法大地，土地有五类，所以在四位太皇后之外，可以再增置一位天中太皇后。 
English: Emperor Jia Chen and Emperor Tianyuan issued an edict saying, "A woman can only take so much land, and there are five types of land. Therefore, in addition to the four great queens, one more great queen can be added.

古文：于是以陈氏为天中太皇后，尉迟妃为天左太皇后。
现代文：于是册封陈氏为天中太皇后，尉迟妃为天左太皇后。
English: As a result, the Chen clan was proclaimed the Empress Dowager of the Middle Kingdom of Heaven, and the Empress Dowager was proclaimed the Empress Dowager of the Left Kingdom of Heaven.

古文：又造下帐五，使五皇后各居其一，实宗庙祭器于前，自读祝版而祭之。
现代文：天元皇帝又下令建造了五座帐篷，让五位皇后各居住一座。他又将宗庙里的祭祀用具陈列于前，亲自拿着祝版宣读祝文，以祭告祖先。
English: Emperor Tengen also ordered the construction of five tents, one for each of the five queens to live in. He also displayed the sacrificial equipment in the ancestral temple in front of him, and personally held a congratulatory plate to read out a congratulatory message to the ancestors.

古文：又以五辂载妇人，自帅左右步从。
现代文：天元皇帝也经常让妇女乘坐玄辂、夏篆、夏缦、墨车和车等五种车子，自己带领左右随从步行跟从。
English: Emperor Tianyuan also often let women ride in five kinds of cars such as Xuanqi, Xiaqi, Xiaqi, Ink Cart and Car, and led the left and right followers on foot.

古文：又好倒悬鸡及碎瓦于车上，观其号呼以为乐。
现代文：他还喜欢倒挂活鸡于车上，或者向车上投掷瓦片，看着那些乘车的妇女吓得号叫而借以取乐。
English: He also liked to amuse himself by hanging live chickens upside down from the car, or throwing tiles at the car and watching the women scream in fright.

古文：夏，四月，癸亥，尚书左仆射陆缮卒。
现代文：夏季四月，癸亥，南陈尚书左仆射陆缮去世。
English: In the summer of April, in the Year of the Rooster, Nan Chen Shangshu's left-hand servant Lu Shu died.

古文：己巳，周天元祠太庙；己卯，大雩；壬午，幸仲山祈雨；甲申，还宫，令京城士女于衢巷作乐迎候。
现代文：己巳，北周天元皇帝到太庙去祭祀祖先。己卯，举行求雨的雩祭。壬午，天元皇帝又到仲山求雨。甲申，天元皇帝从仲山返回皇宫，下令京城百姓在街巷唱歌跳舞迎候车驾。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Tengen went to Zhongshan to pray for rain. In the evening, Emperor Tengen returned to the Imperial Palace from Zhongshan and ordered the people of Beijing to sing and dance in the streets to welcome the carriage.

古文：五月，癸巳，以尚书右仆射晋安王伯恭为仆射。
现代文：五月，癸丑，南陈任命尚书右仆射晋安王陈伯恭为尚书仆射。
English: In May, Nan Chen appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Jinan King Chen Boqiong as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：周杨后性柔婉，不妨忌，四皇后及嫔、御等，咸爱而仰之。
现代文：北周杨皇后性格柔顺，不妒忌，所以其他四位皇后以及后宫中的九嫔、侍御等都爱戴并敬重他。
English: The Northern Zhou Yang Empress was gentle and not jealous, so the other four empresses, as well as the nine concubines and attendants in the harem, all loved and respected him.

古文：天元昏暴滋甚，喜怒乖度，尝谴后，欲加之罪。
现代文：天元皇帝越来越昏庸暴虐，喜怒无常，曾无故责备杨皇后，想强加给她罪名。
English: Emperor Tianyuan became more and more tyrannical and capricious. He had accused Empress Yang without reason and wanted to impose a criminal charge on her.

古文：后进止详闲，辞色不挠，天元大怒，遂赐后死，逼令引诀，后母独孤氏诣阁陈谢，叩头流血，然后得免。
现代文：但是杨皇后举止安祥，言语态度没有曲挠服软的表示，所以天元皇帝十分愤怒，遂将杨皇后赐死，逼令他自杀。杨皇后的母亲独孤氏闻讯后，急忙进宫，为杨皇后求情，以至叩头流血，杨皇后才免于一死。
English: However, Empress Yang's demeanor was peaceful, and her verbal attitude showed no contortions, so Emperor Tianyuan was very angry, so he put Empress Yang to death and forced him to commit suicide. After hearing the news, Empress Yang's mother, Du Guo, hurried to the palace to intercede for Empress Yang, and even bowed her head and bled, so that Empress Yang was spared from death.

古文：后父大前疑坚，位望隆重，天元忌之，尝因忿谓后曰： 必族灭尔家！ 
现代文：杨皇后的父亲杨坚任职大前疑，地位尊崇，深孚众望。天元皇帝一直猜忌他，有一次发怒时对杨皇后说： 我一定要将你家灭族。 
English: Empress Yang's father, Yang Jian, was suspected of being a high-ranking official, his position was respected, and he was highly regarded. Emperor Tianyuan was always suspicious of him, and once, when he was angry, he said to Empress Yang, "I will definitely exterminate your family."

古文：因召坚，谓左右曰： 色动，即杀之。 
现代文：于是传令召杨坚进宫，对左右侍从说： 他如果变了脸色，就立即把他杀死。 
English: Therefore, a messenger summoned Yang Jian to the palace and said to the attendants: "If he changes his face, kill him immediately."

古文：坚至，神色自若，乃止。
现代文：杨坚来到以后，神色自若，天元皇帝才没有杀他。
English: After Yang Jian arrived, he looked so confident that Emperor Tianyuan did not kill him.

古文：内史上大夫郑译，与坚少同学，奇坚相表，倾心相结。
现代文：内史上大夫郑译，少年时与杨坚同学，对杨坚的相貌感到惊奇，于是诚心诚意与他交结。
English: Dr. Zheng Yue, who was a classmate of Yang Jian when he was a boy, was surprised by Yang Jian's appearance, so he sincerely made contact with him.

古文：坚既为帝所忌，情不自安，尝在永巷，私于译曰： 久愿出籓，公所悉也，愿少留意！ 
现代文：杨坚既已遭到天元皇帝的猜忌，心中老是忐忑不安，有一次在宫中的长巷内碰到郑译，就悄悄地对他说： 我早就想出朝镇守一方，这你是很清楚的，希望你能够为我留心这样的机会！ 
English: Since Yang Jian had already been suspected by Emperor Tianyuan, he was always uneasy in his heart. Once, when he met Zheng Zhan in a long alley in the palace, he quietly said to him: I have long wanted to take the side of the imperial guard, which you know very well. I hope you can pay attention to such an opportunity for me!

古文：译曰： 以公德望，天下归心。
现代文：郑译说： 随公您德高望重，天下归心。
English: Translated by Zheng, it said, "Follow your father-in-law's high moral standards, and the world will be converted to you."

古文：欲求多福，岂敢忘也！
现代文：我也奢望前程远大，对您托付的事岂敢遗忘！我很快就向皇帝启奏。 
English: I, too, have high hopes for the future, and I dare not forget what you have entrusted to me. I will soon perform for the emperor.

古文：谨即言之。 天元将遣译入寇，译请元帅。
现代文：北周天元皇帝将派郑译率军进攻南陈，郑译请求朝廷任命一位元帅。
English: The Northern Zhou Emperor Tianyuan would send Zheng Zhan to lead an army to attack Southern Chen. Zheng Zhan requested the imperial court to appoint a marshal.

古文：天元曰： 卿意如何？ 
现代文：天元皇帝问： 你认为派谁合适？ 
English: Emperor Tengen asked: Whom do you think is appropriate to send?

古文：对曰： 若定江东，自非懿戚重臣，无以镇抚。可令随公行，且为寿阳总管以督军事。 
现代文：郑译回答说： 如果要平定江东，不用朝廷懿戚重臣做统帅，难以镇抚，请命令随公杨坚随军前往，担任寿阳总管，负责前线军事。 
English: Zheng Yi replied: "If you want to pacify the east of the Yangtze River, and you don't need the imperial court, relatives, and senior vassals as commanders, and it is difficult to pacify, please order Yang Jian to go with the army and serve as the general manager of Shouyang and be responsible for the front-line military.

古文：天元从之。
现代文：天元皇帝答应了郑译的请求。
English: Emperor Tianyuan agreed to Zheng's request.

古文：己丑，以坚为扬州总管，使译发兵会寿阳。
现代文：己丑，天元皇帝任命杨坚为崐扬州总管，令郑译调遣军队与杨坚到寿阳会合。
English: At the same time, Emperor Tianyuan appointed Yang Jian as the general manager of Shiyan and Yangzhou, and ordered Zheng He to dispatch troops to join Yang Jian in Shouyang.

古文：将行，会坚暴有足疾，不果行。
现代文：将要出发时，适逢杨坚突然得了脚病，结果没有成行。
English: When they were about to set off, Yang Jian suddenly fell ill with a foot ailment. As a result, the trip did not go ahead.

古文：甲午夜，天元备法驾，幸天兴宫。
现代文：甲午夜，天元皇帝乘坐车驾，临幸天兴宫。
English: In the middle of the night, Emperor Tianyuan was driving in his car, passing by Tianxing Palace.

古文：乙未，不豫而还。
现代文：乙未，因病返回。
English: Biyi, back from illness.

古文：小御正博陵刘昉，素以狡谄得幸于天元，与御正中大夫颜之仪并见亲信。
现代文：小御正博陵人刘一向以狡黠谄媚得到天元皇帝的宠爱，与御正大夫颜之仪一起受到天元皇帝的信任。
English: Liu, a member of the small imperial family Zhengbo Mausoleum, has always been favored by the Emperor Tianyuan with his cunning and charm. He was trusted by the Emperor Tianyuan together with the imperial doctor Yan Zhi Yi.

古文：天元召昉、之仪入卧内，欲属以后事，天元瘖，不复能言。
现代文：天元皇帝召见刘、颜之仪到卧室，想向他们托付后事，但因病发音困难，不能再说话。
English: Emperor Tianyuan summoned Liu and Yan Zhi Yi to his bedroom and wanted to entrust the succession to them, but due to the difficulty of pronouncing due to illness, he could no longer speak.

古文：昉见静帝幼冲，以杨坚后父，有重名，遂与领内史郑译、御饰大夫柳裘、内史大夫杜陵韦謩、御正下士朝那皇甫绩谋引坚辅政。
现代文：刘见静帝年纪幼小，而杨坚是杨皇后的父亲，声名显赫，于是和领内史郑译、御饰大夫柳裘、内史大夫杜陵人韦、御正下士朝那人皇甫绩商议，邀请杨坚辅政。
English: Liu Mingjing Emperor was young, and Yang Jian was the father of Queen Yang and had a great reputation. Therefore, he discussed the performance of the emperor with the head of the Imperial Household Agency Zheng Yue, the Imperial Decoration Officer Liu Qiu, the Imperial Household Agency Du Ling Ren Wei, and the Grand Corporal Chao Nan, and invited Yang Jian to assist the government.

古文：坚固辞，不敢当。昉曰： 公若为，速为之；不为，昉自为也。 
现代文：杨坚坚辞不接受，刘就对他说： 您如果想干，就赶快上任；如果不想干，我就自己干。 
English: Yang Jian refused to accept his resignation, and Liu said to him: "If you want to do it, you should take office as soon as possible; if you don't want to do it, I will do it myself."

古文：坚乃从之，称受诏居中侍疾。
现代文：杨坚这才答应，对外则宣称接到天元皇帝诏命，要他住进宫中侍奉疾病。
English: It was only then that Yang Jian consented. To the outside world, he claimed to have received an imperial decree from Emperor Tengen, ordering him to live in the palace and serve the sick.

古文：裘，惔之孙也。
现代文：柳裘是柳的孙子。
English: Liu Qiu is Liu's grandson.

古文：是日，帝殂。
现代文：当天，天元皇帝去世。
English: On the same day, Emperor Tengen passed away.

古文：秘不发丧。
现代文：宫中对外秘而不宣。
English: There will be no obituary.

古文：昉、译矫诏以坚总知中外兵马事。
现代文：刘、郑译又假传诏命，让杨坚总管朝野内外的军队。
English: Liu and Zheng also falsely ordered Yang Jian to be in charge of the army both at home and abroad.

古文：颜之仪知非帝旨，拒而不从。
现代文：颜之仪知道这不是天元皇帝的命令，就拒绝服从诏命。
English: Yan Zhi Yi knew that this was not Emperor Tianyuan's order, so she refused to obey the edict.

古文：昉等草诏署讫，逼之仪连署，之仪厉声曰： 主上升遐，嗣子冲幼，阿衡之任，宜在宗英。
现代文：刘等人起草好诏书并分别署上自己的名字后，就逼颜之仪也签上名字，颜之仪厉声说： 天元皇帝已经升天，继位的皇帝还很年幼，总理朝政的重任应该由宗室中有才能的人担任。
English: After Liu and the others had drafted the edict and signed their names separately, they forced Yan Zhiyi to sign her name as well. Yan Zhiyi said in a strong voice: Emperor Tianyuan has ascended to heaven, the emperor who succeeds to the throne is still very young, and the important task of prime minister and government should be held by a talented person in the family.

古文：方今赵王最长，以亲以德，合膺重寄。
现代文：现今赵王宇文招年纪最大，他既是宗室至亲，不论德行和才干，理当担负辅政重任。
English: Today, Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao is the oldest. He is the closest relative of the family, and regardless of his virtues and talents, he should bear the important responsibility of supporting politics.

古文：公等备受朝恩，当思尽忠报国，奈何一旦欲以神器假人！
现代文：你们诸位备受朝廷恩惠，应当考虑怎样才能尽忠报国才是，怎么能够把天下的权柄授与他姓之人呢！
English: All of you, who have been favored by the imperial court, should consider how you can be loyal to the country and how you can bestow the power of the world on a person with his surname!

古文：之仪有死而已，不能诬罔先帝。 
现代文：我颜之仪有死而已，绝不能欺骗先帝的在天之灵。 
English: Death is only the symbol of my face, and I must not deceive the spirit of the former emperor in heaven.

古文：昉等知不可屈。乃代之仪署而行之。
现代文：刘等人知道无法使颜之仪屈从，于是就代替颜之仪签上名字，然后颁行下去。
English: Liu and others knew that they could not make Yan Zhi Yi submit, so they signed their names instead of Yan Zhi Yi, and then went on.

古文：诸卫既受敕，并受坚节度。
现代文：北周负责保卫京师和皇宫的禁卫军各部队既然都接到了天元皇帝的诏命，于是就都接受杨坚的指挥。
English: Since all the troops of the imperial guard responsible for protecting the Beijing Division and the imperial palace in the northern Zhou Dynasty received the imperial decree of Emperor Tianyuan, they all accepted the command of Yang Jian.

古文：坚恐诸王在外生变，以千金公主将适突厥为辞，征赵、陈、越、代、滕五王入朝。
现代文：杨坚恐怕宗室诸王在地方发动叛乱，就以千金公主将要远嫁突厥为借口，征召赵王宇文招、陈王宇文纯、越王宇文盛、代王宇文达、腾滕王宇文等五王入朝。
English: Yang Jian feared that the kings of his family would start a rebellion in the provinces, so he used the excuse that Princess Qianjin was going to marry a Turk to recruit five kings, including Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao, Chen Wang Yuwenjun, Yue Wang Yuwensheng, Dai Wang Yuwenda, and Tengten Wang Yuwen, to enter the imperial court.

古文：坚索符玺，颜之仪正色曰： 此天子之物，自有主者，宰相何故索之！ 
现代文：杨坚索要天元皇帝的兵符玺印，颜之仪严厉地拒绝道： 这是天子使用的东西，自然有人掌管，宰相凭什么索要天子的兵符印玺呢？ 
English: Yang Jian asked for Emperor Tianyuan's seal, but Yan Zhi Yi sternly refused, saying, "This is something used by the Son of Heaven. Naturally, someone is in charge. Why would the prime minister ask for the seal of the Son of Heaven?"

古文：坚大怒，命引出，将杀之；以其民望，出为西边郡守。
现代文：杨坚听了勃然大怒，命令将颜之仪拉出宫去，准备杀了他。
English: Hearing this, Yang Jian flew into a rage, ordered Yan Zhi Yi to be dragged out of the palace, and prepared to kill him.

古文：丁未，发丧。静帝入居天台。
现代文：但是考虑到颜之仪在朝廷上下都很有声望，于是就派他去做了西部边疆的郡守。
English: However, considering that Yan Zhi Yi was very prestigious in the imperial court, he was sent to be the county governor of the western frontier.

古文：罢正阳宫。
现代文：丁未，北周为去世的天元皇帝发丧。
English: Ding Wei and Northern Zhou mourned the death of Emperor Tianyuan.

古文：大赦，停洛阳宫作。
现代文：北周静帝住进天台，下令废除正阳宫的名称。
English: Emperor Zhou Jing of the North lived in the rooftop and ordered the abolition of the name Zhengyang Palace.

古文：庚戌，尊阿史那太后为太皇太后，李太后为太帝太后，杨后为皇太后，硃后为帝太后，其陈后、元后、尉迟后并为尼。
现代文：静帝又下令大赦天下罪人，停止修建洛阳宫。庚戌，静帝下诏书尊称阿史那太后为太皇太后，李太后为太帝太后，杨皇后为皇太后，朱皇后为帝太后。另外废陈皇后、元皇后、尉迟皇后出家为尼姑。
English: Emperor Jing also ordered a general amnesty for the world's sinners and stopped the construction of Luoyang Palace. Geng Zi, Emperor Jing's edict called Empress Dowager Ashina the great empress dowager, Empress Dowager Li the great empress dowager, Empress Yang the great empress dowager, Empress Zhu the great empress dowager. In addition, Empress Chen, Empress Yuan and Empress Le Chi became nuns.

古文：以汉王赞为上柱国、右大丞相，尊以虚名，实无所综理。
现代文：又任命汉王宇文赞为上柱国、右大丞相，只不过是尊以虚名，实际上没有任何权力。
English: He also appointed Han Wang Yu Wenzan as Shangzhu Guo and Minister of the Right Great Council of Elders, but this was in name only and he did not actually have any power.

古文：以杨坚为假黄钺、左大丞相，秦王贽为上柱国。
现代文：同时任命杨坚为假黄钺、左大丞相，秦王宇文贽为上柱国。
English: At the same time, Yang Jian was appointed as Minister of False Huang Qi and Left Major General, and Qin Wang Uwenqi was appointed as Shangzhu Guo.

古文：百官总己以听于左丞相。
现代文：还下令朝中百官都必须率领下属服从左大丞相的命令。
English: He also ordered that all the officials in the court must lead their subordinates to obey the orders of the Left Grand Chancellor.

古文：坚初受顾命，使邗国公杨惠谓御正下大夫李德林曰： 朝廷赐令总文武事，经国任重。
现代文：起初，杨坚受命辅政时，就派邗国公杨惠对御正下大夫李德林说： 朝廷赐令让我总管文武大权，治理国家的责任重大。
English: At first, when Yang Jian received the order to assist the government, he sent Yang Hui, the Duke of Yunnan, to say to Li Delin, the imperial physician: The imperial court has ordered me to be in charge of the civil and military power, and the responsibility of governing the country is great.

古文：今欲与公共事，必不得辞。 
现代文：我想与你一起谋划大事，你一定不要推辞。 
English: I want to plan big things with you. You mustn't refuse.

古文：德林曰： 愿以死奉公。 
现代文：李德林回答说： 我愿意追随您，虽死不辞。 
English: Li Delin replied: I am willing to follow you, even if it means my death.

古文：坚大喜。
现代文：杨坚非常高兴。
English: Yang Jian was very happy.

古文：始，刘昉、郑译议以坚为大冢宰，译自摄大司马，昉又求小冢宰。
现代文：最初，刘、郑译商议让杨坚出任大冢宰，郑译自己想担任大司马，刘又要求担任小冢宰。
English: At first, Liu and Zheng negotiated to let Yang Jian serve as grand steward, Zheng himself wanted to serve as grand steward, and Liu asked to serve as junior steward.

古文：坚私问德林曰： 欲何以见处？ 
现代文：杨坚私下问李德林： 准备把我怎么安排？ 
English: Yang Jian privately asked Li Delin: How are you going to arrange me?

古文：德林曰： 宜作大丞相、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事，不尔，无以压众心。 
现代文：李德林说： 您应该担任大丞相、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事。如果不这样做，就不能镇服众心。 
English: Li Delin said, "You should serve as grand chancellor, pseudo-emperor, and military governor. If you do not do so, you will not be able to pacify the hearts of the people."

古文：及发丧，即依此行之。以正阳宫为丞相府。
现代文：等到为天元皇帝办完丧事，杨坚就按照李德林所说的去做了，并把正阳宫作为丞相府。
English: When the funeral for Emperor Tianyuan was over, Yang Jian did as Li Delin said and made Zhengyang Palace the prime minister's residence.

古文：时众情未壹，坚引司武上士卢贲置左右。
现代文：当时北周将帅大臣尚未归心于杨坚，杨坚把掌管宫廷宿卫的司武上士卢贲安排在自己的身边。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou General Shuai Minister had not yet fallen in love with Yang Jian, and Yang Jian placed the Sifu Staff Sergeant Lu Wei, who was in charge of the palace guards, at his side.

古文：将之东宫，百官皆不知所从。
现代文：杨坚将要去正阳宫，朝中百官都不知道该怎么办。
English: Yang Jian is going to the Zhengyang Palace, and all the officials in the imperial court don't know what to do.

古文：坚潜令贲部伍仗卫，因召公卿，谓曰： 欲求富贵者宜相随。 
现代文：杨坚一面密令卢贲部署宿卫禁兵，一面召见公卿大臣，对他们说： 想求取富贵的人请追随我。 
English: Yang Jian secretly ordered Lu Wei to deploy the ban on the guards and summoned the nobles and ministers, saying to them, "If you want to woo the rich and noble, please follow me."

古文：往往偶语，欲有去就。
现代文：公卿大臣们三三两两私下商议，有的表示愿意追随杨坚，有的则想留在朝廷。
English: The court nobles and ministers conferred privately in twos and threes. Some expressed their willingness to follow Yang Jian, while others wanted to remain in the imperial court.

古文：贲严兵而至，众莫敢动。
现代文：这时，卢贲带着全副武装的宿卫禁兵来到，公卿大臣们谁也不敢再有离去的表示。
English: At this time, Lu Xun arrived with a fully armed bodyguard, and none of the nobles and ministers dared to leave.

古文：出崇阳门，至东宫，门者拒不纳，贲谕之，不去；嗔目叱之，门者遂却，坚入。
现代文：杨坚带着朝中百官出了宫廷东门崇阳门，来到正阳宫，但是守门的禁兵不放杨坚进去，卢贲上前对他们说明情况，可是这样禁兵还是不肯撤离。于是卢贲双目圆睁，厉声喝令他们闪开，守门禁兵这才退下，杨坚得以进入正阳宫。
English: Yang Jian took hundreds of officials from the Central and Eastern Courts out of the east gate of the palace, the Chongyang Gate, and came to the Zhengyang Palace, but the soldiers guarding the gate would not let Yang Jian in. Lu Yao went forward to explain the situation to them, but the soldiers still refused to evacuate. Therefore, Lu Yao's eyes were wide open, and he shouted at them to open the gate. Only then did the soldiers guarding the gate retreat, and Yang Jian was able to enter the Zhengyang Palace.

古文：贲遂典丞相府宿卫。
现代文：卢贲从此负责掌管丞相府的警卫。
English: From then on, Lu Wei was in charge of the guards at the prime minister's office.

古文：贲，辩之弟子也。
现代文：卢贲是卢辩弟弟的儿子。
English: Lu Wei is the son of Lu Yan's younger brother.

古文：以郑译为丞相府长史，刘昉为司马，李德林为府属，二人由是怨德林。
现代文：杨坚任命郑译为丞相府长史，刘为司马，李德林为府属。郑译、刘二人从此怨恨李德林。
English: Yang Jian appointed Zheng Zhan as chancellor and prefectural governor, Liu as secretary, and Li Delin as a subordinate of the prefecture. Zheng Zhan and Liu have resented Li Delin ever since.

古文：内史下大夫勃海高颎明敏有器局，习兵事，多计略，坚欲引之入府，遣杨惠谕意。
现代文：北周内史下大夫勃海人高，聪明敏捷，有度量，懂军事，足智多谋。杨坚想请他进丞相府任职，于是派杨惠去向高转达相邀之意。
English: In the history of Northern Zhou, the doctor Bohai was tall, clever and agile, had a sense of proportion, understood military affairs, and was resourceful. Yang Jian wanted to invite him to serve in the Prime Minister's Office, so he sent Yang Hui to convey the invitation to Gao.

古文：颎承旨，欣然曰： 愿受驱驰。
现代文：高接受了邀请，并欣然回答说： 愿意听从杨公差遣。
English: Gao accepted the invitation and gladly replied, "I am willing to follow Yang Gong's instructions."

古文：纵令公事不成，颎亦不辞灭族。 
现代文：纵使杨公大业不成，我也不怕遭到灭族之祸。 
English: Even if Yang Gongda's great cause fails, I am not afraid of being subjected to the scourge of extermination.

古文：乃以为相府司录。
现代文：杨坚于是任命高为丞相府司录。
English: Yang Jian then appointed Gao as the secretary of the prime minister's office.

古文：时汉王赞居禁中，每与静帝同帐而坐。刘昉饰美妓进赞，赞甚悦之。
现代文：当时汉王宇文赞就住在宫廷中，每天都与静帝同帐而坐，刘就把一些经过打扮的美貌歌女进献给宇文赞，宇文赞非常高兴。
English: At that time, Han King Yu Wenzan lived in the court and sat with Emperor Jing every day. Liu dedicated some beautiful singers to Yu Wenzan, who was very happy.

古文：昉因说赞曰： 大王，先帝之弟，时望所归。
现代文：刘乘机对宇文赞说： 大王您是先帝的弟弟，为众望所归。
English: Liu Ye then said to Yu Wenzan: The great king was the younger brother of the former emperor, and people at that time all admired him.

古文：孺子幼冲，岂堪大事！
现代文：小皇帝年龄还小，怎能担负起治理天下的重任！
English: Emperor Xuan's son is so young, how can he be in charge of such an important matter!

古文：今先帝初崩，人情尚扰。王且归第，待事宁后，入为天子，此万全计也。 
现代文：只是现在先帝刚刚去世，人心还不稳定，请您暂时先回自己的府第，等待事情安定后，就迎立您为天子，这方是万全之计。 
English: However, now that the former emperor has just passed away, people's hearts are still unstable. I would ask you to return to your hometown for the time being, wait for things to stabilize, and then welcome you as the Son of Heaven. This is the best way.

古文：赞年少，性识庸下，以为信然，遂从之。
现代文：宇文赞年轻，才识平庸低下，相信了刘的话，于是就出宫回府去了。
English: Yu Wenzan was young, his talent was mediocre, and he believed Liu's words, so he left the palace and went back to the capital.

古文：坚革宣帝苛酷之政，更为宽大，删略旧律，作《刑书要制》，奏而行之；躬履节俭，中外悦之。
现代文：杨坚执政以后，革除了北周宣帝苛刻残暴的政令，为政务从宽大。他册改旧律，制定《刑书要制》，上奏静帝颁行天下。他又提倡节俭，并且身体力行，于是得到了朝野内外的称赞。
English: After Yang Jian came to power, he abolished the harsh and cruel decrees of Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty and became more lenient in government affairs. He amended the old laws and formulated the "Important Penal Code," which was issued by Emperor Jing. He also advocated frugality and practiced it himself, so he was praised inside and outside the court.

古文：坚夜召太史中大夫庾季才，问曰： 吾以庸虚，受兹顾命。
现代文：杨坚在夜里召见太史中大夫庚季才，问道： 我平庸没有才能，却得到了辅佐幼主的重任。
English: In the night, Yang Jian summoned Dr. Geng Jicai of the Taishi Middle School and asked: I am mediocre and have no talent, but I have been given the important task of assisting the young master.

古文：天时人事，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：从天时和人事两方面来看，你以为会怎么样呢？ 
English: What do you think will happen in terms of timing and personnel?

古文：季才曰： 天道精微，难可意察。
现代文：庚季才回崐答说： 天道精微奥妙，一时难以观察出来。
English: Geng Jizai replied in reply: The heavenly way is subtle and mysterious, and it is difficult to observe for a while.

古文：窃以人事卜之，符兆已定。
现代文：我只从人事方面来预料，觉得符命征兆已定。
English: I only anticipate from the personnel side and feel that the signs of destiny have been determined.

古文：季才纵言不可，公岂复得为箕、颍之事乎！ 
现代文：我即使说天时和人事都对您不利，您难道还能够效法尧帝时代的许由，逃往箕山，洗耳于颍水，而让天下吗！ 
English: Even if I say that the weather and the personnel are unfavorable to you, will you still be able to follow the excuse of the Qin Dynasty, flee to Shaoshan, wash your ears in the water, and leave the world?

古文：坚默然久之，曰： 诚如君言。 
现代文：杨坚沉默了一会，然后说： 事情确实像你所说的那样。 
English: Yang Jian was silent for a moment, then said, "Things are indeed as you said.

古文：独孤夫人亦谓坚曰： 大事已然，骑虎之势，必不得下，勉之！ 
现代文：杨坚的夫人独孤氏也对他说： 事情已经到了这一步，骑虎难下，你就努力去做吧！ 
English: Yang Jian's wife, Ms. Du Guo, also said to him, "Things have come to this stage, it's hard to ride the tiger, just do your best!"

古文：坚以相州总管尉迟迥位望素重，恐有异图，使迥子魏安公惇奉诏书召之会葬。
现代文：杨坚认为相州总管尉迟迥素来地位高，名望大，恐怕他有异图，于是就派他的儿子魏安公尉迟持诏书召尉迟迥还京师参加天元皇帝的葬礼。
English: Yang Jian thought that the high-ranking and well-known chief lieutenant of the State of Xiangzhou, Qi Yan, might have a different plan, so he sent his son, Wei An, to return to Beijing to attend the funeral of the Emperor Tianyuan.

古文：壬子，以上柱国韦孝宽为相州总管；又以小司徒叱列长义为相州刺史，先令赴鄴；孝宽续进。
现代文：壬子，任命上柱国韦孝宽为相州总管，又任命小司徒叱列长义为相州刺史；先令叱列长义赶赴邺城，韦孝宽随后进发。
English: Ren Zi appointed Shangzhu Guo Wei Xiaokuan as the chief administrator of Xiangzhou, and also appointed Xiao Szeto as the chief historian of Xiangzhou; Shilling rushed to Xiangcheng, and Wei Xiaokuan followed.

古文：陈王纯时镇齐州，坚使门正上士崔彭征之。
现代文：北周陈王宇文纯当时镇守齐州，杨坚派门正上士崔彭前去征召。
English: Northern Zhou Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong was the town guard of Qizhou at that time, Yang Jian sent the chief sergeant Cui Peng to recruit him.

古文：彭以两骑往止传舍，遣人召纯。
现代文：崔彭带着两名随从骑兵到了齐州，就住在供使者休息的传舍，派人去叫宇文纯。
English: Cui Peng and his two attendant cavalrymen arrived in Qizhou. They stayed in the messenger's rest house and sent someone to summon Yu Wenzhong.

古文：纯至，彭请屏左右，密有所道，遂执而锁之，因大言曰： 陈王有罪，诏征入朝，左右不得辄动！ 
现代文：宇文纯来到后，崔彭请他让左右的侍卫随从退下，说有重要的话私下谈。然后乘机命令用枷锁了宇文纯，并对外大声宣布： 陈王有罪，皇帝下诏征他入朝，随从侍卫都不许乱动。 
English: After Yu Wenzhong arrived, Cui Peng asked him to ask the attendants on his right and left to step back, saying that he had something important to discuss in private. Then he took the opportunity to order Yu Wenzhong to be shackled, and loudly announced to the outside world: Chen Wang is guilty, the emperor decreed that he enter the imperial court, and the attendants were not allowed to move.

古文：其从者愕然而去。
现代文：宇文纯的左右人员听后，都惊愕而散去。
English: After listening to this, the people around Yu Wenzhong were stunned and dispersed.

古文：彭，楷之孙也。
现代文：崔彭是崔楷的孙子。
English: Cui Peng is Cui Kai's grandson.

古文：六月，五王皆至长安。
现代文：六月，北周赵、陈、越、代、滕五王都到达长安。
English: In June, the five kings of Northern Zhou Zhao, Chen, Yue, Dai and Teng all arrived in Chang'an.

古文：庚申，周复行佛、道二教。旧沙门、道士精志者，简令入道。
现代文：庚申，北周恢复佛、道二教，原来的和尚、道士诚心修行的，下令分别恢复其宗教徒身份。
English: Goshun, Northern Zhou restored Buddhism and Taoism, and ordered the original monks and Taoists to restore their religious identity.

古文：周尉迟迥知丞相坚将不利于帝室，谋举兵讨之。
现代文：北周尉迟迥深知丞相杨坚将会篡夺政权，就密谋起兵讨伐。
English: The Northern Zhou lieutenant hesitated, knowing that the Prime Minister Yang Jian would usurp power, and plotted to raise an army to fight.

古文：韦孝宽至朝歌，迥遣其大都督贺兰贵，赍书候韦孝宽。
现代文：韦孝宽进至朝歌，尉迟迥派遣部下大都督贺兰贵持他的亲笔信来迎接。
English: Wei Xiaokuan entered the morning song, and his subordinate sent his subordinate, the great viceroy He Langui, to greet him with his own handwritten letter.

古文：孝宽留贵与语以审之，疑其有变，遂称疾徐行；又使人至相州求医药，密以伺之。
现代文：韦孝宽把贺兰贵留下来，与他交谈，从贺兰贵的言谈话语中，觉察到尉迟迥可能会有变故，于是就假称有病，缓慢而行。一面派人以寻医买药为名到相州，暗中侦察尉迟迥的动静。
English: Wei Xiaokuan kept He Langui and talked with him. From He Langui's words and conversation, he perceived that there might be a change in the circumstances of the lieutenant's delay, so he pretended to be ill and walked slowly. On the other hand, he sent someone to Xiangzhou in the name of seeking a doctor and buying medicine to secretly investigate the movements of the lieutenant's delay.

古文：孝宽兄子艺，为魏郡守，迥遣艺迎孝宽，孝宽问迥所为，艺党于迥，不以实对。
现代文：韦孝宽的侄子韦艺，当时正在尉迟迥手下任魏郡太守。尉迟迥就派韦艺去迎接韦孝宽。韦孝宽问他关于尉迟迥的情况，韦艺因为是尉迟迥的同党，没有告诉韦孝宽实情。
English: Wei Xiaokang's nephew Wei Yi, at that time was serving as the governor of Wei County under the command of Ye Xizhen. Ye Xizhen sent Wei Yi to meet Wei Xiaokang. Wei Xiaokang asked him about Ye Xizhen's situation. Because Wei Yi was a member of Ye Xizhen's party, he did not tell Wei Xiaokang the truth.

古文：孝宽怒，将斩之。艺惧，悉以迥谋语孝宽。
现代文：韦孝宽非常愤怒，要把韦艺斩首，韦艺惧怕，就把尉迟迥的密谋全部告诉了韦孝宽。
English: Wei Xiaokuan was very angry, he wanted to behead Wei Yi, Wei Yi was afraid, so he told Wei Xiaokuan all about the conspiracy.

古文：孝宽携艺西走，每至亭驿，尽驱传马而去，谓驿司曰： 蜀公将至，宜速具酒食。 
现代文：于是韦孝宽带着韦艺向西奔还，每到一个亭驿，就把驿站里供使者换乘的传马全都驱赶走，又对驿官说： 蜀公尉迟迥很快就要到达，赶快准备酒宴招待。 
English: Therefore, Wei Xiaokuan took Wei Yi to the west, and every time they arrived at a pavilion, they drove away all the horses that were used to transport the envoys. They also said to the eunuchs, "Shu Guofeng will be arriving soon, let's quickly prepare a banquet to welcome him."

古文：迥寻遣仪司大将军梁子康将数百骑追孝宽，追者至驿，辄逢盛馔，又无马，遂迟留不进。
现代文：稍后，尉迟迥派遣仪同大将军梁子康带着数百名骑兵追赶韦孝宽，每追到一个驿站，遇到的都是丰盛的酒宴，又没有传马可以替换，于是就不再追赶。
English: A little later, with the general Liang Zikang leading hundreds of cavalrymen, the lieutenant Chi Xuan dispatched an officer to chase Wei Xiaokuan. Every time they chased him to a post, they encountered a sumptuous wine banquet, and there was no horse to replace, so they stopped chasing.

古文：孝宽与艺由是得免。
现代文：韦孝宽和韦艺因此得免于难。
English: Wei Xiaokuan and Wei Yi were thus spared.

古文：坚又令候正破六韩裒诣迥谕旨，密与总管府长史晋昶等书，令为之备。
现代文：杨坚又命令候正破六韩裒到邺城去，向尉迟迥申述自己并没有异图，同时暗中带着自己的亲笔信给相州总管府长史晋昶等人，要他们防备尉迟迥起兵叛乱。
English: Yang Jian also ordered Hou Zheng to break through the six Korean counties and go to Handan City, to report to Ye Xizhi that he did not have a different plan, and at the same time secretly brought his own handwritten letter to the Governor of the State of Handan, Shi Jintao, and others, asking them to be prepared for Ye Xizhi's rebellion.

古文：迥闻之，杀昶及裒；集文武士民，登城北楼，令之曰： 杨坚藉后父之势，挟幼主以作威福，不臣之迹，暴于行路。
现代文：尉迟迥得知此事后，就杀了晋昶和破六韩裒，然后召集相州文武官吏和百姓，登上城北门楼，对他们说： 杨坚凭借着皇后父亲的地位，挟制年幼的天子，作威作福，这种不遵守臣道的行为，早已路人皆知。
English: After learning of the matter, the sub-commander killed Jin Xuan and Rui Liukang, and then summoned the civil and military officials and people of Xiangzhou to climb the north gate of the city and said to them: Yang Jian, by virtue of his status as the father of the queen, took advantage of the young heavenly son, and pretended to be a blessing. This behavior of not abiding by the vassal road has long been known to passers-by.

古文：吾与国舅甥，任兼将相；先帝处吾于此，本欲寄以安危。
现代文：我和太祖文皇帝是舅崐甥，与国家情同一体，休戚与共，一身担当出将入相的双重大任。先帝让我镇守相州，本来就寄托着的国家安危兴亡。
English: Emperor Taizu and I are brothers-in-law and nephews. We are one and the same with the country and share the same feelings. I will take on the dual major responsibilities of the coming phase. The former emperor asked me to guard the state, and the country's safety and prosperity were originally entrusted to me.

古文：今欲与卿等纠合义勇，以匡国庇民，何如？ 
现代文：现在我要与你们一起纠合仁义勇敢之士，揭竿而起，以匡扶国家，保护百姓，你们看怎么样？ 
English: Now I want to work with you to entangle the brave men of benevolence and righteousness, to stand up, to support the country and protect the people, what do you think?

古文：众咸从命。
现代文：相州官吏百姓都表示愿意服从尉迟迥的命令。
English: All the officials and people in Songzhou expressed their willingness to obey the order of the commander.

古文：迥乃自称大总管，承制置官司。
现代文：尉迟迥于是自封为大总管，宣称秉承天子之意，设置各种官吏。
English: Therefore, he appointed himself as the chief administrator, claiming to uphold the will of the Son of Heaven, and set up various officials.

古文：时赵王招入朝，留少子在国，迥奉以号令。
现代文：当时赵王宇文招应朝廷征召入朝，小儿子留在封地襄国。尉迟迥就尊奉他并以他的名义号令天下。
English: At that time, Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao was conscripted by the imperial court to join the imperial court, while his youngest son remained in the fief of Xiangguo. He was revered by his subordinates and ruled the world in his name.

古文：甲子，坚发关中兵，以韦孝宽为行军元帅，郕公梁士彦、乐安公元谐、化政公宇文忻、濮阳公武川宇文述、武乡公崔弘度、清河公杨素、陇西公李询等皆为行军总管，以讨迥。
现代文：甲子，杨坚调发北周在关中的军队，任命韦孝宽为行军元帅，公梁士彦、乐安公元谐、化政公宇文忻、濮阳公武川人宇文述、武乡公崔弘度、清河公杨素、陇西公李询等人为行军总管，统率军队讨伐尉迟迥。
English: Gao Zi, Yang Jian transferred the troops stationed in Guanzhong to Northern Zhou, and appointed Wei Xiaokuan as the marshal of the march. Gong Liang Shih Yan, Le An Chaoyun, Kasei Gong U Wenjun, Shenyang Gong Wu Chuan Ren Wu Wenshu, Wuxiang Gong Cui Hongdu, Qinghe Gong Yang Su, Shaanxi Gong Li Xun and others were the general managers of the march, and led the army to delay the battle.

古文：弘度，楷之孙；询，穆之兄子也。
现代文：崔弘度是崔楷的孙子，李询是李穆哥哥的儿子。
English: Cui Hongdu is the grandson of Cui Kai, and Li Xuan is the son of Li Mu's brother.

古文：初，宣帝使计部中大夫杨尚希抚慰山东，至相州，闻宣帝殂，与尉迟迥发丧。
现代文：当初，北周宣帝派遣计部中大夫杨尚希安抚慰问潼关以东各州郡。杨尚希到了相州，听到宣帝去世的消息，便和尉迟迥在相州为宣帝举行葬礼。
English: At first, Northern Zhou Emperor Xuanzong sent Yang Shangxi, a middle doctor of the Department of Statistics, to pacify and comfort the counties east of Shaoguan. Yang Shangxi arrived in Xiangzhou, heard the news of Emperor Xuanzong's death, and then held a funeral for Emperor Xuanzong in Xiangzhou.

古文：尚希出，谓左右曰： 蜀公哭不哀而视不安，将有他计。
现代文：杨尚希从葬礼上出来，对左右随从说： 蜀公尉迟迥哭得不悲痛，而且眼神显得不安，他一定怀有别的打算。
English: Yang Shangxi came out of the funeral and said to his attendants on the left and right: Shu Gongfei did not cry with grief, and his eyes looked uneasy. He must have other plans.

古文：吾不去，惧及于难。 
现代文：我如果不赶快离开此地，恐怕就会陷入祸乱之中。 
English: If I don't get out of here soon, I'm afraid I'm going to get into trouble.

古文：遂夜从捷径而遁。
现代文：于是在夜晚抄小路逃离相州。
English: So he took a back road at night to escape from Sangju.

古文：迟明，迥觉，追之不及，遂归长安。
现代文：等到天明，尉迟迥方才发觉，已经追赶不上，杨尚希得以回到长安。
English: It wasn't until the break of dawn that he realized that he couldn't catch up, and Yang Shangxi was able to return to Chang'an.

古文：坚遣尚希督宗兵三千人镇潼关。
现代文：北周雍州牧毕刺王宇文贤，与赵、陈、越、代、滕五王密谋除掉杨坚。
English: In northern Zhou Yongzhou, Mu Bi stabbed Wang Yuwenxian, and conspired with Zhao, Chen, Yue, Dai and Teng five kings to eliminate Yang Jian.

古文：雍州牧毕刺王贤，与五王谋杀坚，事泄，坚杀贤，并其三子，掩五王之谋不问。
现代文：事情败露，杨坚杀了宇文贤和他的三个儿子，而将五王参预密谋的事掩盖了下来，没有追究问罪。
English: As it turned out, Yang Jian killed Wu Wensheng and his three sons, but covered up the conspiracy of the Five Wise Men and did not pursue criminal charges.

古文：以秦王贽为大冢宰，杞公椿为大司徒。
现代文：任命秦王宇文贽为大冢宰，杞公宇文椿为大司徒。
English: He appointed Qin Wang Uwenqin as the grand commander of the army, and Gong Uwenqin as the grand steward of the army.

古文：庚子，以柱国梁睿为益州总管。
现代文：庚子，北周朝廷任命柱国梁睿为益州总管。
English: Geng Zi, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Zhuo Guo Liang Rui as the general manager of Yizhou.

古文：睿，御之子也。
现代文：梁睿是梁御的儿子。
English: Liang Rui is the son of Liang Mi.

古文：周遣汝南公神庆、司卫上士长孙晟送千金公主于突厥。
现代文：北周派遣汝南公宇文神庆、司卫上士长孙晟护送千金公主到突厥去完婚。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty dispatched Ru Nan Gong Yu Wen Shenqing and Sifu Senior Sergeant Sun Qian to escort Qianjin Princess to Turkey to get married.

古文：晟，幼之曾孙也。
现代文：长孙晟是长孙幼的曾孙。
English: The eldest grandchild is the great-grandson of the eldest grandchild.

古文：又遣建威侯贺若谊赂佗钵可汗，且说之以求高绍义。
现代文：北周又派遣建威侯贺若谊前去贿赂突厥佗钵可汗，并且向他陈说利害，要求将投奔突厥的原北齐宗室范阳王高绍义交还北周。
English: The Northern Zhou also sent Jian Wei Hou He Rongyi to bribe the Turkic Khan, and told him the stakes, demanding that the former Northern Qi's ancestral house Fan Yang Wang Gao Shao Yi, who had defected to the Turks, be returned to the Northern Zhou.

古文：佗钵伪与绍义猎于南境，使谊执之。
现代文：佗钵可汗同意，于是就假装约高绍义到南面边疆打猎，让贺若谊带人抓获了他。
English: Zhai Khan agreed, so he pretended to go hunting in the southern frontier with Gao Shao Yi, and let He Rongrui take someone to capture him.

古文：谊，敦之弟子也。
现代文：贺若谊是贺若敦的弟弟。
English: He Ruoyi is the younger brother of He Ruodong.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，绍义至长安，徙之蜀；久之，病死于蜀。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲申，高绍义被押送到长安，北周朝廷把他流放到蜀地。很久以后，病死于蜀地。
English: In the autumn, in July, Gao Shao Yi was escorted to Chang'an, and the Northern Zhou Dynasty exiled him to Shoudi. After a long time, he died of illness in Shoudi.

古文：周青州总管尉迟勤，迥之弟也。
现代文：北周青州总管尉迟勤是尉迟迥弟弟的儿子。
English: Northern Zhou Qingzhou Chief Lieutenant Zhigang is the son of the younger brother of Lieutenant Zhiyuan.

古文：初得迥书，表送之，寻亦从迥。
现代文：起初，他收到尉迟迥的信后，派人把信送到长安，但是不久，又追随了尉迟迥。
English: At first, he sent someone to deliver the letter to Chang'an after he received it, but he soon followed suit.

古文：迥所统相、卫、黎、洺、贝、赵、冀、瀛、沧、勤所统青、齐、胶、光、莒等州皆从之，众数十万。
现代文：尉迟迥所统辖的相、卫、黎？贝、赵、冀、瀛、沧等州，尉迟勤所统辖的青、齐、胶、光、莒等崐州，都追随他们，军队多达数十万人。
English: They were followed by hundreds of thousands of troops from the provinces of Fang, Wei, Laibei, Zhao, Hebei, Handan and Cang, as well as the provinces of Qing, Qi, Jia, Guang and Handan, all of which were under the command of the Generalissimo.

古文：荥州刺史邵公胄，申州刺史李惠，东楚州刺史费也利进，潼州刺史曹孝远，各据本州，徐州总管司录席毘罗据兗州，前东平郡守毕义绪据兰陵，皆应迥；怀县永桥镇将纥豆陵惠以城降迥。
现代文：另外，荥州刺史邵公宇文胄、申州刺史李惠、东楚州刺史费也利进、潼州刺史曹孝远等都各据本州，徐州总管司录席毗罗占据兖州，前东平郡守毕义绪占据兰陵，都起兵响应尉迟迥。怀县永桥镇将纥豆陵惠以城投降了尉迟迥。
English: In addition, Shao Gong Yu Wenjun, Shenzhou Li Hui, East Chuzhou Fei Li Jin, and Shanzhou Cao Xiaoyuan were all based in their respective states. Xuzhou General Manager Wei Luo occupied Shanzhou, and the former Dongping County Governor Bi Yixu occupied Lanling. They all raised troops to respond to Fei Xuan. Yongqiao Town, Wai County, surrendered the town of Pea Ling Hui to Fei Xuan.

古文：迥使其所署大将军石逊攻建州，建州刺史宇文弁以州降之。
现代文：尉迟迥派遣他所任命的大将军石逊攻打建州，建州刺史宇文弁也以州城投降。
English: General Yi Shizhen sent his appointed general, Shi Xun, to attack Jianzhou, and Jianzhou's assassin, Shi Yuwenben, also surrendered in the city of Jianzhou.

古文：又遣西道行台韩长业攻拔潞州，执刺史赵威，署城人郭子胜为刺史。
现代文：尉迟迥又派遣西道行台韩长业攻克潞州，生擒潞州刺史赵威，任命潞州城人郭子胜为刺史。
English: Later, he sent Han Changye, who had traveled to the West, to conquer Zhangzhou. Zhao Wei, a native of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the governor. Guo Zisheng, a citizen of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the governor.

古文：纥豆陵惠袭陷钜鹿，遂围恒州。
现代文：同时，纥豆陵惠攻陷巨鹿，接着又进围恒州。
English: At the same time, the Peasling Hui invaded and conquered the Giant Deer, and then advanced to besiege Hengzhou.

古文：上大将军宇文威攻汴州，莒州刺史乌丸尼等帅青、齐之众围沂州，大将军檀让攻拔曹、亳二州，屯兵梁郡。
现代文：上大将军宇文威攻打汴州。莒州刺史乌丸尼等率领青、齐两州军队围攻沂州。大将军檀让攻克曹、亳二州后，驻军梁郡。
English: The commander-in-chief, General Yu Wenwei, attacked Bozhou. The commander-in-chief of Bozhou, Shishu Umaruni, led the Qing and Qi armies to besiege Bozhou. After the commander-in-chief, General Danzang, conquered Cao and Nanzhou, the army was stationed in Liang County.

古文：席毘罗众号八万，军于蕃城，攻陷昌虑、下邑。
现代文：席毗罗的军队有八万之众，驻兵蕃城，攻克了昌虑、下邑两县城。
English: Shivira's army of eighty thousand people, stationed in the city of Shicheng, conquered the two county towns of Changxian and Shimoyura.

古文：李惠自申州攻永州，拔之。
现代文：李惠自申州进攻永州，攻克了永州城。
English: Li Hui attacked Yongzhou from Shenzhou and conquered Yongzhou City.

古文：迥遣使招大左辅、并州刺史李穆，穆锁其使，封上其书。
现代文：尉迟迥派遣使者招附大左辅、并州刺史李穆，李穆将他所派的使者抓起来，连同书信一起送上朝廷。
English: He sent an envoy to summon the Grand Left Assistant, and the prefect of the state, Li Mu. Li Mu arrested the envoy he sent, and sent it to the imperial court together with the letter.

古文：穆子士荣，以穆所居天下精兵处，阴劝穆从迥，穆深拒之。
现代文：李穆的儿子李士荣认为李穆所统辖的并州是天下精兵所聚之地，暗中劝说李穆响应尉迟迥，李穆坚决拒绝。
English: Li Mu's son, Li Shirong, believed that the annexed prefecture under Li Mu's control was the gathering place of the world's elite soldiers, and secretly persuaded Li Mu to respond to the lieutenant's delay, but Li Mu resolutely refused.

古文：坚使内史大夫柳裘诣穆，为陈利害，又使穆子左侍上士浑往布腹心。
现代文：杨坚派遣内史大夫柳裘到李穆处，向他陈说利害关系，随后又派遣李穆的儿子左侍上士李浑到并州，向李穆转达他以诚相待之意。
English: Yang Jian sent Liu Qiu, a doctor of internal history, to Li Mu's office to tell him about the conflict of interest, and then sent Li Mu's son, the left-handed staff sergeant Li Hun, to Bianzhou to convey his sincerity to Li Mu.

古文：穆使浑奉尉斗于坚，曰： 愿执威柄以尉安天下。 
现代文：于是李穆派遣李浑送熨斗给杨坚，对他说： 希望你执掌威柄以安定天下。 
English: So Li Mu sent Li Hun to deliver an iron to Yang Jian and said to him, "I hope you will wield your authority to keep the world stable."

古文：又十三环金带遗坚。
现代文：又送给杨坚十三环金带。
English: He also gave Yang Jian a thirteen-ring gold band.

古文：十三环金带者，天子之服也。
现代文：十三环金带是只有天子才能佩带的。
English: The thirteen-ringed gold band is only worn by celestial beings.

古文：坚大悦，遣浑诣韦孝宽述穆意。
现代文：杨坚非常高兴，于是又派遣李浑到行军元帅韦孝宽那里，告诉他李穆的态度。
English: Yang Jian was very happy, so he sent Li Hun to the marching marshal Wei Xiaokuan to tell him about Li Mu's attitude.

古文：穆兄子崇，为怀州刺史，初欲应迥；后知穆附坚，慨然太息曰： 阖家富贵者数十人，值国有难，竟不能扶倾继绝，复何面目处天地间乎！ 
现代文：李穆哥哥的儿子李崇，当时任怀州刺史，起初想响应尉迟迥；后来得知李穆支持杨坚，慨然叹息说： 我全家得到富贵者多达数十人，现在遇到了国家有难，竟不能匡扶危难，延续皇室，还有什么面目立于天地之间呢！ 
English: Li Mu's brother's son, Li Chong, who was appointed as the governor of Huai Zhou at that time, initially wanted to respond to the delay; later, when he learned that Li Mu supported Yang Jian, he sighed with emotion and said: My whole family has gained as many as dozens of rich people, and now the country is in trouble, but it can't support the crisis and continue the royal family, what else is standing between heaven and earth!

古文：不得已亦附于坚。
现代文：不得已，也被迫依附了杨坚。
English: Reluctantly, he was also forced to cling to Yang Jian.

古文：迥子谊，为朔州刺史，穆执送长安；又遣兵讨郭子胜，擒之。
现代文：尉迟迥的儿子尉迟谊，当时任朔州刺史，李穆将他抓获，押送长安。李穆又派军队讨伐郭子胜，抓获了他。
English: At that time, Guo Xizhi's son, Guo Xizhi, was the governor of Shuozhou, and Li Mu captured him and sent him to Chang'an. Li Mu also sent an army to fight against Guo Zisheng and captured him.

古文：迥招徐州总管源雄、东郡守于仲文，皆不从。
现代文：尉迟迥又招附徐州总管源雄和东郡太守于仲文，二人都不顺从。
English: He later invited the Xuzhou governor-general, Yuanxiong, and the eastern county governor, Zhongwen, but neither of them complied.

古文：雄，贺之曾孙；仲文，谨之孙也。
现代文：源雄是源贺的曾孙，于仲文是于谨的孙子。
English: Geng Xiong is the great-grandson of Geng He, and Yu Zhongwen is the grandson of Yu Zhen.

古文：迥遣宇文胄自石济，宇文威自白马济河，二道攻仲文，仲文弃郡走还长安，迥杀其妻子。
现代文：于是尉迟迥派遣宇文胄由石济渡河，宇文威由白马渡河，分两路去攻打于仲文，于仲文被迫放弃东郡城，逃回长安，尉迟迥杀死了他的妻儿。
English: As a result, Fong Chi Kung sent Uwen Hui to cross the river from Shijie, and Uwen Wei to cross the river from Baima, and attacked Zhongwen in two ways. Zhongwen was forced to abandon Dongguan City and fled back to Chang'an, and Fong Chi Kung killed his wife and child.

古文：迥遣檀让徇地河南，丞相坚以仲文为河南道行军总管，使诣洛阳发兵讨让，命杨素讨宇文胄。
现代文：尉迟迥还派遣檀让略地河南，丞相杨坚任命于仲文为河南道行军总管，派他到洛阳征发军队讨伐檀让，同时命令杨素讨伐宇文胄。
English: The general also dispatched troops to Henan Province to fight against the Tangzhang Rebellion, and the prime minister Yang Jian appointed Yu Zhongwen as the general manager of the march in Henan Province. He sent him to Luoyang to send troops to fight against the Tangzhang Rebellion, and ordered Yang Su to fight against the Wuwen Rebellion.

古文：丁未，周以丞相坚都督中外诸军事。
现代文：丁未，北周朝廷任命丞相杨坚都督中外诸军事。
English: Ding Wei, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed the chancellor Yang Jian as the military governor.

古文：郧州总管司马消难亦举兵应迥，己酉，周以柱国王谊为行军元帅，以讨消难。
现代文：北周郧州总管司马消难也举兵响应尉迟迥，己酉，北周朝廷任命柱国王谊为行军元帅，统率军队讨伐司马消难。
English: The general manager of North Zhou Bozhou, Sima Qianlong, also raised an army to respond to the attack. The Northern Zhou court appointed the pillar of the king's friendship as the marching marshal and led the army to fight against Sima Qianlong.

古文：广州刺史于顗，仲文之兄也，与总管赵文表不协；诈得心疾，诱文表，手杀之，因唱言文表与尉迟迥通谋。
现代文：北周广州刺史于是于仲文的哥哥。他因与吴州总管赵文表不和，就假称得了心病，引诱赵文表来探视，然后亲手杀了他，于是对外宣称赵文表与尉迟迥通谋。
English: He pretended to have a heart disease because of his discord with Zhao Wenshu, the governor of Wuzhou, lured Zhao Wenshu to visit him, and then killed him with his own hands, and then claimed that Zhao Wenshu conspired with his lieutenant.

古文：坚以迥未平，因劳勉之，即拜吴州总管。
现代文：杨坚因为尉迟迥尚未平定，因此派人慰勉于，并任命他为吴州总管。
English: Yang Jian sent someone to console him because the war was not yet over, and appointed him as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：赵僭王招谋杀坚，邀坚过其第，坚赍酒淆就之。
现代文：北周赵僭王宇文招密谋除掉杨坚，就邀请杨坚到他的府第，杨坚带着酒菜前往。
English: The Northern Zhou Zhao Jian Wang Yuwenzhu conspired to get rid of Yang Jian, so he invited Yang Jian to his capital, and Yang Jian went with wine and vegetables.

古文：招引入寝室，招子员、贯及妃弟鲁封等皆在左右，佩刀而立，又藏刃于帷席之间，伏壮士于室后。
现代文：宇文招把杨坚引到自己的寝室，他的儿子宇文员、宇文贯和妻弟鲁封等都在左右陪侍，佩刀而立。宇文招又把兵器暗藏在帷幕与宴席之间，让壮士埋伏于寝室后面。
English: Yu Wenzhao led Yang Jian to his bedroom. His sons, Yu Wencai, Yu Wenzhang, and his brother-in-law, Lu Feng, were all standing around him with swords. Yu Wenzhao also hid the weapons between the curtain and the banquet, allowing the strong men to lie in wait behind the bedroom.

古文：坚左右皆不得从，唯从祖弟开府仪同大将军弘、大将军元胄坐于户侧。
现代文：杨坚的左右侍卫都不让随从，只有杨坚的从祖堂弟开府大将军杨弘与大将军元胄坐在寝室的门旁。
English: Yang Jian's left and right bodyguards do not allow followers, only Yang Jian's second cousin, Kaifu General Yang Hong and General Yuan Qi sit by the door of the bedroom.

古文：胄，顺之孙也。
现代文：元胄是元顺的孙子。
English: Yuan Zang is the grandson of Yuan Shun.

古文：弘、胄皆有勇力，为坚腹心。
现代文：杨弘与元胄都很有勇力，是杨坚的心腹将领。
English: Yang Hong and Yuan Qi are both very brave and are Yang Jian's closest generals.

古文：酒酣，招以佩刀刺瓜连啖坚，欲因而刺之。
现代文：酒吃到尽兴时，宇文招用佩刀不断地刺瓜送入杨坚口中，想借机刺杀他。
English: When the wine was consumed to the full, Uwen recruited a saber to continuously stab the melon into Yang Jian's mouth, hoping to take the opportunity to stab him.

古文：元胄进曰： 相府有事，不可久留。 
现代文：元胄见状，上前对杨坚说道： 相府有事，不可久留。 
English: Seeing the letter, Yuan Xuan stepped forward and said to Yang Jian: There's something going on in the palace, I can't stay for long.

古文：招诃之曰： 我与丞相言，汝何为者！ 
现代文：宇文招呵斥他说： 我正在与丞相谈话，你想干什么！ 
English: "I'm talking to the prime minister, what do you want to do!

古文：叱之使却。
现代文：喝令他退下。
English: He reprimanded Geng Yao to step down.

古文：胄嗔目愤气，扣刀入卫。
现代文：元胄双目圆睁，怒气冲冲，提刀站在杨坚身旁。
English: Yuan Qi's eyes were wide open, he was furious, and he was standing next to Yang Jian with a knife.

古文：招赐之酒，曰： 吾岂有不善之意邪！ 
现代文：宇文招赏赐元胄酒喝，并且说： 我难道会有恶意不成！
English: Yuwen Zhaobao gave Yuan Qi wine to drink, and said: "Do I have bad intentions?

古文：卿何猜警如是？ 
现代文：你为何如此多疑，而加以戒备？ 
English: Why are you so suspicious and wary?

古文：招伪吐，将入后邠，胄恐其为变，扶令上坐，如此再三。
现代文：宇文招假装要呕吐，站起身想到后房去，元胄恐怕他一离开就会生变，于是多次扶他重新坐好。
English: Yu Wenzhao pretended to vomit, stood up and thought of going to the back room. Yuan Qi was afraid that he would change as soon as he left, so he helped him to sit down again and again.

古文：招伪称喉干，命胄就厨取饮，胄不动。
现代文：宇文招又谎称喉咙干渴，命令元胄到厨房取水来，元胄不动。
English: Yu Wenzhao also lied that his throat was thirsty and ordered Yuan Qi to fetch water from the kitchen. Yuan Qi did not move.

古文：会滕王逌后至，坚降价迎之。
现代文：正巧滕王宇文迟到，杨坚下台阶迎接他。
English: Coincidentally, Teng Wang Yuwen arrived late, and Yang Jian came down the steps to meet him.

古文：胄耳语曰： 事势大异，可速去！ 
现代文：元胄乘机对杨坚耳语道： 情况异常，请赶快离开这里！ 
English: Yuan Qi took the opportunity to whisper to Yang Jian: The situation is abnormal, please leave here immediately!

古文：坚曰： 彼无兵马，何能为！ 
现代文：杨坚说： 他没有掌握军队，又能有什么作为！ 
English: Yang Jian said, "He has no control over the army, so what can he do!

古文：胄曰： 兵马皆彼物，彼若先发，大事去矣！
现代文：元胄说： 军队本来就是皇室的，他如果先发制人，到那时一切就完了。
English: Yuan Shao said, "The army is originally for the royal family. If he attacks first, everything will be over by then."

古文：胄不辞死，恐死无益。 
现代文：我元胄并不怕死，只是怕死而无益。 
English: I'm not afraid of death, I'm just afraid of dying for no reason.

古文：坚复入坐。
现代文：杨坚没有听从元胄的劝告，仍旧入坐。
English: Yang Jian did not listen to the advice of Yuan Shao and continued to meditate.

古文：胄闻室后有被甲声，遽请曰： 相府事殷，公何得如此！ 
现代文：元胄听到寝室后面有士兵穿戴甲胄的声音，立即上前对杨坚说： 相府公事繁忙，您怎么能如此畅饮停留！ 
English: Yuan Qi heard the sound of soldiers wearing armor in the back of the bedroom, and immediately came forward to Yang Jian and said: You are so busy with your work, how can you stay up so late drinking!

古文：因扶坚下床趋去。
现代文：于是扶杨坚下座床快步离去。
English: So Fu Yang Jian got up from his seat and walked away.

古文：招将追之。胄以身蔽户，招不得出；坚及门，胄自后至。
现代文：宇文招想要追赶杨坚，元胄用身体堵在门口，宇文招不得出；等杨坚到了大门口，元胄才从后面赶上。
English: When Uwen Zhao tried to catch up with Yang Jian, Yuan Qi used his body to block the door, and Uwen Zhao could not get out; when Yang Jian reached the front door, Yuan Qi caught up from behind.

古文：招恨不时发，弹指出血。
现代文：宇文招后悔自己没有及时下手，以至恨得弹指出血。
English: Yu Wenzhu regretted that he did not act in time, so much so that he hated to point out the blood.

古文：壬子，坚诬招与越野王盛谋反，皆杀之，及其诸子。赏赐元胄，不可胜计。
现代文：壬子，杨坚诬陷宇文招与越野王宇文盛谋反，杀了二人和他们的儿子，并重赏元胄，多得数不过来。
English: On the other hand, Yang Jian falsely accused Yu Wencai and the cross-country king Yu Wensheng of plotting a rebellion, killed the two and their son, and rewarded the Yuan Xuan. There are too many to count.

古文：周室诸王数欲伺隙杀坚，坚都督临泾李圆通常保护之，由是得免。
现代文：北周宗室诸王多次想乘机除掉杨坚，杨坚的都督临泾人李圆通经常保护他，因此得免于难。
English: The kings of the Northern Zhou dynasty tried many times to get rid of Yang Jian. Li Yantong, Yang Jian's tutor, often protected him, so he was spared.

古文：癸丑，周主封其弟衍为叶王，术为郢王。
现代文：癸丑，北周静帝封其弟宇文衍为叶王，宇文术为郢王。
English: Ugly, the Northern Zhou Jing Emperor appointed his brother Uwen Yan as the King of Leaves, and Uwen Shu as the King of Leaves.

古文：周豫、荆、襄三州蛮反，攻破郡县。
现代文：北周豫、荆、襄三州蛮人反叛，攻克了一些郡县。
English: The Northern Zhou, Jing and Xiang barbarians rebelled and conquered a number of counties.

古文：周韦孝宽军至永桥城，诸将请先攻之。孝宽曰： 城小而固，若攻而不拔，损我兵威。
现代文：北周行军元帅韦孝宽率军至永桥城，众将领都请求先攻打此城，韦孝宽说： 永桥镇城虽小却很坚固，如果攻而不克，就会挫伤我方军威。
English: Marshal Wei Xiaokuan, who led the Northern Zhou marching army to Yongqiao Town, the generals all requested to attack this town first. Wei Xiaokuan said: Although Yongqiao Town is small, it is very strong. If it is not attacked, it will damage our military prestige.

古文：今破其大军，此何能为！ 
现代文：如果我们打败了尉迟迥的大军，这个小城还能有什么作为！ 
English: If we defeat the army of the late comer, what can this small town do!

古文：于是引军壁于武陟。
现代文：于是率军在武陟安营扎寨。
English: As a result, he led his army to set up camp in Wuxi.

古文：尉迟迥遣其子魏安公惇帅众十万入武德，军于沁东。
现代文：尉迟迥派遣他的儿子魏安公尉迟率军十万进至武德，在沁水东面安营扎寨。
English: He sent his son, Wei An, to Wude with an army of one hundred thousand, and set up camp in the east of Surabaya.

古文：会沁水涨，孝宽与迥隔水相持不进。
现代文：时逢沁水暴涨，韦孝宽就与尉迟迥的军队隔水相持，都不进攻。
English: Whenever the floodwaters surged, Wei Xiaokuan held out against the lagging army across the water and did not attack.

古文：孝宽长史李询密启丞相坚云： 梁士彦、宇文忻、崔弘度并受尉迟迥饷金，军中慅慅，人情大异。 
现代文：韦孝宽府中长史李询秘密向杨坚报告说： 梁士彦，宇文忻和崔弘度三位行军总管接受了尉迟迥馈赠的金钱，因此军中不安，人心异常。 
English: Wei Xiaokuan's lieutenant governor, Shi Li, secretly reported to Yang Jian: Liang Shihyan, Wu Wenjun and Cui Hongdu, the three chiefs of the march, accepted the money donated by the lieutenant, so the army was uneasy and people's hearts were abnormal.

古文：坚深以为忧，与内史上大夫郑译谋代此三人者，李德林曰： 公与诸将，皆国家贵臣，未相服从，今正以挟令之威控御之耳。
现代文：杨坚深为担忧，就与内史上大夫郑译商议派谁取代他们三人，李德林说： 您与这些将领本来都是国家重臣，地位平等，他们没有服从您的义务，现在您只是凭借挟天子以令诸侯的权威来控制和驾御他们罢了。
English: Yang Jian was deeply worried, so he discussed with the doctor of internal history, Zheng Qian, who should replace the three of them. Li Delin said: You and these generals were originally the chief ministers of the state, with equal status. They did not obey your obligations. Now you are just using the authority of the emperor to control and control them.

古文：前所遣者，疑其乖异，后所遣者，又安知其能尽腹心邪！
现代文：以前所派遣的，您疑心他们怀有异意；那么往后再派遣的，您又怎么能知道他们会向您推心置腹呢！
English: The ones you sent before, you suspected they had a grudge against you; the ones you send again, how do you know they'll be loyal to you?

古文：又，取金之事，虚实难用，今一旦代之，或惧罪逃逸；若加縻絷，则自郧公以下，莫不惊疑。
现代文：再说，他们三人收取尉迟迥馈赠金钱的事，真假不明，现在如果马上派人替代他们领兵，他们可能会因害怕获罪而逃走；如果把他们都抓起来，那么前线的将帅自郧公韦孝宽以下，就会人人自危，莫不惊慌。
English: Moreover, it is not clear whether or not the three of them received the money as a gift. If they were to be replaced immediately, they might run away for fear of being charged with a crime. If they were all arrested, then the front-line generals below Wei Xiaokuan would all be in danger and would panic.

古文：且临敌易将，此燕、赵之所以败也。
现代文：况且临战易将，正是战国时期燕国、赵国被齐国、秦国打败的根本原因。
English: Moreover, the fact that it is easy to go to war is the fundamental reason why Yan and Zhao were defeated by Qi and Qin during the Warring States period.

古文：如愚所见，但遣公一腹心，明于智略，素为诸将所信服者，速至军所，使观其情伪。
现代文：以我看来，您只要派遣一位既是您的心腹，又通晓谋略，向来为众将领所信服的人，立刻到军中去，监视将领们的举动。
English: In my opinion, you only need to send someone who is both your confidant and a strategist, who has always been convinced by the generals, to the army immediately to monitor the actions of the generals.

古文：纵有异意，必不敢动，动亦能制之矣。 
现代文：纵使他们怀有异意，也肯定不敢轻举妄动；万一有异常举动，也必能将其制服。 
English: Even if they harbor dissent, they will certainly not dare to act rashly; if there is any abnormal behavior, they will surely be able to subdue it.

古文：坚大悟，曰： 公不发此言，几败大事。 
现代文：杨坚大悟，说： 如果不是你讲明这些道理，几乎要败坏大事。 
English: Yang Jian was enlightened and said: If you do not clarify these principles, you will almost ruin the event.

古文：乃命少内史崔仲方往监诸军，为之节度。
现代文：于是命令少内史崔仲方前去监察诸军，并有权节制军事行动。
English: As a result, Shonai ordered Choe Jungakuk to go forward to monitor the troops and had the right to restrict military operations.

古文：仲方，猷之子也，辞以父在山东。
现代文：崔仲方是崔猷的儿子，以父亲在山东而推辞。
English: Cui Zhongfang is the son of Cui Yao, but he refused to go because his father was in Shandong.

古文：又命刘昉、郑译昉，辞以未尝为将，译辞以母老。
现代文：杨坚又先后命令刘、郑译前往，刘以自己没有做过将帅为理由推辞，郑译以母亲年迈需要侍奉为理由推辞。
English: Yang Jian successively ordered Liu and Zheng to go, Liu refused on the grounds that he had not been a general, and Zheng refused on the grounds that his mother was old and needed to be served.

古文：坚不悦。
现代文：杨坚很不高兴。
English: Yang Jian was very unhappy.

古文：府司录高颎请行，坚喜，遣之。
现代文：丞相府司录高请求前往，杨坚大喜，就派他前去。
English: Yang Jian was overjoyed when the secretary of the prime minister's office, Luo Gao, asked him to go.

古文：颎受命亟发，遣人辞母而已。
现代文：高接受任命后立即出发，只派人向母亲告别。
English: After Gao accepted the appointment, he left immediately, only sending someone to say goodbye to his mother.

古文：自是坚措置军事，皆与李德林谋之，时军书日以百数，德林口授数人，文意百端，不加治点。
现代文：从此以后，杨坚凡是处理军务，都要与李德林商量。当时丞相府发到的军书日以百计，李德林往往同时向几个人口授批文，文意多种多样，从不加以修改。
English: From then on, whenever Yang Jian dealt with military affairs, he had to consult with Li Delin. At that time, there were hundreds of military documents sent to the prime minister's office, and Li Delin often dictated approval documents to several people at the same time. The meaning of the documents was diverse, and they were never revised.

古文：司马消难以郧、随、温、应、土、顺、沔、儇、岳九州及鲁山等八镇来降，遗其子为质以求援。
现代文：北周郧州总管司马消难举郧、随、温、应、土、顺、沔、儇、岳九州和鲁山等八镇投降陈朝，并派他的儿子入朝作为人质，请求援助。
English: Sima Qianlong, the governor-general of North Zhou and Luzhou, surrendered to the Chen Dynasty in eight towns, including Zhou, Zhu, Wen, Ying, Tu, Shun, Zhou, Zhou, Yue, Jiuzhou and Lushan, and sent his son to the Chen Dynasty as a hostage to request assistance.

古文：八月，己未，诏以消难为大都督、总督九州八镇诸军事、司空，赐爵随公。
现代文：八月，己未，南陈宣帝下诏书任命司马消难为大都督、总督九州八镇诸军事、司空，并赐爵随公。
English: In August, Emperor Chen Xuan of the Southern Han Dynasty issued an edict appointing Sima Xidan as the grand governor, governor of the eight military towns in Kyushu, governor of the sky, and conferred a knighthood on him.

古文：庚申，诏镇西将军樊毅进督沔、汉诸军事，南豫州刺史任忠帅众趣历阳，超武将军陈慧纪为前军都督，趣南兗州。
现代文：庚申，又下诏书让镇西将军樊毅督察沔、汉地区的军事；命令南豫州刺史任忠率军向历阳进发；任命超武将军陈慧纪为前军都督，率军向南兖州进发。
English: Goshun also issued an imperial edict to make Zhenxi General Zou Yi the inspector of the military in the Han region; ordered Southern Yuzhou General Zhi Renzhong to lead the army to Liyang; appointed Super Military General Chen Huiji as the former military governor, and led the army to Southern Yuzhou.

古文：周益州总管王谦亦不附丞相坚，起巴、蜀之兵以攻始州。
现代文：北周益州总管王谦也不愿意依附杨坚，于是出动巴、蜀地区的军队攻打始州。
English: Wang Qian, the governor of North Zhou and Yizhou, did not want to be dependent on Yang Jian, so he sent troops from the Ba and Shu regions to attack Shizhou.

古文：梁睿至汉川，不得进，坚即以睿为行军元帅以讨谦。
现代文：新任益州总管梁睿到汉川以后，无法再继续前进，杨坚即任命梁睿为行军元帅讨伐王谦。
English: After the new Yizhou governor, Liang Rui, arrived in Hanchuan, he could no longer move forward. Yang Jian then appointed Liang Rui as the marching marshal to fight Wang Qian.

古文：戊辰，诏以司马消难为大都督水陆诸军事。
现代文：戊辰，陈朝下诏书任命司马消难为大都督水陆诸军事。
English: In the Wangchen and Chen Dynasties, Sima Qiandan was appointed as the military governor of the provinces by imperial edict.

古文：庚午，通直散骑常侍淳于陵克临江郡。
现代文：庚午，通直散骑常侍淳于陵率军攻克临江郡。
English: On the afternoon of the 6th day of the 7th month, the cavalrymen led by Jun Yu Ling conquered Linjiang County.

古文：梁世宗使中书舍人柳庄奉书入周。丞相坚执庄手曰： 孤昔以开府，从役江陵，深蒙梁主殊眷。
现代文：后梁孝明帝萧岿派遣中书舍人柳庄带着书信入北周朝贡，北周丞相杨坚握着柳庄的手说： 我以前加开府时，曾经随军到过江陵，受到梁国君主的热情款待。
English: After Liang Xiaoming, Emperor Xiaoqi sent Liu Zhuang, a scholar from the Middle Kingdom, with a letter to pay tribute to the Northern Zhou Dynasty. Northern Zhou Minister Yang Jian shook Liu Zhuang's hand and said: "When I was in Qiafu, I once went to Gangneung with the army and was warmly welcomed by the monarch of Liang.

古文：今主幼时艰，猥蒙顾托。
现代文：眼下我们正处在天子年幼，时事艰难的时期，我虽然不才，但受命辅佐朝政。
English: Right now, we are in a time when the emperor is young and current affairs are difficult. Although I am not talented, I have been ordered to assist the government.

古文：梁主奕叶委诚朝廷，当相与共保岁寒。 
现代文：梁国君主几代都忠于朝廷，我们应当共同努力使这种融洽关系永远保持下去。 
English: The monarchs of Liang Guo have been loyal to the imperial court for several generations. We should work together to maintain this harmonious relationship forever.

古文：时诸将竞劝梁主举兵，与尉迟迥连谋，以为进可以尽节周氏，退可以席卷山南。
现代文：当时后梁众将帅竞相劝说萧岿起兵，与尉迟迥联合，认为这样做进可以对北周帝室效忠尽节，退可以席卷汉、沔地区。
English: At that time, the generals and generals of the Liang Dynasty competed to persuade Xiao Yu to raise an army and join forces with Fei Chi Yu, believing that by doing so, the advance could be loyal to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and the retreat could sweep the Han and Lu regions.

古文：梁主疑未决。
现代文：萧岿犹豫不决。
English: Xiao Yao hesitated.

古文：会庄至，具道坚语，且曰： 昔袁绍、刘表、王凌、诸葛诞，皆一时雄杰，据要地，拥强兵，然功业莫就，祸不旋踵者，良由魏、晋挟天子，保京都，仗大顺以为名故也。
现代文：适逢柳崐庄回来，将杨坚的话转告了萧岿，并且说： 以前袁绍、刘表、王凌、诸葛诞等人都是汉、魏时期有雄才大略的人，他们占据着战略要地，拥有强大的军队，但是都没有能够建立功业，祸难反而紧随而至。其根本原因就是由于魏、晋挟天子以令诸侯，占据着京师，倚仗名正言顺以讨叛逆，师出有名。
English: When Liu Shuzhuang returned, he conveyed Yang Jian's words to Xiao Jun, and said: Formerly, Yuan Shao, Liu Biao, Wang Ling, Zhu Gexing and others were all men of great talent in the Han and Wei dynasties. They occupied strategic locations and had powerful armies, but they were unable to establish their careers. Instead, disaster followed them. The root cause of this was that Wei and Jin coerced the princes and occupied Beijing, relying on the principle of obedience to fight against rebellion, and the teachers became famous.

古文：今尉迟迥虽曰旧将，昏耄已甚；司马消难、王谦，常人之下者，非有匡合之才。
现代文：方今尉迟迥虽然是一员老将，但是他年老昏庸。而司马消难、王谦又是极普通的人，都没有匡时济世的才干。
English: Although Fang Jinyu is a veteran, he is old and feeble. While Sima Qishan and Wang Qian are very ordinary people, they do not have the ability to save the world.

古文：周朝将相，多为身计，竞效节于杨氏。
现代文：周朝的将帅大臣，大多数只为自己打算，竞相效忠于杨坚。
English: The generals and marshals of the Zhou Dynasty, most of whom only had their own interests at heart, vied for Yang Jian's allegiance.

古文：以臣料之，迥等终当覆灭，随公必移周祚。
现代文：以我看来尉迟迥等人终当被消灭，随公杨坚必定会夺取周政权。
English: From my point of view, Fong Chi-soo and others should eventually be eliminated, and Yang Jian will surely seize Zhou's power.

古文：未若保境息民，以观其变。 
现代文：我们不如保境安民，静观事态的发展变化。 
English: It is better for us to keep the country and the people safe than to watch the development and change of the situation.

古文：梁主深然之，众议遂止。
现代文：萧岿非常赞同，众人也不再争论了。
English: Xiao Yao agreed very much, and everyone stopped arguing.

古文：高颎至军，为桥于沁水。
现代文：北周监军高颎到了前线军中，在沁水上建造桥梁。
English: Gao Kun, the Northern Zhou Observer, arrived at the front line to build a bridge over the Surabaya River.

古文：尉迟惇于上流纵火筏，颎豫为土狗以御之。
现代文：尉迟从上游放流带火的木，高事先在桥的上游建造了一些被称为 土狗 的土墩以阻挡火，使其不能靠近桥梁。
English: He delayed releasing the burning wood from upstream, and Gao built some earthen mounds, known as earthen dogs, upstream of the bridge to block the fire and prevent it from approaching the bridge.

古文：惇布陈二十余里，麾兵少却，欲待孝宽军半渡而击之；孝宽因其却，鸣鼓齐进。
现代文：尉迟布阵二十余里，指挥军队稍微后退，想等到韦孝宽的军队渡河中间时发起进攻。韦孝宽趁尉迟的军队后撤之机，擂鼓齐进。
English: Wei Xiaokuan took advantage of the delay in the retreat of Wei's army and marched forward with all guns blazing. The commander of the army retreated slightly, wanting to wait until Wei's army crossed the middle of the river to launch an attack.

古文：军既渡，颎命焚桥，以绝士卒反顾之心。
现代文：军队过河后，高又命令将桥焚毁，断绝了士卒的退路。
English: After the army crossed the river, Gao ordered the bridge to be burned, cutting off the soldiers' escape route.

古文：惇兵大败，单骑走。
现代文：结果尉迟的军队大败，尉迟单骑逃走。
English: As a result, his army suffered a crushing defeat, and he fled on horseback.

古文：孝宽乘胜进，追至鄴。
现代文：韦孝宽率军乘胜前进，一直追到邺城。
English: Wei Xiaokuan led the army to advance with the victory and chased it all the way to Lucheng.

古文：庚午，迥与惇及惇弟西都公祐，悉将其卒十三万陈于城南，迥别统万人，皆绿巾、锦袄，号 黄龙兵 。
现代文：庚午，尉迟迥和尉迟以及尉迟的弟弟西都公尉迟，率领全部军队十三万人在城南布阵，尉迟迥亲率一万多人，都戴绿巾、穿锦袄，号称 黄龙兵 。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year

古文：迥弟勤帅众五万，自青州赴迥，以三千骑先至。
现代文：尉迟迥的弟弟尉迟勤统率军队五万人，从青州赶来增援尉迟迥，并亲率三千骑兵先期到达。
English: The younger brother of Lt. Shizhen, Lt. Shizhen led an army of fifty thousand, and reinforcements of Lt. Shizhen came from Qingzhou, and the family led three thousand cavalry arrived in advance.

古文：迥素习军旅，老犹被甲临陈。
现代文：尉迟迥深谙用兵之道，现在虽然老了，仍然穿戴甲胄，亲自临阵。
English: Although he is old now, he still wears armor and goes into battle himself.

古文：其麾下兵皆关中人，为之力战，孝宽等军不利而却。
现代文：他的部下都是关中人，为尉迟迥拚死血战，韦孝宽等将帅的军队因形势不利而被迫后退。
English: His subordinates were all from Guanzhong. They fought to the death for their lieutenants. General Wei Xiaokang's army was forced to retreat due to the unfavorable situation.

古文：鄴中士民观战者数万人，行军总管宇文忻曰： 事急矣！
现代文：邺城百姓出来观战的有数万人，行军总管宇文忻说： 形势已经到了危急关头！
English: Tens of thousands of people from the people of Handan City came out to watch the battle. The head of the march, Uwen Yao, said: The situation has reached a critical juncture!

古文：吾当以诡道破之。 
现代文：我要用诡诈的战法击败敌军。 
English: I will use cunning tactics to defeat the enemy army.

古文：乃先射观者，观者皆走，转相腾藉，声如雷霆。
现代文：于是先射击观战的百姓，这些人纷纷逃避，互相推搡践踏，呼声震天。
English: As a result, the civilians who were watching the battle were shot first. These people fled one after another, pushed and trampled each other, and their cries shook the heavens.

古文：忻乃传呼曰： 贼败矣！ 
现代文：宇文忻于是大声喊道： 叛贼失败了！ 
English: Uwen Zang then shouted loudly: The traitors have failed!

古文：众复振，因其扰而乘之。
现代文：韦孝宽的军队很快士气重振，乘纷乱之机发起进攻。
English: Wei Xiaokuan's troops quickly recovered their morale and took advantage of the chaos to launch an attack.

古文：迥军大败，走保鄴城。
现代文：结果尉迟迥的军队大败，退保邺城。
English: As a result, the army of Lai Chi Han suffered a crushing defeat and retreated from the defense of Handan.

古文：孝宽纵兵围之，李询及思安伯代人贺娄子幹先登。
现代文：韦孝宽指挥军队包围了邺城，李询与安思伯代郡人贺娄子干首先登上城头。
English: Wei Xiaokuan commanded the army to encircle Lucheng, and Li Zhen and Ansi Bodei County native He Shanzi Gan were the first to climb the top of the city.

古文：崔弘度妹，先适迥子为妻，及鄴城破，迥窘迫升楼，弘度直上龙尾追之。
现代文：崔弘度的妹妹早先嫁给尉迟迥的儿子为妻，待邺城被攻破后，尉迟迥计穷，登上城楼，崔弘度径直从龙尾道追上去。
English: Choi Hong-du's younger sister had earlier married the son of Ye Chia-tao. After Ye Chia-tao's castle was breached, Ye Chia-du planned to climb the castle tower. Choi Hong-du chased her straight up from Long On Road.

古文：迥弯弓，将射弘度。弘度脱兜鍪，谓迥曰： 颇相识不？
现代文：尉迟迥弯弓搭箭，准备射崔弘度，崔弘度摘下头盔对尉迟迥说： 还认识我吗？
English: The lieutenant bowed his bow and arrows and prepared to shoot Cui Hongdu. Cui Hongdu took off his helmet and said to the lieutenant: "Do you still know me?"

古文：今日各图国事，不得顾私。
现代文：今日我们各自都是为了国事，不能顾及私情。
English: Today, we are all here for the sake of national affairs, and we can't take personal feelings into account.

古文：以亲戚之情，谨遏乱兵，不许侵辱。
现代文：念我们有亲戚之情，特地遏制住乱兵，不许对您侵犯欺侮。
English: Thinking that we are relatives, we have made a special effort to contain the rioters and not allow them to abuse and bully you.

古文：事势如此，早为身计，何所侍也？ 
现代文：现在事情已经到了这一步，您应该早为自身考虑，还等待什么呢？ 
English: Now that it's come to this, you should be thinking to yourself, what are you waiting for?

古文：迥掷弓于地，骂左丞相极口而自杀。
现代文：尉迟迥投弓箭于地，尽情大骂左丞相杨坚，然后自杀。
English: He threw his bow and arrow to the ground, cursed the Minister of the Left, Yang Jian, and then committed suicide.

古文：弘度顾其弟弘升曰： 汝可取迥头。 
现代文：崔弘度对弟弟崔弘升说： 你可取下尉迟迥的头颅。 
English: Cui Hongdu said to his brother Cui Hongsheng, "You can take the head of Second Lieutenant Zhixuan.

古文：弘升斩之。
现代文：于是崔弘升将尉迟迥斩首。
English: As a result, Cui Hongsheng beheaded the lieutenant.

古文：军士在小城中者，孝宽尽坑之。
现代文：在邺小城中的尉迟迥士卒，都被韦孝宽活埋。
English: All of Wei Xiaokuan's lieutenants and subordinates in the small city of Handan were buried alive.

古文：勤、惇、祐东走青州，未至，开府仪同大将军郭衍追获之。
现代文：尉迟勤、尉迟与尉迟向东逃往青州，还没有到达，就被开府仪同大将军郭衍率兵追上抓获。
English: Ye Ziqin, Ye Ziqin and Ye Ziqin fled eastward to Qingzhou. Before they arrived, they were caught by soldiers led by Kaifu Yi and General Guo Yan.

古文：丞相坚以勤初有诚款，特不之罪。
现代文：丞相杨坚因为尉迟勤开始时曾诚心归顺自己，特下令不予问罪。
English: The prime minister, Yang Jian, ordered that no charges be brought against the lieutenant because he had sincerely submitted himself at the beginning of his tardiness.

古文：李惠先自缚归罪，坚复其官爵。
现代文：李惠在尉迟迥失败前就自动回去请罪，杨坚恢复了他原来的官职和爵位。
English: Li Hui voluntarily went back to plead guilty before the failure of the delay, and Yang Jian resumed his original official position and knighthood.

古文：迥末年衰耄，及起兵，以小御正崔达拏为长史。
现代文：尉迟迥晚年衰朽昏愦，起兵后任命小御正崔达为大总管府长史。
English: In his later years, he fell into a state of decrepitude, and after he raised an army, he appointed Kogosho Treida as the Grand Chief Administrator of the prefectural government.

古文：达拏，暹之子也，文士，无筹略，举措多失，凡六十八日而败。
现代文：崔达是崔暹的儿子，一介文士，没有计谋方略，举动处置多有失误，所以尉迟迥起兵才六十八天即告失败。
English: Cui Da was the son of Cui Siam, a scholar. He had no strategy, and made many mistakes in his actions. Therefore, his delay in raising an army for only sixty-eight days ended in failure.

古文：于仲文军至蓼隄，去梁郡七里。
现代文：北周河南道行军总管于仲文率军进至蓼，距梁郡只有七里地。
English: Yuzhongwen, the general manager of marching troops of Beizhou-Henan Province, led the army to Shao, only seven miles away from Liang County.

古文：檀让拥众数万，仲文以羸师挑战而伪北，让不设备；仲文还击，大破之，生获五千余人，斩首七百级。
现代文：檀让拥有军队数万人，于仲文以羸弱之师前去挑战，然后佯装败退，檀让由于胜利而不再设防；于仲文率军杀回，大败檀让的军队，俘虏五千余人，斩首七百级。
English: Danzang had an army of tens of thousands of soldiers, and challenged Yu Zhongwen with a weak division, and then pretended to retreat. Danzang no longer set up defenses due to victory; Yu Zhongwen led the army to fight back, and defeated Danzang's army, captured more than five thousand people, and beheaded seven hundred levels.

古文：进攻梁郡，迥守将刘子宽弃城走。
现代文：于仲文接着进攻梁郡，尉迟迥的守将刘子宽充城逃走。
English: Yu Zhongwen then attacked Liang County, and Liu Zikang fled the city.

古文：仲文进击曹州，获迥所署刺史李仲康。
现代文：于仲文又进攻曹州，俘虏尉迟迥所委任的刺史李仲康。
English: Yu Zhongwen attacked Caozhou again, and the assassin Li Zhongkang, who was appointed by the prisoner-of-war, was executed.

古文：檀让以余众屯成武，仲文袭击，破之，遂拔成武。
现代文：檀让率领残余部队屯守成武县，于仲文率军袭击，再一次打败檀让，攻克成武城。
English: Danzhang led the remaining troops to garrison Chengwu County, and Yu Zhongwen led the army to attack, once again defeated Danzhang and conquered Chengwu City.

古文：迥将席毘罗，众十万屯沛县，将攻徐州。
现代文：尉迟迥的将领席毗罗有兵十万，驻扎在沛县，准备进攻徐州。
English: The general-in-chief, Fei Luo, had 100,000 soldiers and was stationed in Peixian County, preparing to attack Xuzhou.

古文：其妻子在金乡，仲文遣人诈为毘罗使者，谓金乡城主徐善净曰： 檀让明日午时至金乡，宣蜀公令，赏赐将士。 
现代文：席毗罗的妻儿在金乡，于仲文派人假扮成席毗罗的使者，对金乡城主徐善净说： 檀让明天午时来金乡，传达蜀公尉迟迥的命令，并赏赐将士。 
English: Shifiro's wife and son were in Jinxiang, and Yu Zhongwen sent a man pretending to be Shifiro's messenger to the lord of Jinxiang, Xu Shengjing, saying, "Let him come to Jinxiang at noon tomorrow to convey the late order of Shu Gongfei and reward the soldiers."

古文：金乡人皆喜。
现代文：金乡人都很高兴。
English: The people of Jinxiang are very happy.

古文：仲文简精兵，伪建迥旗帜，倍道而进。
现代文：于仲文就挑选精兵，打着尉迟迥的旗号，兼程前往。
English: Yu Zhongwen selected a group of elite soldiers, and under the banner of "fei Zhixuan" (尉迟), he went there on a part-time basis.

古文：善净望见，以为檀让，出迎谒。
现代文：徐善净望见，以为是檀让，出城迎接。
English: Xu Shanzhong saw it, thought it was a gift, and went out of the city to meet it.

古文：仲文执之，遂取金乡。
现代文：于仲文乘机令人拿下徐善净，于是夺取了金乡城。
English: Yu Zhongwen seized the opportunity to take down Xu Shengjing, and thus captured Jinxiang City.

古文：诸将多劝屠其城，仲文曰： 此城乃毘罗起兵之所，当宽其妻子，其兵自归。
现代文：众将领多劝于仲文屠杀该城兵民，于仲文说： 此城是席毗罗起兵的地方，我们应当宽待他们的妻儿，这样他部下的官兵就会自动归降。
English: The generals mostly advised Yu Zhongwen to massacre the soldiers and civilians of the city. Yu Zhongwen said: This city is the place where Shiviro raised an army. We should be lenient with their wives and children, so that the officers and soldiers of his subordinates would voluntarily surrender.

古文：如即屠之，彼望绝矣。 
现代文：如果我们屠杀了他们的妻儿家属，他们就会彻底绝望。 
English: If we slaughtered their wives, children and families, they would be in utter despair.

古文：众皆称善。
现代文：大家都赞成于仲文的主张。
English: Everyone praised it and said it was good.

古文：于是毘罗恃众来薄官军，仲文设伏击之，毘罗众大溃，争投洙水死，水为之不流。
现代文：于是席毗罗依仗着优势兵力来逼近官军，于仲文设下埋伏，纵兵出击，席毗罗的军队惨败，部下争着投洙水而死，以至洙水被堵塞不流。
English: As a result, Shiviro relied on superior forces to approach the government army, set up an ambush under Zhongwen, and launched a long-range attack. Shiviro's army suffered a disastrous defeat, and his subordinates died fighting to throw water, so that the water was blocked and did not flow.

古文：获檀让，槛送京师；斩毘罗，传首。
现代文：于仲文俘获了檀让，用槛车押送京城，杀了席毗罗，传首级到长安。
English: Yu Zhongwen captured Danzhang, escorted him to the capital in a carriage, killed Shi Viro, and sent his head to Chang'an.

古文：韦孝宽分兵讨关东叛者，悉平之。
现代文：韦孝宽分兵讨伐关东叛军，全部平定。
English: Wei Xiaoguan's detachments fought against the Kwantung rebels, and all of them were defeated.

古文：坚徙相州于安阳，毁鄴城及邑居。
现代文：杨坚迁移相州治所于安阳，毁掉邺城及其民房。
English: Yang Jian moved the Xiangzhou Administrative Center to Anyang, destroying Lucheng and its houses.

古文：分相州，置毛州、魏州。
现代文：又分割相州，设置毛州、魏州。
English: He also divided Xiangzhou into Maozhou and Weizhou.

古文：梁主闻迥败，谓柳庄曰： 若从众人之言。社稷已不守矣！ 
现代文：后梁国主得知尉迟迥起兵失败，对柳庄说： 当初如果听从了众将领的话，国家就不能保全了。 
English: After Liang Guozhong learned of the failure of his subordinates to raise an army, he said to Liuzhuang: If we had listened to the generals at the beginning, the country would not have been preserved.

古文：丞相坚之初得政也，待黄公刘昉、沛公郑译甚厚，赏赐不可胜计，委以心膂，朝野倾属，称为 黄、沛 。
现代文：北周丞相杨坚起初掌握政权时，对黄公刘、沛公郑译礼遇深厚，赏赐的财物不可胜计，并且委以心腹重任，所以朝野上下莫不奉承巴结，称为 黄、沛 。
English: When Northern Zhou Minister Yang Jian initially seized power, he was very generous to Huang Gong Liu and Pei Gong Zheng. He rewarded them with immeasurable wealth and entrusted them with important responsibilities. Therefore, there was no shortage of flattery and flattery from the top to the bottom, known as Huang and Pei.

古文：二人皆恃功骄恣，溺于财利，不亲职务。
现代文：刘、郑二人仗着荐引杨坚有功而骄傲放纵，追求财物，不理政事。
English: Liu and Zheng, relying on the recommendation of Yang Jian, are proud and indulgent, pursue wealth, and ignore politics.

古文：及辞监军，坚始疏之，恩礼渐薄。
现代文：等到相继推辞出任监军以后，杨坚开始疏远他们，恩惠礼遇逐渐淡薄。
English: After Yang Jian's successive resignations as the supervisor of the troops, he began to alienate them, and the favors and courtesy were gradually diluted.

古文：高颎自军所还，宠遇日隆。
现代文：高从军中回朝后，日益受到杨坚的宠信。
English: After Gao returned to the imperial court from the military, he was increasingly favored by Yang Jian.

古文：时王谦、司马消难未平，坚忧之，忘寝与食。
现代文：当时王谦与司马消难的反叛尚未平定，杨坚为此担忧，常常废寝忘食。
English: At that time, Wang Qian and Sima Qian's rebellion had not yet been quelled, and Yang Jian was worried about this, often losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：而昉逸游纵酒，相府事多遗落。
现代文：而刘游玩享乐，纵酒无节，致使相府公事多有耽误。
English: Liu, on the other hand, enjoyed himself and drank excessively, which led to delays in his official duties.

古文：坚乃以高颎代昉为司马；不忍废译，阴敕官属不得白事于译。
现代文：于是杨坚任命高代替刘为丞相府司马；但还不忍心废黜郑译，就暗中命令各级官吏不得向郑译上报公事文书。
English: As a result, Yang Jian appointed Gao to replace Liu as the chief secretary of the prime minister's office; however, he did not have the heart to dismiss Zheng Yue, so he secretly ordered officials at all levels not to report official documents to Zheng Yue.

古文：译犹坐厅事，无所关预，惶惧顿首，求解职；坚犹以恩礼慰勉之。
现代文：郑译虽然仍能出入丞相府，但已不能参预政事。于是郑译惊恐地向杨坚顿首谢罪，请求解除长史职务，杨坚仍然施以恩惠来安慰他。
English: Although Zheng Yi can still enter and leave the prime minister's office, he can no longer participate in pre-election politics. Therefore, Zheng Yi thanked Yang Jiantong for his sin and requested to be relieved of his duties as chief historian. Yang Jiantong still gave him favors to comfort him.

古文：癸酉，智武将军鲁广达克周之郭默城。
现代文：癸酉，陈朝智武将军鲁广达攻克北周郭默城。
English: At that time, Chen Zhaozhiwu's general Lu Guangda conquered the North Zhou Guo Mucheng.

古文：丙子，淳于陵克祐州城。
现代文：丙子，通直散骑常侍淳于陵攻克北周州城。
English: On the third day of the third month, Jun Yuling captured Yuzhou City.

古文：周以汉王赞为太师，申公李穆为太傅，宋王实为大前疑，秦王贽为大右弼，燕公于寔为大左辅。
现代文：北周朝廷任命汉王宇文赞为太师，申公李穆为太傅，宋王宇文实为大前疑，秦王宇文贽为大右弼，燕公于为大左辅。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Han Wang Yu Wenzan as the Grand Master, Shen Gong Li Mu as the Grand Master, Song Wang Yu Wenshi as the Grand Prior, Qin Wang Yu Wensheng as the Grand Right Hand, and Yan Gong Yu as the Grand Left Hand.

古文：寔，仲文之父也。
现代文：于是于仲文的父亲。
English: Thus Yu Nakafumi's father.

古文：乙卯，周大赦。
现代文：乙卯，北周朝廷大赦天下。
English: Second, the Northern Zhou Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：周王谊帅四总管至郧州，司马消难拥其众以鲁山、甑山二镇来降。
现代文：北周行军元帅王谊统领四位总管进至郧州，司马消难率军献鲁山、甑山二镇归降南陈。
English: The north Zhou marching army led by Marshal Wang Yi and four commanders-in-chief marched to Ganzhou. Sima Qianlong led the army to conquer Lu Mountain and the two towns of Lushan and returned to South Chen.

古文：初，消难遣上开府仪同大将军段珣将兵围顺州，顺州刺史周法尚不能拒，弃城走，消难虏其母弟而南。
现代文：起初，司马消难派遣上开府仪同大将军段率军围攻顺州，北周顺州刺史周法尚抵御不住，只好弃城出逃，司马消难俘获了他的母亲和弟弟向南而去。
English: At first, Sima Qianlong sent Shang Kaifuyi and General Duan to besiege Shunzhou. North Zhou could not resist Shunzhou's attack on Zhoufa, so he had to abandon the city and flee. Sima Qianlong captured his mother and brother and went south.

古文：樊毅救消难，不及。周亳州总管元景山击之，毅掠居民而去。
现代文：陈将樊毅率军来援救司马消难，没有赶上，北周亳州总管元景山攻打樊毅，樊毅劫掠百姓而退去。
English: Chen sent Xing Yi and his army to rescue Sima, but they didn't catch up with him. Yuan Jingshan, the general manager of Beizhou, attacked Xing Yi, and Xing Yi plundered the people and retreated.

古文：景山与南徐州刺史宇文弼追之，与毅战于漳口。一日三战三捷。
现代文：元景山和南徐州刺史宇文合兵追击樊毅，在漳口交战，一日内三战三捷。
English: Yuanjing Mountain and South Xuzhou stabbed Shi Yuwen together to pursue Zou Yi, and fought at Zoukou, with three battles and three victories in one day.

古文：毅退保甑山镇，城邑为消难所据者，景山皆复取之。
现代文：于是樊毅退保甑山镇，原来由司马消难所占据的地方，都被元景山重新夺取。
English: As a result, Zou Yi withdrew from the defense of Lushan Town, and the places originally occupied by Sima Qidang were all recaptured by Yuan Jingshan.

古文：郧州巴蛮多叛，共推渠帅兰雒州为主，以附消难。
现代文：郧州巴蛮到处反叛，他们共同推举酋帅兰雒州为首领，响应司马消难。
English: Zhangzhou barbarians rebelled everywhere, and they jointly elected the chieftain Lan Zhangzhou as the leader, in response to Sima's disappearance.

古文：王谊遣诸将分讨之，旬月皆平。
现代文：王谊派遣众将分路讨伐，不到一个月即全部平定。
English: Wang Yi dispatched the general public to make a separate crusade, and in less than a month, they were all pacified.

古文：陈纪、萧摩诃等攻广陵，周吴州总管于顗击破之。
现代文：南陈前军都督陈纪、萧摩诃率军进攻广陵，被北周吴州总管于击退。
English: The former army of Southern Chen, led by the prefectural governors Chen Ji and Xiao Maqi, attacked Guangling, but was repulsed by the general manager of Northern Zhou and Wuzhou.

古文：沙州氐帅杨永安聚众应王谦，大将军乐宁公达奚儒讨之。
现代文：沙州氐帅杨永安聚众响应王谦，大将军乐宁公达奚儒率军讨伐。
English: Yang Yong'an, the marshal of Shazhou, rallied the crowd in response to Wang Qian, and the great general Le Ning Gongda led the Confucian crusade.

古文：杨素破宇文胄于石济，斩之。
现代文：杨素率军于石济击败荥州刺史宇文胄，将宇文胄斩首。
English: Yang Su led the army to defeat the Zhangzhou assassin Uwen Yao in Shijie and beheaded him.

古文：周以神武公窦毅为大司马，齐公于智为大司空；九月，以小宗伯竟陵公杨惠为大宗伯。
现代文：北周朝廷任命神武公窦毅为大司马，齐公于智为大司空；九月，又任命小宗伯竟陵公杨惠为大宗伯。
English: The Northern Zhou court appointed Shenwu Gong Dou Yi as the grand steward and Qi Gong Yuchi as the grand steward; in September, it also appointed Xiaozongbo Qingting Gong Yang Hui as the grand steward.

古文：丁亥，周将王延贵帅众援历阳；任忠击破之，生擒延贵。
现代文：丁亥，北周将领王延贵率军增援历阳，被南陈南豫州刺史任忠击败，俘获了王延贵。
English: In Dinghai, the northern Zhou general Wang Yangui led an army to reinforce Liyang, and was defeated by the southern Chen, southern Yuzhou, and Renzhong, and captured Wang Yangui.

古文：壬辰，周废皇后司马氏为庶人。
现代文：壬辰，北周朝廷废皇后司马氏为平民。
English: In Imjin, Sima, the deposed empress of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, became a commoner.

古文：庚戌，以随世子勇为洛州总管、东京小冢宰，总统旧齐之地。
现代文：庚戌，北周朝廷任命随公杨坚的长子杨勇为洛州总管、东京小冢宰，统辖原北齐王朝所管辖的地区。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty court appointed Yang Yong, the eldest son of Prince Yang Jian, to be the governor of Luozhou and the governor of Tokyo, overseeing the areas under the jurisdiction of the former Northern Qi Dynasty.

古文：壬子，以左丞相坚为大丞相，罢左、右丞相之官。
现代文：壬子，北周朝廷又任命左丞相杨坚为大丞相，废除左、右丞相的官职。
English: In the same year, the Northern Zhou Dynasty also appointed the Minister of the Left, Yang Jian, as the Grand Minister of the Left, abolishing the official posts of the Minister of the Left and the Minister of the Right.

古文：冬，十月，甲寅，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，甲寅，出现日食。
English: In the winter of October, the solar eclipse occurs.

古文：周丞相坚杀陈惑王纯及其子。
现代文：北周丞相杨坚诛杀陈惑王宇文纯和他的儿子。
English: Northern Zhou Minister Yang Jianlian killed Chen Zhaozhong, Wang Yuwenjun and his son.

古文：周梁睿将步骑二十万讨王谦，谦分命诸将据险拒守。睿奋击，屡破之，蜀人大骇。
现代文：北周行军元帅梁睿统率步、骑兵二十万讨伐王谦，王谦分别命令众将占据战略要地，以抵御朝廷军队，梁睿率军奋勇出击，多次打败王谦军队，蜀地人大为惊骇。
English: Northern Zhou marching marshal Liang Rui-tong led 200,000 cavalry to fight Wang Qian. Wang Qian separately ordered the troops to occupy strategic locations to resist the imperial army. Liang Rui led the army to attack bravely and repeatedly defeated Wang Qian's army. The people of Shu were greatly shocked.

古文：谦遣其将达奚惎、高阿那肱、乙弗虔等帅众十万攻利州，堰江水以灌之。
现代文：王谦派遣部将达奚、高阿那肱、乙弗虔等人率军十万攻打利崐州，筑坝拦嘉陵江水以灌利州城。
English: The dispatching department of Wang Qian led an army of 100,000 soldiers, including Dadu, Gao Anaxuan and Yifu Qian, to attack Lishu Prefecture, build a dam to block the water of the Jialing River and flood the city of Lishu.

古文：城中战士不过二千，总管昌黎豆卢勣，昼夜拒守，凡四旬，时出奇兵击惎等，破之；会梁睿至，惎等遁去，睿自剑阁入，进逼成都。
现代文：城中守军士卒不过两千，总管昌黎人豆卢率军日夜拒守，相持达四十天，还时常出奇兵袭击达奚等人的军队，并取得胜利。正当此时，梁睿率军赶到，达奚等人率军逃走。于是梁睿率军从剑阁入川，进逼成都。
English: There were only two thousand soldiers in the city, but the commander-in-chief of the Changli people, Doulu, and his army refused to defend the city day and night, and they held out for forty days. They also often attacked the army of Daju and others with extraordinary soldiers, and achieved victory. At this time, Liang Rui and his army arrived, and Daju and his army fled. So Liang Rui and his army entered the river from Jiange and forced their way into Chengdu.

古文：谦令达奚惎、乙弗虔城守，亲帅精兵五万，背城结陈。
现代文：王谦命令达奚、乙弗虔守城，自己亲率精兵五万，背城摆开阵势。
English: Wang Qian ordered Daju and Yifu Qian to defend the city. He personally led fifty thousand elite soldiers and set up a position behind the city.

古文：睿击之，谦战败，将入城，惎、虔以城降。
现代文：梁睿纵兵攻打，王谦战败，将要入城，达奚、乙弗虔举城投降。
English: Liang Rui's column attacked, Wang Qian was defeated and was about to enter the city, and Dadu and Yifu Qian surrendered the city.

古文：谦将麾下三十骑走新都，新都令王宝执之。
现代文：王谦带领部下三十名骑兵逃往新都，被新都县令王宝抓获。
English: Wang Qian led his thirty cavalrymen to escape to Xindu and was captured by Xindu County Governor Wang Bao.

古文：戊寅，睿斩谦及高阿那肱，剑南平。
现代文：戊寅，梁睿将王谦和高阿那肱斩首，剑南全部平定。
English: Wu Yin and Liang Rui beheaded Wang Qian and Gao Anaxuan, and all of Jian'nan was pacified.

古文：十一月，甲辰，周达奚儒破杨永安，沙州平。
现代文：十一月，甲辰，北周大将军达奚儒率军击败氐帅杨永安，平定了沙州。
English: In November, Jia Chen, the general of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Dagu Confucius, led the army to defeat Yang Yong'an, the general of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and leveled Shazhou.

古文：丁未，周郧襄公韦孝宽卒。
现代文：丁未，北周郧襄公韦孝宽去世。
English: Ding Wei, Wei Xiaokuan, the Duke of Northern Zhou, passed away.

古文：孝宽久在边境，屡抗强敌；所经略布置，人初莫之解，见其成事，方乃惊服。
现代文：韦孝宽曾长期镇守边疆，多次抗击强敌；对于他的筹划部署，人们一开始都难以理解，待后来他获得胜利，人们才惊奇和钦佩。
English: Wei Xiaokuan had defended the frontier for a long time and fought against strong enemies many times. At first, people found it difficult to understand his planning and deployment, but later, when he won the victory, people were surprised and admired.

古文：虽在军中，笃意文史；敦睦宗族，所得俸禄，不及私室。
现代文：韦孝宽虽然戒马一生，但专心于文史；又与宗族和睦，自己所得俸禄，从不独自占有。
English: Although Wei Xiaokuan renounced horses for the rest of his life, he concentrated on literary history. He was also in harmony with his clan, and he never appropriated his own salary.

古文：人以此称之。
现代文：人们因此而称赞他。
English: People are praising him for that.

古文：十二月，庚辰，河东康简王叔献卒。
现代文：十二月，庚辰，南陈河东康简王陈叔献去世。
English: In December, Geng Chen, South Chen River East Kang Jian Wang Chen Shuxian passed away.

古文：癸亥，周诏诸改姓者，宜悉复旧。
现代文：癸亥，北周静帝下诏令在西魏时改姓鲜卑姓氏的人，都应恢复原来的姓氏。
English: People who changed their surnames to Xingbei during the Western Wei Dynasty should restore their original surnames.

古文：甲子，周以大丞相坚为相国，总百揆，去都督中外、大冢宰之号，进爵为王，以安陆等二十郡为随国，赞拜不名，备九锡之礼；坚受王爵、十郡而已。
现代文：甲子，北周朝廷任命大丞相杨坚为相国，统辖百官总理国家政事；免去他都督中外诸军事、大冢宰的称号；进爵位为王，以安陆等二十郡作为随王国；特许他在朝见天子时不称名，又赐他享有九锡仪礼。杨坚只接受了随王爵位和十郡的封地。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Yang Jian, the grand chancellor, as the crown prince of the country, supervising the state affairs of the prime minister of the hundred officials; he was exempted from the title of the military and grand vizier; he was promoted to the title of king, with twenty counties such as Anlu as the kingdom; he was specially allowed not to be named when he saw the emperor, and he was granted the Jiuxi ceremony. Yang Jian only accepted the title of the king and the fief of ten counties.

古文：辛未，杀代奰王达、滕闻王逌及其子。
现代文：辛未，北周诛杀了代王宇文达、腾闻王宇文和他们的儿子。
English: In Xinwei, the Northern Zhou Dynasty killed the acting king Uwenda, Tengwen Wang Uwen and their son.

古文：壬申，以小冢宰元孝规为大司徒。
现代文：壬申，北周朝廷任命小冢宰元孝规为大司徒。
English: In Jinshin, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Xiaobai Zai Yuan Xiao Jian as the chief disciple.

古文：是岁，周境内有州二百一十一，郡五百八。
现代文：这一年，北周境内有州二百一十一个，郡五百零八个。
English: In that year, there were 211 prefectures and 508 counties in the territory of Beizhou.

