古文：鄱阳学在城外东湖之北，相传以为范文正公作郡守时所创。
现代文：鄱阳学宫在城外东湖的北面，相传是范文正公当郡守时所创建的。
English: According to legend, Fan Wen Zheng Gong founded the Shuyang Academy Palace on the north side of the East Lake outside the city when he was the county governor.

古文：予考国史，范公以景祐三年乙亥岁四月知饶州，四年十二月，诏自今须藩镇乃得立学，他州勿听。
现代文：我考察国史，范公在仁宗景佑三年乙亥岁四月任饶州太守，四年十二月，诏书规定必须是藩镇才可以建立学宫，别的州不许建。
English: I examined the history of the country. Fan Gong was appointed the governor of Raozhou in April of the year of the Rooster in the third year of the reign of Emperor Jinzong Jingyou. In December of the year of the Rooster, the edict stipulated that the school palace could only be built in the town of the clan, and it was not allowed to be built in other states.

古文：是月，范公移润州。
现代文：当月，范公迁官润州。
English: That month, Fan Gong moved to Renzhou.

古文：《余襄公集》有《饶州新建州学记》，实起于庆历五年乙酉岁，其郡守曰都官员外郎张君，其略云： 先是郡先圣祠宫栋宇隳剥，前守亦尝相土，而未遑缔治，于是即其基于东湖之北偏而经营之。 
现代文：《余襄公集》有《饶州新建州学记》，实是仁宗庆历五年乙酉岁建立，郡守是都官员外郎张君，大略说： 起初郡城里先圣祠宫，房屋毁坏，前郡守也曾察看过，还没有来得及修建，于是张君就用祠宫旧基，在东湖北边建起学宫。 
English: "Yuxiang Public Collection" has "Record of the Newly-Established Raozhou State School," which was actually established in the 5th year of the 4th month of the 5th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th

古文：浮梁人金君卿郎中作《郡学庄田记》云： 庆历四年春，诏郡国立学，时守都官副郎张侯谭始营之，明年学成。 
现代文：浮梁县人金君卿郎中，作《郡学庄田记》说： 仁宗庆历四年春天，诏书命令郡国建立学宫，当时郡守都官副郎张君名谭的筹划，建立，第二年学宫建成。 
English: The son-in-law of Kim Jun Kyong, a resident of Fu Liang County, who wrote the "Record of the County School Village," said: In the spring of the fourth year of Inzong's reign, an edict ordered the county to build a school palace. At that time, Zhang Jun Mingtan, the deputy son of the county governor, planned and built the school palace, which was completed the following year.

古文：与余公记合。范公在饶时，延君卿置馆舍，使公有意建学，记中岂无一言及之？
现代文：和公所记的相同范公在饶州时，请金君卿建立馆舍，如果范公有意建立学宫，记中哪能一句也不提呢？
English: When the same Fan Gong as the one in the official record was in Raozhou, he asked Jin Junqing to build a hall. If Fan Gong intended to build a school palace, how could there be no mention of it in the record?

古文：盖是时公既为执政，去郡十年矣。
现代文：况且此时范公已入朝中掌管朝政，离开饶州十年了。
English: Moreover, at this time, Fan Gong had entered the court and was in charge of court politics, leaving Raozhou for ten years.

古文：所谓前守相土者不知为何人？
现代文：所记前太守察看土地，不知道是什么人？
English: The former governor-general who was recorded as inspecting the land, I don't know who he was?

