古文：吕用之诸葛殷董昌
现代文：吕用之诸葛殷董昌
English: Lyu Ying's Zhuge Yin Dongchang

古文：吕用之
现代文：吕用之
English: Lyu Yongzhi

古文：吕用之，鄱阳安仁里细民也。性桀黠，略知文字。
现代文：吕用之，是鄱阳郡安仁里一名普通百姓，性格凶悍而狡猾，略识些文字。
English: Lyu Yingzhi is an ordinary citizen from Anrenli, Poyang County. He is fierce and cunning, and knows some words.

古文：父璜，以货茗为业，来往于淮浙间。
现代文：他的父亲叫吕璜，以贩卖茶叶为职业，穿梭于淮河南北和浙江之间。
English: His father's name was Lv Ying, and he was a tea merchant who shuttled between the northern and southern parts of the Huaihe River and Zhejiang Province.

古文：时四方无事，广陵为歌钟之地，富商大贾，动逾百数。
现代文：当时各地都很太平，广陵一带是歌舞音乐之乡，富翁巨商常常来此，且人数颇众。
English: At that time, all parts of the country were peaceful. The Guangling area was the home of song and dance music. Wealthy merchants often came here, and there were quite a few of them.

古文：璜明敏，善酒律，多与群商游。
现代文：吕璜聪明机敏，又善于饮酒并懂得音律，经常跟一伙一伙的商人们出去游玩。
English: Lv Ying is clever and quick-witted. He is also good at drinking and knows music. He often goes out with a group of businessmen.

古文：用之年十二三，其父挈行。
现代文：当时，吕用之才十二三岁，由父亲领着走。
English: At that time, Lü Yizhi was only 12 or 13 years old and was led by his father.

古文：既慧悟，事诸贾，皆得欢心。
现代文：他自幼就很慧敏，有悟性，把那些巨商们侍奉得很开心。
English: Ever since he was a child, he was very clever and intelligent, and he enjoyed serving those great merchants.

古文：时或整履摇箑，匿家与奴仆等居。
现代文：有时穿戴整齐，在家中与奴仆住在一起。
English: Sometimes fully clothed, they live at home with servants.

古文：数岁，璜卒家。
现代文：几年之后，其父吕璜死在家中。
English: A few years later, his father, Lv Ying, died at home.

古文：乾符初，群盗攻剽州里，遂他适。
现代文：唐代乾符初年，强盗们攻进了州里，于是到别的地方去。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the robbers invaded the state and went elsewhere.

古文：用之既孤且贫，其舅徐鲁仁绸给之。
现代文：当时，吕用之孤独无依而且又很贫寒，他的舅父徐鲁仁常常接济他。
English: At that time, Lü Yizhi was lonely and poor, and his uncle Xu Luren often helped him.

古文：岁余，通于鲁仁室，为鲁仁所逐。
现代文：一年多以后，吕用之与鲁仁内子通奸，他被徐鲁仁赶了出来。
English: More than a year later, Lü Yizhi committed adultery with Lu Ren's inner son, and he was driven out by Xu Luren.

古文：因事九华山道士牛弘徽。
现代文：因此，他便上九华山侍奉道士牛弘徽。
English: Therefore, he went to Mount Jihua to serve the Taoist priest Niu Honghui.

古文：弘徽自谓得道者也，用之降志师之，传其驱役考召之术。
现代文：牛弘徽自称是个得道者，吕用之屈就于此并拜他为师，让他把驱役鬼神之术传给自己。
English: Niu Honghui claimed to be an adept, and Lü Yizhong bowed down to him and worshiped him as a teacher, asking him to teach him the art of driving ghosts and gods.

古文：既弘徽死，用之复客于广陵。遂彀巾布褐，用符药以易衣食。
现代文：牛弘徽死后，吕用之又客居于广陵，遂戴着有皱纹的纱巾、穿着粗布衣服，用符咒药物来换衣食度日。
English: After the death of Niu Honghui, Lv Yanzhi lived as a guest in Guangling again, so he wore a wrinkled gauze, wore coarse cloth clothes, and used charm drugs to change clothes and food to spend the day.

古文：岁余，丞相刘公节制淮左，有盅道置法者，逮捕甚急。
现代文：一年多后，丞相刘公来淮东地区巡查，有用道术盅惑人心、影响执法的，立即逮捕。他害怕了，随即渡到江南。
English: More than a year later, the Minister of Justice Liu Gongru came to Huadong District to inspect, and was immediately arrested for using Taoism to demagogue and influence law enforcement. He was afraid and immediately went to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：用之惧，遂南渡。
现代文：当时，高骈镇守京口城，召一些道士教他练轻功，以求长生。
English: At that time, Gaozhu Town guarded Jingkou Town and called some Taoists to teach him to practice light gong in order to gain eternal life.

古文：逾月不召。
现代文：吕用之也去应召，一个多月竟然没人理。
English: Lü Yizhi also went to answer the call, but was ignored for more than a month.

古文：诣渤海亲人俞公楚。
现代文：他去拜见渤海国来的亲戚俞公楚。
English: He went to visit his relative Zangongchu from Bohai Province.

古文：公楚奇之，过为儒服，目之曰江西吕巡官，因间荐于渤海。
现代文：公楚感到惊奇，给他换上套儒生的服装，称他是自江西来的吕巡官，凭其本事马上就要推荐给渤海国了。
English: The official was surprised and put a Confucian costume on him, saying that he was a Lu inspector from Jiangxi and that he would be recommended to the Bohai Kingdom immediately.

古文：及召试。
现代文：高骈听罢，急忙召来考验他。
English: Listen to Gao Yao. Quickly summon him to test him.

古文：公楚与左右附会其术，得验。寻署观察推官，仍为制其名。
现代文：俞公楚及手下人暗中附会，使吕用之的法术得到了验证，随即被封为观察推官，仍不用原来的名字。
English: Yu Gongchu and his subordinates secretly joined the meeting, so that Lu's spell was verified, and he was immediately appointed as an observation officer, but still did not use his original name.

古文：因字之曰无可，言无可无不可。自是出入无禁。
现代文：由于他的字叫无可，也可以说无可无不可，自然是随便出入，没有人可以禁止。
English: Because his character is called "nimble," it can also be said that "nimble" and "inevitable," it is natural to come and go at will, and no one can forbid it.

古文：初专方药香火之事。
现代文：开始，他钻研仙药香火等。
English: At the beginning, he delved into the study of immortals, incense, and so on.

古文：明年，渤海移镇，用之固请戎服。遂署右职。
现代文：第二年，渤海国移镇，吕用之坚决请求穿上军装赴渤海，遂被任命为重要的职位。
English: The following year, when he was transferred to Bohai Province, Lü Yizhi firmly asked him to put on a military uniform and go to Bohai, and he was appointed to an important position.

古文：用之素负贩，久客广陵，公私利病，无不详熟。
现代文：他平昔当小商贩，长期客居广陵，官府及民间的流弊，没有他不了解的。
English: He used to be a small trader and lived in Guangling for a long time. There is nothing he doesn't understand about the corruption of the government and the people.

古文：鼎灶之暇，妄陈时政得失。渤海益奇之，渐加委仗。
现代文：饭后之余，他狂妄地述说时政的得失，使渤海国君越来越重视他，逐渐予以重用。
English: After the meal, he arrogantly recounted the gains and losses of the current government, which made the king of Bohai pay more and more attention to him and gradually reuse him.

古文：先是渤海旧将，有梁缵、陈拱、冯绶、董僅、公楚、归礼，日以疏退，渤海至是孤立矣。
现代文：开始，渤海国的旧将梁缵、陈拱、冯绶、董仅、公楚、归礼等人，渐渐与国君疏远起来，使之陷入孤立之境地。
English: At the beginning, the former generals of the Bohai Kingdom, such as Liang Zheng, Chen Gong, Feng Zheng, Dong Bao, Gong Chu and Gui Li gradually distanced themselves from the sovereign, leaving him in an isolated situation.

古文：用之乃树置私党，伺动息。
现代文：吕用之便乘机网罗私党，伺机举事。
English: Lv Yizhi took the opportunity to entrap a private party and waited for an opportunity to do something.

古文：有不可去者，则厚以金宝悦之。
现代文：有不跟他走的，他便用金银财宝取悦之。
English: If anyone would not go with him, he made them happy with silver and gold.

古文：左右群小，皆市井人，见利忘义，上下相蒙，大逞妖妄。
现代文：他身边的人，全是些见利忘义的市井小民，于是便欺上瞒下大逞妖妄。
English: The people around him are all small-town people who see profit and forget righteousness, so they deceive and conceal and are arrogant and arrogant.

古文：仙书神符，无日无之，更迭唱和，罔知愧耻。
现代文：那些所谓仙书神符，他们天天带在身上，一段接一段地诵念，不知道惭愧和羞耻。
English: Those so-called immortals, they carry them on their bodies every day, chanting one after another, without shame or embarrassment.

古文：自是贿赂公行，条章日紊，烦刑重赋，率意而为。
现代文：吕用之经常向掌君主出行的公行官行贿，使宫中的规章制度日见紊乱，加重了赋税并使刑罚更加烦琐，任意胡为，使百姓怨声载道。
English: Lv Yizhi often bribed the officials who traveled with the monarch, made the rules and regulations in the palace increasingly chaotic, increased taxes and made punishments more cumbersome, and acted arbitrarily, causing the people to complain.

古文：道路怨嗟，各怀乱计。
现代文：他们上层人物也是各怀鬼胎。
English: Their upper-echelon figures are also in cahoots with each other.

古文：用之惧其窃发之变，因请置巡察使，采听府城密事。
现代文：吕用之怕突发变故，于是奏请设置巡察使，探听搜集宫内外的密事。
English: Lv Yizhi was afraid of sudden changes, so he requested that an inspector be set up to investigate and collect secret matters inside and outside the palace.

古文：渤海遂承制受御史大夫，充诸军都巡察使。
现代文：渤海国君立即封他为御史大夫，充任各军都巡察使。
English: The king of the Bohai Kingdom immediately appointed him as a goshi taifu, and he served as an inspector of each army.

古文：于是召募府县先负罪停废胥吏阴狡兔猾者得百许人，厚其官傭，以备指使。
现代文：于是，他召募了一百多个因犯罪而被罢免的阴险刁猾的官吏，给予优厚待遇，以备自己指挥使用。
English: As a result, he recruited more than a hundred sinister and cunning officials who had been removed from office for crimes, and gave them preferential treatment to prepare them for his command.

古文：各有十余丁，纵横闾巷间，谓之察子。
现代文：这些人各带十多个家丁，横行街巷，被称为察子。
English: These people, each with more than a dozen children, roam the streets and alleys, and are known as chanzi.

古文：至于士庶之家，呵妻怒子，密言隐语，莫不知之。
现代文：至于平民百姓打孩子骂老婆用的一些密言隐语，也没有他们不知道的。
English: As for the secret code words used by commoners to beat their children and abuse their wives, there is nothing they don't know.

古文：自是道路以目。
现代文：这样一来，道路两旁都如同生出眼睛一般。
English: As a result, both sides of the road are like eyes.

古文：有异己者，纵谨静端默，亦不免其祸。
现代文：他们借此机会排除异己，纵然你谨慎小心静默端坐什么话也不说，也难免遭其祸。
English: They use this as an opportunity to weed out dissent, and even if you're careful to sit quietly and not say anything, you'll still be affected.

古文：破灭者数百家。
现代文：家破人亡的共有数百户之多。
English: Hundreds of families have been destroyed.

古文：将校之中，累足屏气焉。
现代文：将校之中，大多数人都不敢出门甚至屏住了呼吸。
English: Among the officers, most were afraid to go out and even held their breath.

古文：诸葛殷
现代文：诸葛殷
English: Zhuge Yin

古文：高骈嬖吏诸葛殷，妖人吕用之之党也。
现代文：唐僖宗时，高骈有个宠吏叫诸葛殷，是妖人吕用之的死党。
English: At the time of Tang Xizong, Gao Yao had a favorite official named Zhuge Yin, who was a close ally of the sorcerer Lv Ying.

古文：初自鄱阳，将诣广陵。用之先谓骈曰：玉皇以令公久为人臣，机务稍旷，获谴于时君。辄遣左右一尊神为令公道中羽翼，不久当降。
现代文：他第一次从鄱阳去广陵，吕用之先对高骈说：玉皇大帝认为你当大臣时间太长，使一些军国大事荒搁了，他为此责怪于你；于是派遣身边的两位神仙辅佐你，很快就要降临人世。
English: The first time he went from Shenyang to Guangling, Lv Ying first said to Gao Yu: "The Jade Emperor thinks that you have been a minister for too long, causing some military and national events to be postponed, and he blames you for this; so he sent two immortals around to assist you, and they will soon come to the world."

古文：令公善遇，欲其不去，亦可以人间优职縻之。
现代文：你要好好对待他们，如果不想走，你也可以给他们安排个人间的好职位干。
English: You have to treat them well, and if they don't want to leave, you can also give them a good job.

古文：明日，殷果来。
现代文：第二天，诸葛殷果然来了。
English: The next day, Zhuge Yin did come.

古文：遂巾褐见骈于碧筠亭，妖形鬼态，辨诈蜂起，谓可以坐召神仙，立变寒暑。
现代文：他穿着破衣烂衫在碧筠亭上拜见高骈，妖模鬼样，口若悬河，说自己可以坐召神仙，马上就能使冬夏颠倒。
English: Wearing a tattered shirt, he paid a visit to a stilt on the Baguio Pavilion. He looked like a demon and spoke like a river, saying that he could summon the gods and immediately turn winter and summer upside down.

古文：骈莫测也，俾神灵遇之，谓之诸葛将军也。
现代文：高骈不知底细，把他当成神仙看待，称他为诸葛将军。
English: Gao Yao did not know the details, he regarded him as a god and called him General Zhuge.

古文：每从容酒席间，听其鬼怪之说，则尽日忘倦。
现代文：每次在酒筵间纵情畅饮，高骈听他的鬼怪之说，一天都不会感到疲倦。
English: Every time he indulges in a glass of wine, Gao Yao will not feel tired for a day listening to his ghost story.

古文：自是累迁盐铁剧职，聚财数十万缗。
现代文：从此他连任主管盐铁之要职，聚财几十万千文钱。
English: Since then, he has been reappointed to the important post of director of salt and iron, and has amassed hundreds of thousands of dollars.

古文：其凶邪阴妖，用之蔑如也。
现代文：他的凶邪阴险狡诈，使吕用之都自愧弗如。
English: His viciousness, insidiousness and cunning have made the capital city of Lvying ashamed of itself.

古文：有大贾周师儒者，其居处花木楼榭之奇，为广陵甲第。
现代文：有个大富商叫周师儒，他家中花草树木和楼榭亭台奇美无比，堪称广陵第一。
English: There was a wealthy merchant named Zhou Shiru. The flowers, plants, trees and pavilions in his home were incomparably beautiful, and could be said to be the best in Guangling.

古文：殷欲之而师儒拒焉。
现代文：诸葛殷想占为己有却遭周师儒的拒绝。
English: Zhuge Yin wanted to take possession but was rejected by Zhou Shiru.

古文：一日，殷为骈曰：府城之内，当有妖起。使其得志，非水旱兵戈之匹也。
现代文：一天，诸葛殷对高骈说：府城之中，有妖怪作祟；如果让它得逞，咱们这里非有天灾人祸不可！
English: One day, Zhuge Yin said to Gao Gan, "There is a specter haunting the capital city. If it succeeds, we must have a natural or man-made disaster here!"

古文：骈曰：为之奈何？
现代文：高骈问：这如何是好？
English: Gao Yu asked: How is this good?

古文：殷曰：当就其下建斋坛，请灵官镇之。
现代文：诸葛殷说：应当在那下面建一座斋坛，请神官除掉它！
English: Zhugeyin said, "A sacrificial altar should be built below there, please ask the priest to remove it!"

古文：殷即指师儒之第为处。
现代文：然后，他指指周师儒的家。
English: He then pointed to Zhou Shiru's home.

古文：骈命军侯驱出其家。是日雨雪骤降，泥淖方盛。
现代文：于是，高骈命手下人将周师儒从家中驱赶出来。这天，雨雪骤降，泥泞不堪。
English: As a result, Gao Yao's subordinates drove Zhou Shiru out of his home. On this day, the rain and snow suddenly fell, and the mud was unbearable.

古文：执事者鞭挞迫蹙，师儒携挈老幼，匍匐道路，观者莫不愕然。
现代文：那些奉命而来的人用皮鞭抽打逼迫，使周师儒扶老携幼，在大道上连滚带爬，围观者都感到十分惊愕。
English: Those who were ordered to come used whips to beat and persecute, making Zhou Shifu help the old and the young to crawl along the boulevard, and the onlookers were very surprised.

古文：殷迁其族而家焉。
现代文：诸葛殷将自家迁居于此。
English: Zhuge Yin moved his family here.

古文：殷足先患风疽，至是而甚。
现代文：不久，他的脚先生出一颗毒疮，越来越严重。
English: Soon, he developed a poisonous ulcer on his foot, which grew worse and worse.

古文：每一躁痒，命一青衣，交手爬搔，血流方止。
现代文：每当那毒疮躁痒起来，他便让一婢女用手挠个不停，直至流出血来为止。
English: Whenever the sore became itchy, he had a servant woman scratch it with her hands until it bled.

古文：骈性严洁，甥侄辈皆不得侍坐，唯与殷款曲，未尝不废寝忘食。
现代文：高骈有洁癖，外甥侄儿等晚辈来了都不准坐下，只对诸葛殷热情招待，甚至都废寝忘食。
English: Gao Yao has a cleanliness habit. When younger generations such as nephews and nieces come, they are not allowed to sit down. They only warmly invite Zhuge Yin. They even forget to eat and sleep.

古文：或促膝密坐，同杯共器。
现代文：有时促膝而坐，有时同杯共饮。
English: Sometimes they sit knee-to-knee, sometimes they drink together.

古文：遇其风疽忽发，即恣意搔扪，指爪之间，脓血沾染。骈与之饮啗，曾无难色。
现代文：遇到诸葛殷的毒疮忽然躁痒难忍，他尽情抓挠弄得满手脓血时，高骈跟他照样又吃又喝，脸上并无为难的神情。
English: When he encountered Zhuge Yin's poisonous sores, he suddenly felt itchy and unbearable. When he scratched his hands until they were covered with blood, Gao Yao still ate and drank with him, and there was no troubled look on his face.

古文：左右或以为言，骈曰：神仙多以此试人。汝辈莫介意也。
现代文：手下的人就说了这件事，高骈说：神仙往往都是这样考验人，你们不要介意呵！
English: One of his subordinates mentioned this, and Gao Yao said: Immortals often test people in this way, don't mind it!

古文：骈前有一犬子，每闻殷腥秽之气，则来近之。
现代文：高骈的身边有一只狗崽子，每当闻到腥秽的气味，便跑上前去。
English: Next to the stilt there is a dog-mule. Whenever it smells something foul, it runs forward.

古文：骈怪其驯狎。
现代文：高骈责怪它大过于驯顺狎昵。
English: Gao Yao accused it of being too tame.

古文：殷笑曰：某常在大罗宫玉皇前见之，别来数百年，犹复相识。
现代文：诸葛殷笑着说：我曾经在大罗宫玉皇大帝身边见过它，分别几百年了，它还认识我。
English: Zhuge Yin said with a smile: I once saw it at the side of the Jade Emperor in the Grand Palace, several hundred years apart, and it still knows me.

古文：其虚诞率多如此。
现代文：他常常是如此虚诞骄狂。
English: He was often so vain and arrogant.

古文：高虞常谓人曰：争知不是吾灭族冤家？
现代文：高骈曾经对人说：怎知道它不是灭我家族的冤家呢？
English: Gao Yao once said to a man: "How do I know that it is not my family's enemy?

古文：殷性躁虐，知扬州院来两月，官吏数百人，鞭背殆半。
现代文：诸葛殷性情急躁暴虐，管理扬州院两个月来，几百名官吏当中，有一半人挨了他的鞭子。
English: Zhuge Yin is quick-tempered and tyrannical. He has been in charge of Yangzhou Court for two months, and half of the hundreds of officials have been whipped by him.

古文：光启二年，伪朝授殷兼御史中丞，加金紫。
现代文：僖宗光启二年，后唐任命诸葛殷兼任御史中丞，加一道金印紫绶带。
English: In the second year of Emperor Gaozong Guangqi, the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Zhuge Yin to concurrently serve as the Imperial Historian, adding a gold-sealed purple ribbon.

古文：及城陷，窜至湾头，为逻者所擒。腰下获黄金数斤，通天犀带两条，既缚入城。
现代文：等到扬州城被攻陷之后，他逃窜到海边，被巡逻的士兵擒获，在他的腰间搜出好几斤黄金，还有两条通天犀带，当即将他捆入城中。
English: After the fall of Yangzhou City, he fled to the seashore and was caught by patrolling soldiers, who found several pounds of gold around his waist, as well as two sky-high rhinoceroses, and immediately bundled him into the city.

古文：百姓聚观，交唾其面，燖撮其鬓发，顷刻都尽。
现代文：老百姓前来围观，将唾沫吐到他脸上，撕扯他的头发，顷刻便拔光了。
English: Members of the public surrounded him, spat in his face, pulled out his hair and pulled it out again.

古文：狱具，刑于下马桥南，杖之百余，绞而未绝。
现代文：他被戴上刑具，关押在下马桥南，打了一百棒子，又用绳子勒但没有勒死。
English: He was put on a torture device, detained in the south of the lower horse bridge, beaten with a hundred clubs, and strangled with a rope, but not strangled.

古文：会师铎母自子城归家，经过法所，遂扶起避之，复苏于桥下。
现代文：这时正赶上师铎的母亲从扬州所属的一座小城回家，路过法场，随即扶起他躲到桥下，他才苏醒过来。
English: At this time, his mother, who was returning home from a small city belonging to Yangzhou, passed by the court and immediately helped him to hide under the bridge, and he woke up.

古文：执朴者寻以巨木踣之。
现代文：执刑的人见到他，便用大木头砸去。
English: When the executioner saw him, he smashed him with a large piece of wood.

古文：驺殿过，决罚如初。
现代文：用马车拉到大堂上重新判决，还是和当初一样。
English: With a carriage pulled to the lobby for a new verdict, it was still the same as it was at the beginning.

古文：始殷之遇也，骄暴之名，寻布於远近。
现代文：他的骄横暴虐之名，远远近近全知道了。
English: His name is known far and wide for his arrogance and brutality.

古文：其族人竞以谦损戒殷。
现代文：同族的人们竞相以谦损告戒他。
English: His compatriots rushed to admonish him.

古文：殷曰：男子患于不得遂志，既得之，当须富贵自处。
现代文：诸葛殷说：男子汉怕的是不能够实现他的志愿，既然实现了，就应该好自为之。
English: Zhuge Yin said: What a man is afraid of is not being able to realize his will. Since he has realized it, he should do it himself.

古文：人生宁有两遍死者？
现代文：一个人在一生之中，难道还有死两遍的吗？
English: Does a person have to die twice in a lifetime?

古文：至是果再行法。
现代文：果然，后来又对他再次行刑。
English: Sure enough, he was later executed again.

古文：及弃尸道左，为仇人剜其目，断其舌。
现代文：待他被弃尸路旁时，被仇人剜掉了眼珠，割断了舌头。
English: While waiting for his body to be dumped by the side of the road, his enemies gouged out his eyeballs and cut out his tongue.

古文：儿童辈以瓦砾投之，须臾成峰。
现代文：小孩子们拿起石头瓦块向他投去，很快就堆起了一座小山。
English: The children picked up stone blocks and threw them at him, quickly creating a small mountain.

古文：又高骈末年，惑于神仙之术。
现代文：又高骈到了晚年，被所谓的神仙之术弄得神魂颠倒。
English: In his later years, Gao Yao was fascinated by the so-called magic of the immortals.

古文：吕用之、张守一、诸葛殷等，皆言能役鬼神，变化黄金。骈酷信之，遂委以政事。
现代文：吕用之、张守一、诸葛殷等人，都说自己能够召神唤鬼，变出黄金，高骈深信不疑，当即都委任以官职。
English: Lyu Ying Zhi, Zhang Shou I, Zhuge Yin and others all said that they could summon gods and ghosts and conjure up gold. Gao Yao was so convinced that he immediately appointed them to official positions.

古文：用之等援引朋党，恣为不法。
现代文：吕用之等勾结朋党，胡作非为。
English: Lv Yizhi and others colluded with their cronies to commit illegal acts.

古文：其后亦虑多言者有所漏泄，因谓骈曰：高真上圣，要降非难。
现代文：后来，他也担心话多语失泄露秘密，所以对高骈说：高真上圣，将要非难于我们。
English: Later, he was also worried that talking too much would reveal the secret, so he said to Gao Yu: "It will be difficult for us to make Gao Zhen go to the temple.

古文：所患者，学道之人，真气稍亏，灵咒遂绝。
现代文：所令人忧虑的是，学道之人真气亏损，灵咒也随之失去效力。
English: What is worrisome is that those who learn the Tao will lose their sincerity, and their mantras will lose their effectiveness.

古文：骈闻之，以为信然，乃谢绝人事，屏弃妾媵。
现代文：高骈听了此言，信以为真，便谢绝人世间的事情，把爱妾们也抛到一边。
English: Gao Yao heard this and believed it to be true, so he renounced worldly affairs and cast aside his concubines.

古文：宾客将吏，无复见之。
现代文：从此，宾客和他的部下，就再也看不到他了。
English: From then on, the guest and his men never saw him again.

古文：有不得已之故，则遣人先浴斋戒，诣紫极宫道士被除不祥，谓之解秽，然后见之。
现代文：有迫不得已的原因，便派人先进去为他沐浴斋戒，再到紫极宫请道士除凶消灾，称之为解秽，然后才能与人相见。
English: As a last resort, they sent someone to bathe and fast for him first, and then went to the Purple Palace to ask a Taoist priest to remove the evil and eliminate the disaster, calling it decontamination, before they could meet each other.

古文：拜起才终，已复引出。
现代文：可当你礼拜后刚刚站起来，便又被人领出门去。
English: But as soon as you stand up after prayers, you are ushered out the door again.

古文：自此内外拥隔。纪纲日紊。
现代文：从此他与世隔绝，纲纪日见紊乱。
English: Since then, he has been isolated from the world, and his discipline has become increasingly disordered.

古文：用之等因大行威福，傍若无人，岁月既深，根蒂遂固。
现代文：吕用之等人于是作威作福，旁若无人，时间一长，他们便站稳了脚跟，根基逐渐稳固。
English: Lv Yizhi and the others then took the initiative to do good, if there was no one around, after a long time, they stood firm, and the foundation gradually stabilized.

古文：用之自谓磻溪真君、张守一是赤松子、诸葛殷称将军。
现代文：吕用之自称磻溪真君，张守一是赤松子，诸葛殷是将军。
English: Lyu Yingzhi called himself Shunxi Zhenjun, Zhang Shouyi was Akamatsu Zi, and Zhuge Yin was the general.

古文：有一萧胜者，谓之秦穆公附马。皆云上帝遣来，为令公道侣。
现代文：有一个叫萧胜的人，自称是当年秦穆公的驸马，都说他是上天派下来为高骈做道路之神的。
English: There was a man named Xia Sheng, who claimed to be Qin Mu Gong's steed that year, and said that he was sent down from heaven to be the god of the road for Gao Gan.

古文：其鄙诞不经，率皆如此。
现代文：此人粗俗不堪，说的话荒诞不经，随随便便的跟吕用之等人完全一样。
English: This person is vulgar, his words are absurd, and he is just like Lyu Yingzhi and others.

古文：江阳县前一地祗小庙，用之贫贱时，常与妻止其舍。
现代文：江阴县外有一座小土地庙，吕用之贫贱之时，曾经与妻子在这里居住。
English: There is a small land temple outside Jiangyin County. When Lü Yizhi was poor, he used to live here with his wife.

古文：凡所动静，祷而后行。
现代文：不论做什么事情，都要先祷告一番再行动。
English: Whatever you do, pray before you act.

古文：得志后，谓为冥助，遂修崇之。
现代文：得志之后，吕用之说是得到了阴间神灵的帮助，于是在这里重修了庙宇。
English: After the victory, Lyu Yingzhi said that he had received help from the gods of the underworld, so he rebuilt the temple here.

古文：回廊曲室，妆楼寝殿，百有余间。
现代文：回廊曲室，妆楼寝殿，一共有一百多间。
English: There are more than a hundred rooms in total, including the music room in the corridor and the bedroom in the dressing room.

古文：土木工师，尽江南之选。
现代文：土木工匠，全是从整个江南挑选来的。
English: Civil engineers were selected from all over the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：每军旅大事，则以少牢祀之。
现代文：每当遇到军旅大事，则要杀猪宰羊祭祀。
English: Whenever there is a major military event, pigs should be slaughtered and sheep sacrificed.

古文：用之、守一，皆云神遇。
现代文：吕用之、张守一都说自己与神相遇过。
English: Lyu Yingzhi and Zhang Shou all said that they had encountered God.

古文：骈凡有密请，即遣二人致意焉。
现代文：高骈凡是得到亲近人的邀请，他便派吕、张二位前去应付。
English: Whenever Gao Wei received an invitation from someone close to him, he would send Lü and Zhang forward to deal with it.

古文：中和元年，用之以神仙好楼居，请于公廨邸北，跨河为迎仙楼。
现代文：唐僖宗中和元年，吕用之以神仙好在楼里居住为由，请求在公廨北边的官邸，跨河修造一座迎仙楼。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty and the first year of the 21st century, Lyu Ying, on the grounds that it was good for the gods to live in the building, requested that a welcoming hall be built across the river from the official residence on the north side of Gongye.

古文：其斤斧之声，昼夜不绝，费数万缗，半岁方就。
现代文：斧头声昼夜不停，耗资一万千文钱，半年才修成。
English: The sound of the axe is heard day and night, and it took six months to build, at a cost of 10,000 yuan.

古文：自成至败。
现代文：从修成到毁坏。
English: From construction to destruction.

古文：竟不一游。
现代文：竟然没有来过一次。
English: I haven't been there even once.

古文：扃鐍俨然，以至灰烬。
现代文：最后却化成了灰烬。
English: In the end, it was reduced to ashes.

古文：是冬，又起延和阁于大厅之西，凡七间，高八丈，皆饰以珠玉，绮窗绣户，殆非人工。
现代文：这年冬天，又在大厅西侧建起一座延和阁，共七间，八丈高，全装饰上珠玉。门窗也用绸缎作帘，几乎不像人工所做。
English: This winter, another Yanhe pavilion was built on the west side of the hall, with a total of seven rooms, eight stories high, all decorated with jewels. The doors and windows were also made of satin, almost like they were made by hand.

古文：每旦，焚名香，列异宝，以祈王母之降。
现代文：每天早晨，都要烧名香，摆奇珍异宝，祈求王母娘娘降福。
English: Every morning, they should burn famous incense, display rare and precious treasures, and pray for the blessing of the Queen Mother.

古文：及师铎乱，人有登之者，于藻井垂莲之上，见二十八字云：延和高阁上干云，小语犹疑太乙闻。
现代文：等到师铎之乱时，有人登上阁去，在藻井的垂帘之上看见了二十八个字，写的是：延和高阁上干云，小语犹疑太乙闻。
English: At the time of the Shishu Disturbance, someone went up to the pavilion and saw twenty-eight words on the curtain of the moss well. It was written: "On the pavilion, there are dry clouds, and the small words are too hesitant to hear."

古文：烧尽降真无一事。开门迎得毕将军。
现代文：烧尽降真无一事，开门迎得毕将军。
English: It's no big deal if you burn out and get relegated. Open the door and welcome General Bi.

古文：此近诗妖也。
现代文：这差不多是一首妖诗呵。
English: It's almost like a fairy tale.

古文：用之公然云：与上仙来往。
现代文：吕用之公然说：我们与天上的神仙来往，每次都是当着高骈的面进行的。
English: Lyu Yanzhi openly said, "Our dealings with the heavenly spirits are always conducted in front of Gao Yao.

古文：左右稍有异论，则死不旋踵矣。见者莫测其由，但搏膺不敢出口。
现代文：有时他们呼风唤雨，高骈向空中作揖，并说看见仙人们走远了，随即就跪地下拜吕用之比比划划，一点都不害羞。周围稍有异论，他的死期就不远了，观看的人们不知道这是什么原因，一个个气愤不已却不敢说话。
English: Sometimes they call for wind and rain, the stilt flies into the air, and says that he saw the fairies go far away, and then kneeled down to pay homage to them, not at all shy. There is a little dissent around, his death is not far away, the people watching do not know what the reason is, one by one angry but dare not speak.

古文：用之忽云：后土夫人灵仇，遣使就某借兵马，并李筌所撰《太白阴经》。
现代文：吕用之忽然说：后土夫人与我相好，派特使向我借兵马，还有李筌所撰写的《太白阴经》。
English: Lv Yizhi suddenly said, "Lady Hou Tu is friendly with me. She sent an envoy to borrow soldiers and horses from me, as well as the "Taibai Yin Jing" written by Li Xuan.

古文：骈遽下两县，率百姓苇席数千领，画作甲兵之状，遣用之于庙庭烧之。
现代文：高骈立即派人下到两个县里，领百姓编了几千领苇席，并在上面画上兵士的模样，派吕用之到庙庭上把它们烧掉。
English: Gao Yao immediately sent people down to the two counties, led the people to make thousands of lanterns, painted soldiers on them, and sent Lu to use them to burn them in the temple courtyard.

古文：又以五彩笺写《太白阴经》十道，置于神座之侧。
现代文：又把《太白阴经》中的十道写在五彩笺上，放到神像身边。
English: He also wrote the Ten Precepts from the Tai Bai Yin Jing on a five-color inkstand and placed it next to the statue of the god.

古文：又于夫人帐中塑一绿衣年少，谓之韦郎。
现代文：接着，又派人在后土夫人像傍塑造出一个绿衣少年，称之为韦郎。
English: Next, someone was sent to sculpt a green-clad boy next to the portrait of Lady Houdo, and he was called Wei Lang.

古文：庙成，有人于西庑栋上题一长句，诗曰：四海干戈尚未宁，谩劳淮海写仪刑。
现代文：庙修成了，有人在西侧房栋上题了一首长句，说道：四海干戈尚未宁，谩劳淮海写仪刑。
English: After the construction of the temple was completed, someone inscribed a long sentence on the west side of the building, saying: "The four seas have not yet been conquered, and it is the labor of the Huaihai to write the ritual punishment."

古文：九天玄女犹无信，后土夫人岂有灵。
现代文：九天玄女犹无信，后土夫人岂有灵。
English: For nine days, Hyunjo still had no faith. Did Lady Houchi have a soul?

古文：一带好云侵鬓绿，两行嵬岫拂眉清。
现代文：一带好云侵鬓绿，两行嵬岫拂眉清。
English: A band of fine clouds encroached on the green, and two lines of clouds whisked the brow.

古文：韦郎年少耽闲事，案上休夸《太白经》。
现代文：韦郎年少耽闲事，案上休夸太白经。
English: Wei Lang is too young to be distracted, and the case is too vague.

古文：好事者竞相传诵。
现代文：好事之徒竞相传诵。
English: Good-doers compete to recite it.

古文：是岁，诏于广陵立骈生祠，并刻石颂。
现代文：这年，皇帝下诏令在广陵建立一应高骈生祠，并在石头上刻写颂词。
English: In the same year, the emperor issued a decree to build a memorial to Gao Xing Sheng in Guangling, and inscribed a eulogy on the stone.

古文：差州人采碑石于宣城。
现代文：于是，州里的百姓便被派到宣城采集碑石。
English: As a result, people from the prefecture were sent to Xuancheng to collect the stones.

古文：及至扬子院，用之一夜遣人密以健牯五十牵至州南，凿垣架濠，移入城内。
现代文：这些碑石运到扬子院，吕用之当天晚上就派人偷偷用五十头健牛把它拖到了州府南头，穿城墙越过护城河，转移到了城内。
English: These stele stones were transported to Yangzi Court, and on the evening of the same day that Lu used them, he secretly sent someone with fifty head of beef cattle to drag it to the southern end of the state capital, through the city wall, across the moat, and into the city.

古文：及明，栅缉如故。
现代文：等到天亮之后，栅栏等又恢复了原样。
English: After the dawn, the fence and so on were restored to their original state.

古文：因令扬子县申府，昨夜碑石不知所在。遂悬购之。
现代文：于是，吕用之让扬子县令申报州府，说碑石在一夜之间不知去向，随即悬赏购之。
English: As a result, Lv Yanzi County ordered Lv Yanzi County to report to the state capital, saying that the stele did not know where to go overnight, and then offered a reward for its purchase.

古文：至晚云，被神人移置街市。
现代文：到晚些时候才听说，那碑石已被人移到了街市之上。
English: It was only later that I heard that the monument had been moved to the top of the market.

古文：骈大惊，乃于其傍立一大木柱，上以金书云：不因人力，自然而至。
现代文：高骈大吃一惊，就派人在碑石旁竖起一根大木柱，上面用金字写道：不因人力，自然而至。
English: Takahata was so surprised that he sent someone to erect a large wooden pillar next to the monument, on which he wrote in gold letters: "Not by human power, but by nature."

古文：即令两都出兵仗鼓乐，迎入碧筠亭。
现代文：当即令两个都府派出兵仗队和鼓乐，将碑石迎进碧筠亭。
English: Immediately, the two prefectures sent military guards and drum music to welcome the monument into Baguette Pavilion.

古文：至三桥拥闹之处，故埋石以碍之，伪云：人牛拽不动。
现代文：到了三桥最拥挤之处，由于被埋的石头阻碍着，便谎称说：人和牛都拽不动呵！
English: When they got to the most crowded part of Sanqiao, they lied and said that they couldn't move because of the stones.

古文：骈乃朱篆数字，帖于碑上，须臾去石乃行。
现代文：高骈便提笔写了几个红色的篆字，贴到碑石上，一会儿那石头就动了。
English: Gao Yao took a pen and wrote a few red scribbles, pasted them on the stone, and in a moment the stone moved.

古文：观者互相谓曰：碑动也。
现代文：围观者互相传说：碑石动了！
English: Onlookers told each other: The stele has moved!

古文：识者恶之。
现代文：有见识的人对此十分厌恶。
English: Sensible people abhor it.

古文：明日，扬子有一村妪，诣知府判官陈牒，云：夜来里胥借耕牛牵碑，误损其足。
现代文：第二天，扬子县有一个农村老太婆，到知府判官那里呈上一份状子，说：昨天里胥到我家借耕牛拖碑石，误伤了牛腿。
English: The next day, a rural old woman in Yangzi County went to the magistrate of the prefectural government to submit a complaint, saying: Yesterday, she ran to my house to borrow a cow to drag a stone monument, and accidentally injured the cow's leg.

古文：远近闻之，莫不绝倒。
现代文：周围的人们听到了，都笑弯了腰。
English: People around heard it and bent over with laughter.

古文：比至失守，师铎之众，竟至坏墉而进。
现代文：等到该城失守，师铎的兵马竟从坏墙处蜂拥而入。
English: When the city was lost, the soldiers and horses of the division actually swarmed in from the broken wall.

古文：常与丞相郑公不叶，用之知之，忽曰：适得上仙书，宰执之间，有阴图令公者。
现代文：高骈曾经与郑丞相不融洽，吕用之知道这件事。他忽然对高骈说道：我刚才得到天上神仙的书信，说宰相们之中，有人要暗害于你。
English: Gao Yao had been at odds with Premier Zheng Rong, and Lü Yizhong knew about it. He suddenly said to Gao Yao, "I have just received a letter from the heavenly deities, saying that among the prime ministers, someone wants to harm you.

古文：使一侠士来，夜当至。
现代文：他派了一个侠士，今晚该到了。
English: He's sent a knight. He should be here tonight.

古文：骈惊悸不已，问计于用之。
现代文：高骈又惊又怕，向吕用之询问对策。
English: Takahata was both alarmed and afraid, and asked Lyu about countermeasures.

古文：曰：张先生少年时，尝学斯术于深井里聂夫人。近日不知更为之否？
现代文：吕用之说：张守一少年的时候，曾经跟深井里的聂夫人学过一门道术，近日不知是否更加精深？
English: Lyu Yanzhi said: When Zhang Shou was a young man, he once learned a Taoist technique from Lady Zou in a deep well. I don't know if it is more profound these days.

古文：若有，但请此人当之，无不齑粉若。
现代文：如果是这样，只要请他出来抵挡，非把对方击成粉末不可！
English: If that's the case, just ask him to come out and resist, and you'll have no choice but to beat your opponent into a pulp!

古文：骈立召守一语之。
现代文：高骈立即召来张守一，把意图跟他说了。
English: Gao Yao immediately summoned Zhang Shouyi and told him of his intention.

古文：对曰：老夫久不为此戏，手足生疏。然为令公，有何不可？
现代文：张守一回答说：我好长时间没练此道了，手脚生疏；但是为了您，有什么不可以的呢？
English: Zhang Shouyi replied: I have not practiced this way for a long time, my hands and feet are rusty; but for you, what is not allowed?

古文：及期衣妇人衣，匿于别室。
现代文：时辰临近时，他穿上女人的衣服，藏在高骈爱妾的房间。
English: As the hour approached, he put on women's clothes and hid in Gao Yao's mistress's room.

古文：守一寝于骈卧内。
现代文：张守一睡在高骈的卧室之内。
English: Zhang Shouyi sleeps in Gao Yao's bedroom.

古文：至夜分，掷一铜铁于阶砌之上，铿然有声。
现代文：到了半夜时分，他把一颗铜铁扔到了石阶之上，发出铿然的声响。
English: At midnight, he threw a piece of copper and iron onto the stone steps, making a loud noise.

古文：遂出皮囊中彘血。洒于庭户檐宇间，如格斗之状。
现代文：接着，他从皮囊中拿出狗血，洒在门窗和房檐之间，像是经过一番格斗的样子。
English: Next, he took the dog's blood from the bag and sprinkled it between the door, window and eaves, as if after a fight.

古文：明日，骈泣谢守一曰：蒙先公再生之恩。真枯骨重肉矣。
现代文：第二天，高骈哭着向张守一道谢说：蒙先生再生之恩，我真是起死回生呵！
English: The next day, Gao Wei cried and thanked Zhang Shou, saying, "Thanks to Mr. Meng's regeneration, I really came back to life!"

古文：乃躬辇金玉及通天犀带以酬其劳。
现代文：就躬下身子献上黄金珠玉及通天犀带，作为酬谢。
English: He bowed down and offered the golden jewel and the rhinoceros ribbon to Tsuten, as a reward.

古文：江阳县尉薛，失其名，亦用之党也。
现代文：江阳县有个薛县尉，忘记了他的名字，也是吕用之的死党。
English: There was a Xue County lieutenant in Jiangyang County, I have forgotten his name, who was also a close ally of Lü Yingzhi.

古文：忽一日告骈曰：夜来因巡警，至后土庙前，见无限阴兵。其中一人云： 为我告高王，夫人使我将兵数百万于此界游奕，幸王无虑他寇之侵轶也。
现代文：忽然有一天，他告诉高骈说：昨天晚上我去巡警，到了后土夫人庙前，发现了无数阴兵，其中一个说： 请替我们转告高骈，后土夫人派来数百万兵将在这个地方巡逻，使他不用担心贼寇入侵呵。
English: Suddenly, one day, he told Gao Yao: "Yesterday evening, I went to the patrol, and when I arrived in front of the Hou Tu Lady Temple, I found countless Yin soldiers. One of them said: "Please tell Gao Yao for us, the Hou Tu Lady has sent millions of soldiers to patrol this place, so he doesn't have to worry about the invasion of thieves."

古文：言毕而没。
现代文：说完，便销声匿迹。
English: That's it.

古文：群妖闻之大喜悦，竞以金帛遗之。
现代文：那伙妖人听了十分欢喜，竞相把金银布帛赠送给这位薛县尉。
English: The group of goblins were very happy to hear this, and competed to give gold and silver cloths to the Xue County lieutenant.

古文：未久，奏薛六合县令。
现代文：不久，高骈奏报朝廷封薛县尉为六合县县令。
English: Soon after, Gao Yu's report to the imperial court made Xue County Lieutenant the county magistrate of Liuhe County.

古文：用之又以木刻一大人足，长三尺五寸。
现代文：吕用之又用木头刻了一只巨人脚，三尺五寸多长。
English: Lü Yizhi also carved a giant's foot with wood, more than three feet and five inches long.

古文：时久雨初霁，夜印于后土庙殿后柏林中，及江阳县前，其迹如较力之状。
现代文：当时久雨初晴，晚上他在后土夫人庙的大殿后面柏树林中，印上了巨人的脚印，一直印到江阳县衙门前，那脚印呈现拼搏之状。
English: At that time, it had been raining for a long time. In the evening, he printed the giant's footprints in the cypress forest behind the main hall of the Houtu Lady Temple, all the way to the Jiangyang County Gate. The footprints looked like a struggle.

古文：明日，用之谓骈曰：夜来有神人斗于夫人庙中。用之夜遣阴兵逐之，已过江矣。
现代文：第二天，吕用之对高骈说：昨天晚上有神仙来到后土夫人庙中相斗，我派遣阴兵把他们赶跑了，已经过江而去了。
English: The next day, Lü Yizhi said to Gao Yao: "Yesterday evening, some gods and goddesses came to fight each other in the Houtu Lady Temple. I sent Yin soldiers to chase them away, and they have already crossed the river.

古文：不尔，广陵几为洪涛，骈骇然。遂以黄金二十斤，以饷用之。
现代文：不久，广陵几乎被洪水淹没，高骈十分惊恐，当即拿出二十斤黄金赠给吕用之。
English: Soon, Guangling was almost submerged by the flood. Gao Yao was very alarmed and immediately took out twenty pounds of gold to give to Lü Ying.

古文：后骈有所爱马死，园人惧得罪，求救于用之。
现代文：后来，高骈有一匹爱马死了，喂马的人怕由此获罪，向吕用之求救。
English: Later, a beloved horse in Gaochun died, and the person who had been feeding the horse, fearing that he would be blamed, asked Lv Ying for help.

古文：用之乃又见骈曰：隋将陈杲仁，用之有事命至淮东。果仁诉以无马，令公大乌且望一借。
现代文：吕用之就又去拜见高骈，说：隋朝的大将陈果仁，我命令他到淮东办一件事情，他说没有马；并说知道你有一匹大乌马，希望能借给他一用。
English: Lü Yizhi went to see Gao Yao again and said: Chen Guoren, the general of the Sui Dynasty, I ordered him to go to Huadong to do something. He said that he did not have a horse. He also said that he knew you had a big horse and hoped to lend it to him.

古文：顷刻，厩吏报云：大乌黑汗发。
现代文：顷刻，管马厩的小官来报告说，大乌马身上直冒黑汗，怕是不行了。
English: All of a sudden, the small official in charge of the stables came to report that the horse was sweating profusely, and he was afraid he wouldn't be able to continue.

古文：骈徐应之曰：吾已借大司徒矣。
现代文：高骈缓缓地点点头说：我已经借给大司徒了。
English: Gao Yao nodded slowly and said, "I have already lent it to Daishi."

古文：俄而告毙。
现代文：那马一会就死了。
English: That horse will be dead in no time.

古文：初萧胜纳财于用之，求知盐城监。
现代文：起初，萧胜向吕用之行贿，谋求当盐城监司。
English: At first, Xiao Sheng bribed Lv Ying to become the supervisor of Yancheng.

古文：骈以当任者有绩，与夺之间，颇有难色。
现代文：高骈认为当任者有政绩，考虑定夺之际，颇有为难之色。
English: Gao Yao believes that the incumbent has political achievements, and it is quite a dilemma when considering the decision.

古文：用之曰：用胜为盐城者，不为胜也。
现代文：吕用之说：用萧胜当盐城监司，不算破格任用呵。
English: Lyu Yanzhi said: using Xia Sheng as the supervisor of Yancheng is not an unprecedented appointment.

古文：昨得上仙书云： 有一宝剑在盐城井中，须用灵官取之。
现代文：昨天我收到天上神仙写来的书信说，盐城的井里有一把宝剑，但必须用灵官才能把它取出来。
English: Yesterday, I received a letter from a celestial deity saying that there was a sword in the well in Yancheng, but it had to be retrieved by a spiritualist.

古文：以胜上仙左右人，欲遣去耳。
现代文：萧胜作为神仙身边的人，应该派他去呵。
English: Xiao Sheng, as a person who is close to the immortal, should be sent there.

古文：骈俯仰许之。
现代文：高骈听他这么一说，点头应允。
English: Gao Yao listened to what he had to say and nodded in agreement.

古文：胜至监数月，遂匣一铜匕首献于骈。用之稽首曰：此北帝所佩者也。得之则百里之内，五兵不敢犯。
现代文：萧胜到盐城几个月后，将一把铜匕首装在匣子里敬献给高骈，吕用之点头说：这是北帝所佩带的呵，得到它的人在百里之内，五种兵器都不敢碰它。
English: A few months after Xiao Sheng arrived in Yancheng, he placed a bronze dagger in a box and dedicated it to Gao Yao. Lu nodded and said, "This is what the Northern Emperor wore. People within a hundred miles of getting it wouldn't dare touch it with five kinds of weapons."

古文：骈甚异之，遂饰以宝玉，常置座隅。
现代文：高骈十分惊异高兴，在剑上镶嵌上宝玉，常常放在自己坐椅旁边。
English: Gao Yao was very surprised and happy. The sword was inlaid with precious stones and was often placed next to his chair.

古文：时广陵久雨，用之谓骈曰：此地当有火灾，郭邑之间，悉合灰烬。
现代文：当时广陵久雨不停，吕用之对高骈说：这地方应该有一场火灾，城内将化为一片灰烬。
English: At that time, it had been raining in Guangling for a long time, and Lü Yizhi said to Gao Gan: There should be a fire in this place, and the city would be reduced to ashes.

古文：近日遣金山下毒龙，以少雨濡之。
现代文：这两天我派金山下的毒龙，用小雨润润地。
English: In the past two days, I have sent poisonous dragons under the Jinshan Mountain to moisten the ground with light rain.

古文：自此虽无大段烧爇，亦未免小小惊动也。
现代文：这样一来虽然没有火灾，也难免受到小小的惊忧。
English: In this way, although there is no fire, it is inevitable to be a little worried.

古文：于是用之每夜密遣人纵火，荒祠坏宇，无复存者。
现代文：于是，吕用之每天晚上都悄悄派人放火，荒毁的庙宇便成了牺牲品，一座都没有幸存下来。
English: As a result, Lü Yanzhi quietly sent people to set fires every night, and the ruined temples became the victims. None of them survived.

古文：骈当授道家秘法，用之、守一无增焉。
现代文：高骈应该接受道家的秘法了，然而吕用之、张守一却没有什么长进。
English: Gao Yao should have accepted the secret of Taoism, but Lu Yizhi and Zhang Shouyi did not make any progress.

古文：因刻一青石，如手扳状，隐起龙蛇，近成文字：玉皇授白云先生高骈，潜使左右置安道院香几上。
现代文：于是，他们把一块大青石头，刻成用手扭过的样子，隐隐约约可以看见蜿蜒盘曲的文字：玉皇大帝授高骈为白云先生，潜使左右置安道院香几上。
English: As a result, they carved a large blue stone into the shape of a hand twisted, and vaguely you can see the sinuous text: The Jade Emperor awarded Mr. Baiyun with a high gong, and placed the imperial envoy on the left and right of the Andoin incense burner.

古文：骈见之，不胜惊喜。
现代文：高骈看见了，不胜惊喜。
English: Gao Yao was surprised when he saw it.

古文：用之曰：玉皇以令公焚修功著，特有是命。
现代文：吕用之说：玉皇大帝念你焚香修德功绩显著，才有了这样的命运。
English: Lyu Yanzhi said, "The Jade Emperor wishes you to burn incense to cultivate virtue. It is only because of your outstanding achievements that you have such a fate."

古文：计其鸾鹤，不久当降。
现代文：估计他派来的鸾凤和仙鹤，不久也该到了。
English: He reckoned that the chrysanthemums and cranes he had sent should be arriving soon.

古文：某等此际谪限已满，便应得陪幢节，同归真境也。
现代文：我们几个这次在凡间的期限已满，应该陪着你的大驾，同归仙境呵。
English: Several of us have reached the end of our time here on earth, and we should accompany you on your journey back to fairyland.

古文：他日瑶池席上，亦是人间一故事。
现代文：将来有一天，咱们在瑶池宴上相逢，这不也是人世间的一段故事吗？
English: One day in the future, we will meet at the Dianchi Lake banquet. Isn't this also a story of the human world?

古文：言毕，欢笑不已。
现代文：说完，狂笑不已。
English: He finished, laughing maniacally.

古文：遂相与登延和阁，命酒肴，极欢而罢。
现代文：随即，他们相互搀扶着登上了延和阁，命人摆上酒菜，酒足饭饱方肯罢休。
English: Immediately afterwards, they helped each other to board the Yanhe Pavilion, ordering people to serve wine and food, and they were willing to stop eating and drinking as much as possible.

古文：后于道院庭中，刻木为鹤，大如小驷，鞍辔中设机捩，人或逼之，奋然飞动。
现代文：接着，又在道院庭中用木头刻起仙鹤来，如同小马一样大小，鞍垫下和缰绳上安好机关，他们逼近阁台，奋臂飞动。
English: Then, in the courtyard of the Taoist temple, they carved cranes out of wood, as big as small horses, and secured the apparatus under the saddle pad and on the reins. They approached the loft and flew with all their might.

古文：骈尝羽服跨之，仰视空阔，有飘然之思矣。
现代文：高骈尝试着穿上仙衣跨了上去，仰望天空，有飘然欲仙、心旷神怡之感。
English: Gao Yao tried to put on a fairy dress and straddled up, looking up at the sky, with a feeling of fluttering desire for fairies and a sense of joy.

古文：自是严斋醮，飞炼金丹。
现代文：从此更加严格地遵守斋戒，虔心敬神，炼制金丹，妄想一日成为飞仙。
English: Since then, he has been more strictly observing fasting, devoutly worshiping God, refining jade, and dreaming of becoming a flying fairy one day.

古文：费耗资财，动逾万计。日居月诸，竟无其验。
现代文：耗资巨大，动辄万计，日积月累，竟然一点也不灵验。
English: The cost is huge, the plans are ever-changing, the days and months are piling up, and it's not working at all.

古文：董昌
现代文：董昌
English: Dong Chang

古文：董昌未僭前，有山阴县老人，伪上言于昌曰：今大王善政及人，愿万岁帝于越，以福兆庶。
现代文：董昌没有僭越起事之前，山阴县有位老人，矫作地上书给董昌说：你今天的仁政使得人人受惠，祝愿你早日登基，为民造福。
English: Prior to the uprising, an old man in Shanyin County wrote a letter to Dong Chang, saying: Your benevolent government today has benefited everyone. I wish you to ascend to the throne as soon as possible for the benefit of the people.

古文：三十年前，已闻谣言，正合今日，故来献。
现代文：三十年前就听到那首民谣了，与今天之事正相符合，所以来敬献给你。
English: I heard that ballad 30 years ago, and it's so relevant today, so I'd like to dedicate it to you.

古文：其言曰： 欲识圣人姓，千里草青青。欲知圣人名，日人曰上生。
现代文：那民谣说： 欲识圣人姓，千里草青青；欲知圣人名，日从曰上升。
English: The ballad says: If you want to know a saint's surname, you have to travel thousands of miles; if you want to know a saint's name, you have to go up from day to day.

古文：昌得之大喜，因谓曰：天命早已归我，我所为大矣。
现代文：董昌听罢大喜，便对老人说：天命早已归我，天下我为大人。
English: Hearing this, Dong Chang was overjoyed and said to the old man: "The fate of the world has already fallen to me. I am an adult.

古文：乃赠老人百缣，仍免其征赋。
现代文：就赠给老人一百疋双丝细绢，还免掉了他的税赋。
English: He gave the old man a hundred pairs of silk stockings and exempted him from paying taxes.

古文：先遣道士朱思远立坛场，候上帝。
现代文：董昌先派朱思远道士设立坛场，迎候上帝。
English: Dong Chang first sent Zhu Siyuan Taoist to set up an altar to welcome God.

古文：忽一夕云，天符降于雨中，有碧纸朱文，其文又不可识。
现代文：忽然一天空中飘来乌云，天符降落到雨中，箓纸上写着红字，那字却不好认。
English: All of a sudden, a dark cloud floated into the sky, a celestial beacon fell into the rain, and a scarlet letter was written on a piece of paper, but it was hard to recognize.

古文：思远言天命命与董氏。
现代文：朱思远说，那上面写的是天命命于董氏六个字。
English: Zhu Siyuan said that what was written on it was the six words of the "Mandate of Heaven" to Mr. Dong.

古文：又有王守真者，欲谓之王百艺，极机巧。
现代文：又有一个叫王守真的人，老百姓称他王百艺，非常机智灵巧。
English: There was also a man named Wang Shuzhen, whom the common people called Wang Baiyi, who was very clever and dexterous.

古文：初立生祠，雕刻形像。
现代文：他开始进入一个新庙宇，就雕刻佛像，摹仿官府的样子画上殿堂楼阁。
English: He began to enter a new temple, he carved Buddha statues, and painted the palace pavilion to imitate the appearance of the government.

古文：塑续官属，及设兵卫，状若鬼神，皆百艺所为也。
现代文：塑续官属，设造的卫士兵卒，状貌如同鬼神一般。这全是王百艺所干的。
English: The officials and subordinates, and the soldiers of the Imperial Guard, all of whom were created by Wang Baiyi, look like ghosts and gods.

古文：妖伪之际，悉由百艺幻惑所致。
现代文：妖伪者们经常聚集在一起，也全是由于王百艺妖言惑众所致。
English: Hypocrites often gather together, and it's all because of Wang Baiyi's sorcery.

古文：昌每言：我兔子上金床谶我也。
现代文：董昌每次说： 兔子上金床 ，预示了我的命运。
English: Every time Dong Chang said, "The rabbit on the anvil," it foreshadowed my fate.

古文：我卯生，来年岁在卯，二月二日亦卯，即卯年卯月卯日，仍当以卯时。
现代文：我是卯年生的，来年是卯年，二月二日也是卯月卯日，即卯年卯月卯日，还应当在卯时。
English: I was born in the year of the rooster, next year is the year of the rooster, February 2nd is also the day of the rooster, that is, the day of the rooster, it should also be in the rooster time.

古文：万世之业，利在于此。
现代文：我的千秋万代的宏图大业，只有在此开始才最为有利。
English: It is only at this point that my great and ever-changing career begins to be most advantageous.

古文：乾宁二年，二月二日，率军俗数万人，僣衮冕仪卫，登子城门楼，赦境内，改伪号罗平国，年号天册，自称圣人。
现代文：唐昭宗乾宁二年二月二日，董昌率领士兵及百姓好几万人，举行隆重加冕仪式后起事，登上了内城的门楼，在境内实行大赦，建立罗平国，年号为天册。
English: On February 2, the second year of Tang Zhaozong Qianning, Dong Chang led tens of thousands of soldiers and people to rise up after a grand coronation ceremony, climbed the gate tower of the inner city, implemented an amnesty in the territory, and established Luoping Province. The year is the heavenly book.

古文：及令官属将校等，皆呼圣人万岁。
现代文：他自称圣人，并命令所属官兵百姓等，全都得喊圣人万岁。
English: He called himself a saint and ordered his officers, soldiers and people to shout "Long live the saint."

古文：俯而言曰。词毕，复欲舞蹈。
现代文：一次董昌在殿上饮酒作乐，手下人俯首说道：祝词已经说完了，是否再来段舞蹈？
English: Once, when Dong Chang was drinking and making music in the hall, his subordinates bowed their heads and said, "The speech is over. Will there be another dance?"

古文：昌乃连声止之：卿道得许多言语，压得朕头疼也。
现代文：董昌连声制止，说：你讲了这么多话，把我的头都压疼了！
English: Dong Chang stopped him and said, "You've said so much, my head hurts!"

古文：时人闻，皆大笑之。
现代文：当时人们听了，全都大笑起来。
English: When people heard that, they all burst out laughing.

