古文：李少君孔元方王烈焦先孙登吕文敬沈建
现代文：李少君孔元方王烈焦先孙登吕文敬沈建
English: Li Shaojun, Kong Yuanfang, Wang Liejiao, Deng Lvwen, Jing Shenjian

古文：李少君
现代文：李少君
English: Li Shaojun

古文：李少君者，齐人也。
现代文：李少君是山东人。
English: Li Shaojun is from Shandong Province.

古文：汉武帝召募方士。
现代文：汉武帝因为好道术招募天下懂道术的方士。
English: Emperor Hanwu, because of good Daoism, recruited the world's most knowledgeable Daoists.

古文：少君于安期先生得神丹炉火之方，家贫，不能办药，谓弟子曰： 老将至矣，而财不足，虽躬耕力作，不足以致办。
现代文：李少君在先秦时代著名方士安期先生那里得到了炼丹的秘方，但由于家里穷，买不起炼丹的金石原料和草药，就对弟子们说： 我又老又穷，就是再卖力气地种田，也凑不上买药炼丹的钱。
English: In the pre-Qin era, Li Shaojun obtained the secret recipe for the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the elixir of the

古文：今天子好道，欲往见之，求为合药，可得恣意。 
现代文：听说当今天子汉武帝爱好道术，我想去朝见他，求皇帝和我一起炼丹，皇上一定会很愿意。 
English: I heard that Emperor Wudi of Han loved Taoism. I want to go to see him in the morning and ask the emperor to make Dan together with me. The emperor will be very willing.

古文：乃以方上帝，云： 丹砂可成黄金，金成服之升仙。
现代文：于是李少君把安期的炼丹秘方上奏汉武帝说， 丹砂可以炼出金丹，吃了金丹就能成仙。
English: So Li Shaojun told Han Wudi the secret recipe for making gold dust in the An period, saying that gold dust can make gold dust, and eating gold dust can make you immortal.

古文：臣常游海上，见安期先生，食枣大如瓜。 
现代文：我曾经在海上漫游，遇见了仙人安期先生，他经常吃一种像瓜一样大的枣子。 
English: I once roamed the sea and met Mr. Anji, a hermit, who often eats a jujube as big as a melon.

古文：天子甚尊敬之，赐遗无数。
现代文：汉武帝对李少君很尊重，赏给他不少东西。
English: Emperor Hanwu respected Li Shaojun very much and gave him many gifts.

古文：少君尝与武安侯饮食，座中有一老人，年九十余，少君问其名，乃言曾与老人祖父游夜，见小儿从其祖父，吾故识之。
现代文：李少君曾经和武安侯一起宴饮，座上有一位九十多岁的老人，李少君问老人的姓名，老人说了姓名后，李少君说， 我曾经和你的祖父一起夜里游玩宴饮过，那时你很小，跟你祖父在一起，所以我才认识你。 
English: Li Shao Jun once had a banquet with Wu An Hou. There was an old man in his nineties on the table. Li Shao Jun asked the old man's name. After the old man said his name, Li Shao Jun said, I once had a banquet with your grandfather at night. When you were very young, you were with your grandfather, so I only know you.

古文：时一座尽惊。
现代文：在座的人听了李少君这番话都很惊奇。
English: Everyone present was surprised to hear Li Shaojun's words.

古文：又少君见武帝有故铜器，因识之曰： 齐桓公常陈此器于寝座。
现代文：有一次，李少君看见汉武帝有一件旧铜器，就对武帝说， 我认识这件铜器。春秋战国时的齐桓公曾把它摆在自己的床头。 
English: Once, Li Shaojun saw that Emperor Wu of Han had an old bronze ware and said to Emperor Wu, I know this bronze ware. Prince Qi Huan had placed it at the head of his bed during the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period.

古文：帝按言观其刻字，果齐之故器也，因知少君是数百岁人矣。
现代文：汉武听李少君这么一说，就细看铜器上刻的字，果然是春秋时齐国的铜器，从而知道李少君己活了几百岁了。
English: When Han Wu heard Li Shaojun say this, he carefully read the words engraved on the bronze ware. It was indeed a bronze ware from the Spring and Autumn Period of Qi, so he knew that Li Shaojun had lived for several hundred years.

古文：视之如五十许人，面色肌肤，甚有光泽，口齿如童子。
现代文：但李少君看上去只有五十来岁，脸色红润皮肤很光滑，牙齿像少年人那样整齐。
English: But Li Shaojun only looks to be in his fifties. His face is rosy, his skin is smooth, and his teeth are as neat as a teenager's.

古文：王公贵人，闻其能令人不死，莫不仰慕，所遗金钱山积。
现代文：汉朝的王公贵族们听说李少君能使人长生不死，都对他万分敬仰，给他送的金钱堆积如山。
English: The princes and aristocrats of the Han Dynasty heard that Li Shaojun could make people immortal, and they all admired him immensely, sending him mountains of money.

古文：少君乃密作神丹，丹成，谓帝曰： 陛下不能绝骄奢，遣声色，杀伐不止，喜怒不胜，万里有不归之魂，市曹有流血之刑，神丹大道，未可得成。 
现代文：李少君就用这些钱偷偷买了原料炼成了仙丹，然后对武帝说， 陛下如果不能除掉骄奢淫逸的恶习，仍然贪图美女纵欲无度，到处征战讨伐，喜怒无常，使冤魂流落在荒野，让城市里常有杀头的重刑，那就绝不能炼成仙丹修成大道。 
English: Li Shaojun used this money to secretly buy the raw materials and refined them into immortelle, and then said to Emperor Wu, "If Your Majesty cannot get rid of the vices of pride and lasciviousness, still covet beautiful women, indulge in excesses, go everywhere to fight, be moody, make evil spirits wander in the wilderness, and let the city often have capital punishment, then it must not be refined into immortelle and built into a highway.

古文：乃以少药方与帝，少君便称疾。
现代文：李少君把自己不会衰老的秘方给了汉武帝，然后就假称自己生了病告辞。
English: Li Shaojun gave Emperor Han the secret recipe for not aging, and then said goodbye, pretending to be ill.

古文：是夜，帝梦与少君俱上嵩高山，半道，有使者乘龙持节云中来，言太乙请少君。
现代文：这天夜里，汉武帝梦见和李少君一起登上河南的嵩山，半路上有个神仙拿着旌节骑着龙从云中降下来，说太乙真人请李少君去。
English: That night, Emperor Hanwu had a dream that he and Li Shaojun were climbing Mount Song in Henan Province. Halfway up the mountain, a fairy descended from the clouds on a dragon, holding a scepter, and said that Emperor Taejo had asked Li Shaojun to go.

古文：帝遂觉，即使人问少君消息，且告近臣曰： 朕昨梦少君舍朕去。 
现代文：汉武帝惊醒了，立刻派人打听李少君的情况，并且告诉亲近的大臣说： 我昨夜梦见李少君离我而去了！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu woke up, immediately sent someone to inquire about Li Shaojun's condition, and told a close minister: I dreamed last night that Li Shaojun left me!

古文：少君乃病困，帝往视之，并使人受其方，事未竟而卒。
现代文：李少君病重时，武帝去探视，李少君让人把他炼仙丹的秘方完全记下来，还没说完就死了。
English: When Li Shaojun was seriously ill, Emperor Wu went to visit him. Li Shaojun had someone write down his secret recipe for cactus and died before he could finish.

古文：帝曰： 少君不死，故化去耳。 
现代文：武帝说： 李少君不会死，他是登了仙界了！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Li Shaojun will not die, he has ascended to the celestial world!

古文：及敛，忽失尸所在，中表衣悉不解，如蝉蜕也。
现代文：李少君刚要入殓时，尸体忽然不见了，衣服连扣子都没解开，好像蝉蜕一样。
English: When Li Shaojun was about to be put into the coffin, the body suddenly disappeared. His clothes were not even unbuttoned, as if he had been strangled.

古文：帝犹增叹，恨求少君不勤也。
现代文：汉武帝更加后悔，恨自己没有向李少君更多的求教道术。
English: Emperor Hanwu regretted even more, hating himself for not asking Li Shaojun more about Taoism.

古文：初少君与朝议郎董仲躬相亲爱。仲躬宿有疾，体枯气少。
现代文：李少君生前和任朝议郎的董仲躬是好朋友，董仲躬一向有病，身体消瘦气血不足。
English: When Li Shaojun was alive, he was a good friend of Dong Zhong Mu, who was a member of the Council of Elders. Dong Zhong Mu had always been ill, and his body was emaciated and lacked vitality.

古文：少君乃与其成药二剂，并其方，用戊巳之草，后土脂，黄精根，兽沉肪，先莠之根，百卉花酿，亥月上旬，合煎铜器中，使童子沐浴洁净，调其汤火，使合成鸡子，三枚为程。
现代文：李少君就给了他两副药和药方，让他用戊巳年间生长的草、当地出产的油脂、黄精的根和野兽的脂膏，秋天先枯死的根、春天百花的膏汁，在十二月上旬把上述药料合放在铜器中熬，让一个童子沐浴得十分洁净，让他看好火候，把熬好的膏再制成鸡蛋大的药丸，三只药丸一个疗程。
English: Li Shaojun gave him two pairs of medicines and prescriptions. He asked him to use the grass that grew during the Wu Si period, the locally produced grease, the root of the yellow essence and the animal's fat paste, the root that died first in the autumn, and the paste of the spring flowers. In early December, he boiled the above-mentioned medicines together in a copper vessel, let a boy bathe very clean, let him watch the heat, and then made the boiled paste into egg-sized pills, three pills a course of treatment.

古文：服尽一剂，身体便轻；服三剂，齿落更生；五剂，年寿长而不复倾。
现代文：吃了一副药丸，身子就会非常轻快，吃了三副，旧牙脱掉生出新牙，吃了五副以后，年岁增长了但腰不弯背不驼。
English: After eating one pair of pills, the body will be very brisk. After eating three pairs, the old teeth are removed and new teeth are born. After eating five pairs, the age has increased but the waist is not bent and the back is not humped.

古文：仲躬为人刚直，博学五经，然不达道术，笑世人服药学道，频上书谏武帝，以为人生则命，衰老有常，非道术所能延。
现代文：董仲躬为人刚强正直，精通《四书》《五经》，但对道术一点也不入门，还经常嘲笑那些服丹药学道术的人，常常上书给汉武帝，认为人寿天定，衰老是正常的，不是学道术能长生不老的。
English: Dong Zhongwu was a strong and honest person. He was well versed in the "Four Books" and the "Five Classics," but he was not at all familiar with Taoism. He often mocked those who practiced Taoism. He often wrote to Emperor Hanwu, believing that life expectancy is predetermined by heaven, aging is normal, and it is not possible to live forever by studying Taoism.

古文：意虽见其有异，将为天性，非术所致，得药竟不服，又不问其方。少君去后数月，仲躬病甚。
现代文：李少君知道董仲躬对修道有不同的看法，他的性格就是这样，改变不了他的认识。李少君给董仲躬的药，董仲躬根本就不吃，也不理睬李少君讲解的道学方术。李少君走后几个月，董仲躬病更重了。
English: Li Shao Jun knew that Dong Zhong Mu had a different view on the practice of Taoism. His character was like that, and he could not change his understanding. Li Shao Jun gave medicine to Dong Zhong Mu, but Dong Zhong Mu did not eat it at all, nor did he pay attention to Li Shao Jun's explanation of Taoism. A few months after Li Shao Jun left, Dong Zhong Mu's illness became more severe.

古文：常闻武帝说前梦，恨惜少君，仲躬忆少君所留药。
现代文：他曾听说了汉武帝梦见李少君成仙而去非常遗憾后悔，就想起了李少君给他的药。
English: He once heard that Emperor Hanwu dreamt that Li Shaojun had become an immortal and regretted it very much, and he remembered the medicine that Li Shaojun had given him.

古文：试服之，未半，乃身体轻壮，其病顿愈；服尽，气力如年少时，乃信有长生不死之道。
现代文：董仲躬试着服那药，只吃了半副，就觉得身轻体壮，病立刻好了。服完一副药之后，就觉得像年轻时那样精力充沛，这时他才相信真的有长生不死的道术。
English: Dong Zhongwu tried taking the medicine, and after taking only half a dose, he felt light and strong, and his illness immediately improved. After taking a dose of medicine, he felt as energetic as he was when he was young, and only then did he believe that there really was a Taoism of immortality.

古文：解官，行求道士，问其方，竟不能悉晓。
现代文：于是董仲躬就辞去了官职，向道士们求教，但得不到正确圆满的回答。
English: As a result, Dong Zhongwu resigned from his official position and asked the Taoists for advice, but did not receive a correct and complete answer.

古文：仲躬唯得发不白，形容盛甚，年八十余乃死。
现代文：后来虽然他头发不白精力旺盛，但还是活到八十多岁就死了。
English: Later, although his hair was white and his energy was strong, he still lived to be more than eighty years old and died.

古文：嘱其子道生曰： 我少得少君方药，初不信，事后得力，无能解之，怀恨于黄泉矣。
现代文：死前叮嘱他的儿子董道生说， 我曾得到李少君的仙药，起初不相信，后来服药见效，却不能解释药力的来源和修道的方术，只有怀恨于九泉之下了。
English: Before his death, he instructed his son, Dong Daosheng, to say, "I once received Li Shaojun's elixir. At first I didn't believe it, but later I took the medicine and it worked. However, I couldn't explain the source of the potency and the method of practice. I was filled with hatred."

古文：汝可行求人间方术之事，解其方意，长服此药，必度世也。 
现代文：你要寻找人间懂得道术的人，向他学习修道的要诀，常服仙药，就会超化成仙了。 
English: If you look for a person on earth who understands Daoism, learn the essentials of Daoism from him, and regularly take celestial medicine, you will be transformed into a celestial being.

古文：时有文成将军，亦得少君术。
现代文：当时还有个文成将军，也得到了李少君的传授。
English: At that time, there was also a General Wencheng, who was also taught by Li Shaojun.

古文：事武帝，帝后遣使诛之，文成谓使者曰： 为吾谢帝，不能忍少日而败大事乎？
现代文：文成将军是汉武帝的臣下，后来由于得罪了武帝，武帝派使者去杀他。文成将军对使者说， 请替我质问皇上，他为什么不能忍耐几天而毁了大事呢？
English: General Wencheng was a vassal of Emperor Hanwu. Later, because he offended Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu sent an envoy to kill him. General Wencheng said to the envoy, "Please question the emperor for me. Why can't he be patient for a few days and ruin a great event?"

古文：帝好自爱，后三十年，求我于成山，方共事，不相怨也。 
现代文：如果皇上仍然爱好修道，可以在三十年后到成山去找我，我会成全他，不会怨恨他的。 
English: If the emperor still loves monasticism, he can come to Chengshan to find me in thirty years. I will make him perfect and will not resent him.

古文：使者还，具言之。帝令发其棺视之，无所见，唯有竹筒一枚。
现代文：使者杀了文成将军以后，回来向汉武帝转告文成将军的话，武帝听后命人打开文成将军的棺材，棺材中却什么都没有，只有一只竹筒。
English: After the messenger killed General Wencheng, he came back to tell Emperor Wu of Han about General Wencheng's words. Emperor Wu then ordered someone to open General Wencheng's coffin, but there was nothing in the coffin, only a bamboo tube.

古文：帝疑其弟子窃其尸而藏之，乃收捕，检问其迹，帝乃大悔诛文成。
现代文：武帝怀疑是文成弟子偷去了他的尸体藏起来了，就到处搜查了解文成的去外，终于相信文成将军是成仙而去了，就十分后悔杀了文成。
English: Emperor Wu suspected that a disciple of Wencheng had stolen and hidden his body, so he searched everywhere to find out where Wencheng had gone. Finally, he believed that General Wencheng had gone to heaven, and he deeply regretted killing Wencheng.

古文：后复征诸方士，更于甘泉祀太乙，又别设一座祀文成，帝亲执礼焉。
现代文：后来武帝又征召方士，又在陕西淳化县甘泉山建了甘泉宫祀奉道家始祖太乙真人，又另外建了一座庙祀奉文成将军，每次祭礼，武帝都是亲自主持。
English: Later, Emperor Wu also conscripted priests, and built Ganquan Palace in Ganquan Mountain, Junhua County, Shaanxi Province, to worship the founder of Taoism, Tai Yi Zhenren, and also built a temple to worship General Wencheng. Emperor Wu personally presided over every festival.

古文：孔元方
现代文：孔元方
English: Kong Yuanfang

古文：孔元方，许昌人也。
现代文：孔元方是河南许昌人。
English: Kong Yuanfang is from Xuchang, Henan Province.

古文：常服松脂茯苓松实等药，老而益少，容如四十许人。郄元节、左元放，皆为亲友，俱弃五经当世之人事，专修道术。
现代文：他经常服用松脂、茯苓、松籽等药，老年时变得十分年轻，容貌像四十多岁的人，郄元节、左元放都是他的好朋友，他们都是既不读《四书》、《五经》，又不问世事，专门研究道术。
English: He often took drugs such as pine resin, wolfberry, and pine seeds, and became very young in old age, looking like a person in his forties. He was a good friend of Shuan Yuanjie and Zuo Yuanfang. They both did not read the "Four Books" and "Five Classics" and did not ask about worldly affairs, but specialized in studying Taoism.

古文：元方仁慈，恶衣蔬食，饮酒不过一升，年有七十余岁。
现代文：孔元方为人善良仁慈，粗衣素食，喝酒从不超过一升，当时有七十多岁。
English: Kong Yuanfang was a kind and benevolent person. He was a vegetarian and never drank more than one liter of alcohol. He was in his 70s at the time.

古文：道家或请元方会同饮酒，次至元方，元方作一令：以杖柱地，乃手把杖倒竖，头在下，足在上，以一手持杯倒饮，人莫能为也。
现代文：有一次，几位道士请孔元方一起喝酒，轮到元方干杯时，元方行了个酒令：他把拐杖拄在地上，手扶着拐杖头朝下脚朝上倒立着，用另一只手拿着酒杯倒着喝酒，结果谁也不会像他这样饮酒。
English: Once, several Taoists invited Kong Yuanfang to drink with them. When it was Yuanfang's turn to make a toast, Yuanfang made a toast: he put his crutch on the ground, stood upside down with his hand on the crutch, and drank with his other hand holding the glass upside down. As a result, no one would drink like him.

古文：元方有妻子，不畜余财，颇种五谷。
现代文：孔元方有妻有子，但从不积存钱财，只是很下力气地种田。
English: Kong Yuanfang had a wife and child, but he never saved money. He just worked hard at farming.

古文：时失火，诸人并来救之，出屋下衣粮床几，元方都不救，唯箕踞篱下视火。
现代文：有一次，孔元方家里失火了，人们都来救火，往外抢救衣物粮食家具，但孔元方却不往外抢东西，反而蹲在篱笆前看火。
English: Once, there was a fire in Kong Yuanfang's home. People came to put out the fire and rescue clothes, grain and furniture, but Kong Yuanfang did not go out to grab things, but squatted in front of the fence to watch the fire.

古文：其妻促使元方助收物，元方笑曰： 何用惜此。 
现代文：他的妻子催他赶快抢救财物，孔元方笑道： 这些都是身外之物，有什么可惜的！ 
English: His wife urged him to quickly rescue his belongings. Kong Yuanfang laughed and said, "These are external things, what a pity!"

古文：又凿水边岸，作一窟室，方广丈余，元方入其中断谷，或一月两月，乃复还，家人亦不得往来。
现代文：孔元方又在河边岸上凿了一个一丈见方的洞，然后钻进洞里，不吃不喝，一两个月也不出来，家里的人他也不让到洞里来。
English: Kong Yuanfang also dug a square hole on the bank of the river, and then went into the hole, did not eat or drink, and did not come out for a month or two. He did not let his family come into the hole.

古文：窟前有一柏树，生道后棘草间，委曲隐蔽。
现代文：洞前有一棵柏树，长在大道后面的荆棘草丛里，挡着那个洞。
English: In front of the cave there is a cypress tree, growing in the thorn bushes behind the main road, blocking the hole.

古文：弟子有急，欲诣元方窟室者，皆莫能知。
现代文：有时弟子有急事想找孔元方，也找不到他住的那个洞。
English: Sometimes a disciple is in a hurry and wants to find Kong Yuan Fang, but can't find the cave where he lives.

古文：后东方有一少年，姓冯名遇，好道，伺候元方，便寻窟室得见。
现代文：后来从东方来了一个少年，名叫冯遇，爱好道术，想跟随孔元方学道。
English: Later, a young boy named Feng Yu, who was fond of Taoism, came from the East and wanted to follow Kong Yuanfang to study Taoism.

古文：曰： 人皆来，不能见我，汝得见，似可教也。 
现代文：他一来就找着了孔元方的那个洞室。孔元方说： 别人来都找不到我，你却一来就找到了我，看来你是值得我传授道术的人。 
English: As soon as he arrived, he found Kong Yuanfang's cave room. Kong Yuanfang said, "Other people couldn't find me, but you found me as soon as you arrived. It seems that you are a person worthy of my teaching Taoism."

古文：乃以素书二卷授之曰： 此道之要言也，四十年得传一人。
现代文：孔元方就把两卷写在白布上的经文给了冯遇，并对他说： 这上面写的是修道的要点，四十年才可以传授一个人。
English: Kong Yuanfang gave Feng Rong the two volumes of scriptures written on a white cloth, and said to him, "What is written above are the essentials of the practice. It takes forty years to teach one person.

古文：世无其人，不得以年限足故妄授。若四十年无所授者，即八十年而有二人可授者，即顿接二人。
现代文：如果四十年到了还找不到值得传授的人，那也不能因为年限到了胡乱传授，须等八十年，如有两个人可传授，就传给两个人。
English: If, at the end of forty years, no one worthy of being taught can be found, it is not because the time limit has been reached, but because the teaching has been carried out haphazardly. It is necessary to wait eighty years. If there are two people who can be taught, then they should be taught by two people.

古文：可授不授为 闭天道 ；不可授而授为 泄天道 ，皆殃及子孙。
现代文：误传或不传，就犯了 闭天道 的罪，不该传的却传了，就犯了 泄天道 的罪，这两种罪都会连累子孙而受到惩罚。
English: If one misrepresents or does not propagate, he has committed the sin of shutting out the heavenly way, and if he propagates what he should not propagate, he has committed the sin of divulging the heavenly way. Both of these sins will burden the descendants and will be punished.

古文：我已得所传，吾其去矣。 
现代文：现在我已经把道术的精要传给你，我就可以去了。 
English: Now that I have passed on the essence of Taoism to you, I can go.

古文：乃委妻子入西岳。
现代文：于是孔元方就扔下妻子儿女进了西岳华山。
English: As a result, Kong Yuanfang threw his wife and children into the West Yuehua Mountain.

古文：后五十余年，暂还乡里，时人尚有识之者。
现代文：五十年后，孔元方回过一次故乡，当时的人还有认识他的。
English: Fifty years later, Kong Yuanfang returned to his hometown once, and people at that time still knew him.

古文：王烈
现代文：王烈
English: Wang Lie

古文：王烈者，字长休，邯郸人也。常服黄精及鈆，年三百三十八岁，犹有少容。
现代文：王烈字长休，河北邯郸人，经常服用野生姜和铅，活到三百三十八岁时面貌还很年轻。
English: Wang Liezhi Changxiu, a native of Handan, Hebei Province, often took wild ginger and lead. He lived to the age of 338 and still looked very young.

古文：登山历险，行步如飞。
现代文：他攀登险峻的山峰时健步如飞。
English: He climbs up steep mountains with flying steps.

古文：少时本太学书生，学无不览，常以人谈论五经百家之言，无不该博。
现代文：王烈青年时曾是太学中的书生，常和人们议论《四书》、《五经》和诸子百家的著作，非常博学多才。
English: When he was young, Wang Lie was a student of the classics at the University of Taiyuan. He often discussed the "Four Books," "Five Classics" and the works of hundreds of authors with people. He was very knowledgeable and versatile.

古文：中散大夫谯国嵇叔夜，甚敬爱之，数数就学。
现代文：任中散大夫的醮国人嵇叔夜很敬重王烈，常常向他请教。
English: The people of Yunnan, who appointed Zhongshan as a doctor, respected Wang Rongye very much and often asked him for advice.

古文：共入山游戏采药。
现代文：并和他一起进山游玩采药。
English: They also went into the mountains with him to collect medicines.

古文：后烈独之太行山中，忽闻山东崩圮，殷殷如雷声。
现代文：后来王烈独自进了山西太行山，有一天他忽然听见山的东部发生了山崩，隆隆的轰鸣好像打雷。
English: Later, Wang Li alone entered the Taihang Mountain in Shanxi Province. One day, he suddenly heard a landslide in the eastern part of the mountain. The rumbling sound sounded like thunder.

古文：烈不知何等，往视之，乃见山破石裂数百丈，两畔皆是青石，石中有一穴口，经阔尺许，中有青泥流出如髓。
现代文：王烈不知道是怎么回事，就赶去看。只见大山崩塌了几百丈，两面都是青石，石中有一个直径一尺宽的洞，洞里不断流出像骨髓般的青泥。
English: Wang Li didn't know what was going on, so he rushed to see. He saw that the mountain had collapsed several hundred meters, and both sides were covered with bluestone. There was a hole in the stone with a diameter of one foot wide, and bluestone mud like bone marrow was constantly flowing out of the hole.

古文：烈取泥试丸之，须臾成石，如投热蜡之状，随手坚凝。
现代文：王烈试着把那泥团成了圆球，不一会圆球就成了石头，好像把热蜡团成球凝固以后的样子。
English: Wang Lie tried to roll the mud into a ball, but soon the ball turned into stone, like a ball of hot wax after it has solidified.

古文：气如粳米饭，嚼之亦然。
现代文：那泥丸散发出一股粳米饭般的香气，放在嘴里咀嚼也有粳米饭的味道。
English: The mud ball emits a sticky rice-like aroma, and when chewed in the mouth, it also has a sticky rice taste.

古文：烈合数丸如桃大，用携少许归，乃与叔夜曰： 吾得异物。 
现代文：王烈就团了象桃子大小的泥丸带了回来，对嵇康说： 我得到了一件奇怪的东西给你。 
English: Wang Lie then brought back a peach-sized ball of mud and said to Yu Kang: "I have got a strange thing for you.

古文：叔夜甚喜，取而视之，已成青石，击之如铜声。
现代文：嵇康很高兴，王烈就把泥丸拿出来，一看泥丸已变成青石丸了，一敲还发出铜的声音。
English: Yan Kang was very happy, so Wang Lie took out the mud ball. At a glance, the mud ball had turned into a blue stone ball, and it made a copper sound when tapped.

古文：叔夜即与烈往视之，断山以复如故。
现代文：嵇康就让王烈领他到山崩处去看，那崩塌的山却恢复了原来的样子。
English: Yan Kang asked Wang Lie to take him to the site of the landslide to take a look, but the collapsed mountain had regained its original appearance.

古文：烈入河东抱犊山中，见一石室，室中白石架，架上有素书两卷。
现代文：后来王烈又进了河东的抱犊山里，看见一个石窟，里面有个白石的架子，上面有两卷写在白布上的经文。
English: Later, Wang Lie went into the Baojun Mountains in the east of the river and saw a cave with a white stone shelf with two volumes of scriptures written on a white cloth.

古文：烈取读，莫识其文字，不敢取去。却着架上。
现代文：王烈拿来看，不认识上面的字，不敢把经卷拿走，又放回白石架上。
English: Wang Liang took the scroll and looked at it. He did not know the above words and did not dare to take the scroll away and put it back on the white stone shelf.

古文：暗书得数十字形体，以示康。康尽识其字。
现代文：但他照着经卷上的字记下来几十个字，回来给嵇康看，那些字嵇康全都认识。
English: But he wrote down dozens of words according to the words on the scroll and came back to show them to Yu Kang. Yu Kang knew all those words.

古文：烈喜，乃与康共往读之。
现代文：王烈十分高兴，就领上嵇康到山中石窟去读经。
English: Wang Lie was very happy and took Jie Kang to the mountain grotto to read the Bible.

古文：至其道径，了了分明，比及，又失其石室所在。烈私语弟子曰： 叔夜未合得道故也。 
现代文：去的路都记得很清楚，但走到那里，却怎么也找不到石窟了。王烈后来私下里对弟子说： 这是因为嵇康不该得道，所以那石窟才闭上了。 
English: He remembered the way very clearly, but when he got there, he couldn't find the grotto. Wang Lei later said to his disciple in private: It's because Jie Kang shouldn't have received the Tao, that's why the grotto was closed.

古文：又按神仙经云，神山五百年辄开，其中石髓出，得而服之，寿与天相毕。
现代文：按照神仙经里的说法，神山五百年裂开一次，其中会流出来石髓，如果能服用了石髓，就可以和天地一样活得长久。
English: According to the saying in the Divine Immortal Sutra, the divine mountain is cracked once every five hundred years, and stone pith will flow out of it. If you can take the stone pith, you can live as long as heaven and earth.

古文：烈前得者必是也。
现代文：王烈先前得的石丸，肯定就是石髓了。
English: The stone ball that Wang Lie obtained earlier must have been the stone pith.

古文：河东闻喜人多累世奉事烈者。
现代文：河东闻喜的人，大都世世代代祀奉王烈。
English: Most of the people in Hedong Wenki have worshipped Wang Lê from generation to generation.

古文：晋永宁年中，出洛下，游诸处，与人共戏斗射。
现代文：晋代永宁年间，王烈去陕西洛南县的洛川一带漫游，和人比赛射箭。
English: During the Yongning Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Li wandered around Luochuan in Luonan County, Shaanxi Province, and won an archery competition.

古文：烈挽二石弓，射百步，十发矢，九破的。
现代文：王烈用的是需二石力量才能拉开的弓，在百步的距离射靶，十箭九中。
English: Wang Lie uses a bow that requires two stone strength to pull open, and shoots the target at a distance of a hundred paces, nine out of ten arrows.

古文：一年复去，又张子道者，年九十余，拜烈，烈平坐受之。
现代文：一年以后，王烈又到洛川去，有一个九十多岁的老者名叫张子道，恭敬地向王烈施礼，王烈连站都不站起来。
English: A year later, Wang Lie went to Luochuan again. An old man in his 90s named Zhang Zidao respectfully bowed to Wang Lie. Wang Lie did not even stand up.

古文：座人怪之，子道曰： 我年八九岁时见，颜色与今无异，吾今老矣，烈犹有少容。 
现代文：同座的人很奇怪，张子道说： 我七八岁时见他时，他就是现在这副容貌，现在我九十多岁了，他仍是一副少年的面孔。 
English: The people at the table were very strange, Zhang Zicun said: When I saw him when I was seven or eight years old, he had the same appearance as now. Now that I am over ninety years old, he still has the face of a teenager.

古文：后莫知所之。
现代文：后来，人们不知道王烈去了哪里。
English: Later, people didn't know where Wang Lie had gone.

古文：焦先
现代文：焦先
English: Jiaxian

古文：焦先者，字孝然，河东人也，年一百七十岁。
现代文：焦先是河东人，已经活了一百七十岁。
English: Jiaxian is a person from east of the river and has already lived 170 years.

古文：常食白石，以分与人，熟煮如芋食之。
现代文：经常服食白石，并把白石分给别人，像煮土豆那样煮熟了吃。
English: He would often take white pebbles and share them with others, and eat them cooked like boiled potatoes.

古文：日日入山伐薪以施人，先自村头一家起，周而复始。
现代文：焦先还天天进山砍柴，然后把柴分给别人，先从村头第一家开始，一家一家地分给柴禾。
English: Jiaoxi also went into the mountains every day to cut firewood, and then distributed the firewood to others, starting with the first house in the village, and distributing the firewood to each family.

古文：负薪以置人门外，人见之，铺席与坐，为设食，先便坐。亦不与人语。
现代文：焦先每次把柴禾背到住家的门外放下，主人看见后，就把焦先请到屋中坐下，并请焦先吃饭，焦先就坐下，也不和主人说话。
English: Every time, Jiao first carried the firewood to the door of the house and put it down. When the master saw it, he invited Jiao first to sit down in the house, and invited Jiao first to eat. Jiao first sat down, and did not talk to the master.

古文：负薪来，如不见人，便私置于门间，便去，连年如此。
现代文：焦先如果把柴禾背来而主人不在，他就把柴禾放到门外转身就走，年年如此。
English: If Jiaxian takes the firewood and the owner is not there, he will put the firewood outside the door, turn around and leave. This happens every year.

古文：及魏受禅，居河之湄，结草为庵，独止其中。
现代文：魏文帝即位之后，焦先在河边盖了一间草屋，自己一个人住进去。
English: After Emperor Weiwen ascended the throne, Jiao first built a grass hut by the river and lived there alone.

古文：不设床席，以草褥衬坐，其身垢污，浊如泥潦。
现代文：屋子里不放床，只铺着草垫子，满身都是泥污，像在泥里打了滚似的。
English: There was no bed in the room, only a straw mat, and mud was all over his body, as if he had rolled in the mud.

古文：或数日一食，行不由径，不与女人交游。
现代文：有时他几天吃一次饭，行为很规矩，也不和女人来往。
English: Sometimes he eats once every few days, behaves in a very orderly manner, and does not socialize with women.

古文：衣弊，则卖薪以买故衣着之，冬夏单衣。
现代文：他的衣服破了，就卖了柴买件旧衣服穿上，不论冬天夏天都是一身单衣。
English: His clothes were worn out, so he sold firewood to buy old clothes to wear. He wore a singlet in both winter and summer.

古文：太守董经，因往视之，又不肯语。
现代文：当时当太守的董经听说后就来拜访焦先，焦先却不说话。
English: At that time, when Dong Jing, the governor-general, heard about it, he came to visit Jiaxian, but Jiaxian did not speak.

古文：经益以为贤。
现代文：董经就更觉得焦先是大贤人。
English: Dongjing feels even more that the focus is on great sages.

古文：彼遭野火烧其庵，人往视之，见先危坐庵下不动，火过庵烬，先方徐徐而起，衣物悉不焦灼。
现代文：后来焦先的草屋被野火烧毁，人们跑去看，只见焦先端坐在火中，草屋烧成灰烬之后，焦先才慢慢站起来，连身上的衣服都没烧着。
English: Later, Jiaxian's grass hut was burned down by a wildfire. People ran to see, only to see Jiaxian sitting in the fire. After the grass hut was burned to ashes, Jiaxian slowly stood up, and even his clothes were not burned.

古文：又更作庵，天忽大雪，人屋多坏，先庵倒。
现代文：后来焦先又把草屋盖起来，忽然下了一场大雪，很多房子都被大雪压塌了。焦先的草房也倒了。
English: Later, Jiaoxi covered the grass hut again, and suddenly a heavy snow fell, and many houses were crushed by the heavy snow. Jiaoxi's grass hut also fell down.

古文：人往不见所在，恐已冻死，乃共拆庵求之，见先熟卧于雪下，颜色赫然，气息休休，如盛暑醉卧之状。
现代文：人们去看，怕焦先已经冻死，就扒开草房寻找，只见焦先躺在雪底下熟睡，面色红润，呼吸均匀，像在炎夏喝醉了一样。
English: People went to see, fearing that Jiaozuo had frozen to death, they opened the grass hut to look for it, only to find Jiaozuo lying under the snow, fast asleep, ruddy-faced, breathing evenly, as if drunk in the summer.

古文：人知其异，多欲从学道，先曰： 我无道也。 
现代文：人们都认为焦先不是凡人，很多人想和他学道。焦先说： 我哪里会什么道术呢？ 
English: People all think that Jiaxian is not an ordinary person, and many people want to learn the Tao with him. Jiaxian said: Where can I learn what Taoism is?

古文：或忽老忽少，如此二百余岁，后与人别去，不知所适。
现代文：焦先一会儿老，一会儿又很年轻，这样活到二百多岁，后来就离开大家走了，也不知去了什么地方。
English: Anxious first, then old, then very young, he lived to be more than two hundred years old, and then he left everyone and went to I don't know where.

古文：所请者竟不得一言也。
现代文：那些向他请教道术的人，连一句话也没从他那里得到。
English: Those who asked him for advice on Taoism didn't get a word from him.

古文：孙登
现代文：孙登
English: Sun Deng

古文：孙登者，不知何许人也。恒止山间，穴地而坐，弹琴读《易》。
现代文：孙登不知道是什么地方人，常常住在山中的地洞里，弹琴、读《易经》。
English: Sun Deng didn't know what kind of local people they were, but they often lived in caves in the mountains, playing the piano and reading the I Ching.

古文：冬夏单衣，天大寒，人视之，辄被发自覆身，发长丈余。
现代文：他冬夏都穿单衣，十冬腊月，人们见他头发长得一丈多长披盖在身上御寒。
English: He wears a singlet in winter and summer, and in the winter, people see his hair grow longer and longer and cover his body to keep out the cold.

古文：又雅容非常，历世见之，颜色如故。
现代文：孙登的面容非常年轻，几代人看见他都没有衰老变化。
English: Sun Deng's face is very young, and several generations have seen him without aging changes.

古文：市中乞得钱物，转乞贫下，更无余资，亦不见食。
现代文：他常到街上乞讨，得到的东西转手就给了穷人，自己一点也不要，人们也从来看不到孙登吃饭。
English: He often went to the streets to beg. Whatever he got he gave to the poor. He didn't want anything for himself, and people never saw him eat.

古文：时杨骏为太傅，使传迎之，问讯不答。
现代文：当时当太傅的杨骏把孙登请去，但问他什么他都不回答。
English: At that time, Yang Qi, who was the grandmaster, invited Sun Deng to go, but he did not answer anything when asked.

古文：骏遗以一布袍，亦受之。出门，就人借刀断袍，上下异处，置于骏门下，又复斫碎之。
现代文：杨骏赠给孙登一件布袍子，孙登就要了，但一出门就向人借了把刀，把袍子割成两半，扔到杨骏的门前，又把袍子用刀剁碎了。
English: Yang Hui presented a cloth robe to Sun Deng. Sun Deng was about to leave, but as soon as he left, he borrowed a knife from someone, cut the robe in half, threw it in front of Yang Hui's door, and cut the robe with a knife.

古文：时人谓为狂，后乃知骏当诛斩，故为其象也。
现代文：当时人们都说孙登是疯子，然而后来杨骏犯罪被斩首，大家才明白孙登剁碎杨骏的袍子是一种预示。
English: At that time, people said that Sun Deng was a madman, but later, when Yang Hui was beheaded for his crimes, everyone understood that Sun Deng's shredding of Yang Hui's robe was an omen.

古文：骏录之，不放去，登乃卒死。
现代文：当时，孙登剁碎了杨骏送他的袍子后，杨骏一怒之下把孙登抓了起来，孙登就突然死了。
English: At that time, after Sun Dengyao broke the robe that Yang Hui gave him, Yang Hui got angry and grabbed Sun Dengyao, and Sun Dengyao suddenly died.

古文：骏给棺，埋之于振桥。
现代文：杨骏给了一口棺木，把孙登埋在振桥。
English: Yang Mi gave a coffin and buried Sun Deng in Zhenqiao.

古文：后数日，有人见登在董马坡，因寄书与洛下故人。
现代文：几天后，人们却在董马坡看见了孙登，就捎信给洛川的朋友。
English: A few days later, people saw Sun Deng in Dongma Po and sent letters to his friends in Luochuan.

古文：嵇叔夜有迈世之志，曾诣登，登不与语。
现代文：嵇康有修道的志向，曾向孙登请教，孙登不理他。
English: Gongkang had the aspiration of cultivating Taoism. He once asked Sun Deng for advice, but Sun Deng ignored him.

古文：叔夜乃扣难之，而登弹琴自若。
现代文：嵇康就提出一些问题，故意诘难他，但孙登竟不在乎地自己弹琴。过了很久，嵇康只好走了。
English: Yu Kang asked some questions to deliberately annoy him, but Sun Deng played the piano by himself without a care in the world. After a long time, Yu Kang had to leave.

古文：久之，叔夜退，登曰： 少年才优而识寡，劣于保身，其能免乎？ 
现代文：孙登说： 嵇康这人年轻有才，但见识太少，不善于保护自身。 
English: Sun Deng said, "He is a talented young man, but he has too little insight and is not good at protecting himself.

古文：俄而叔夜竟陷大辟。
现代文：过了不久，嵇康果然犯了罪被斩首。
English: Soon after, Yan Kang did indeed commit a crime and was beheaded.

古文：叔夜善弹琴，于是登弹一弦之琴，以成音曲。
现代文：嵇康很善于弹琴，孙登却能弹一根弦的琴，而且也能弹成完整的乐曲。
English: Yan Kang is very good at playing the piano, but Sun Deng can play a single string piano, and can also play a complete piece of music.

古文：叔夜乃叹息绝思也。
现代文：嵇康对孙登的琴技感叹佩服，觉得用一根弦弹出乐曲简直是不可思议。
English: Yu Kang is impressed with Sun Deng's piano skills, and thinks it's unbelievable that he can play a piece of music with just one string.

古文：吕文敬
现代文：吕文敬
English: Lu Wenjing

古文：吕恭，字文敬，少好服食。
现代文：吕恭字文敬，青年时就好服养生延年的药。
English: When you're young, it's a good idea to take health and longevity pills.

古文：将一奴一婢，于太行山中采药。
现代文：有一次他带着一个仆人一个婢女，进太行山中采药。
English: Once he took a servant and a maidservant into the mountains of Taihang to collect medicines.

古文：忽见三人在谷中，问恭曰： 子好长生乎，乃勤苦艰险如是耶？ 
现代文：忽然遇到了三个人。他们问吕恭， 你这样不辞劳苦地爬山越岭，是不是要寻求长生之术啊？ 
English: Suddenly, he met three people. They asked Lü Qiong, "If you go to such great lengths to climb mountains, is it to seek the art of longevity?"

古文：恭曰： 实好长生，而不遇良方，故采服此药，冀有微益耳。 
现代文：吕恭说： 我确实是寻求长生之术，但一直没遇到好的药方，只好采些草药服用。希望多少有点益处。 
English: Lyu Qiong said, "I am indeed seeking the elixir of life, but I haven't come across a good prescription, so I have to take some herbs. I hope it will be of some benefit."

古文：一人曰： 我姓吕字文起。 次一人曰： 我姓孙字文阳。 次一人曰： 我姓王字文上。 
现代文：三个人自我介绍，一个姓吕字文起，一个姓孙字文阳，第三个人姓王字文上，三个人都是天界太和府里的神仙。
English: Three people introduced themselves, one with the surname Lyu Zi Wenqi, one with the surname Sun Zi Wenyang, and the third with the surname Wang Zi Wenyang. All three were heavenly beings from Heaven and Earth.

古文：三人皆太清太和府仙人也。 时来采药，当以成新学者。
现代文：吕文起对吕恭说： 我们有时也来这里采药，以便成全那些新学道的人。
English: Lu Wenqi said to Lu Qiong: Sometimes we also come here to collect medicines in order to perfect those who are learning the new way.

古文：公既与我同姓，又字得吾半支，此是公命当应常生也。
现代文：你既然和我同姓，名字中也有一个字 文 跟我相同，这是你的仙缘，命中应该得到长生。
English: Since you have the same surname as me, there is also a character in your name, which is the same as mine. This is your immortality, and you should be destined to live forever.

古文：若能随我采药，语公不死之方。 
现代文：你如果能跟着我采药，我就告诉你长生不老药的仙方。 
English: If you can follow me, I'll tell you the secret formula for the elixir of life.

古文：恭即拜曰： 有幸得遇仙人，但恐暗塞多罪，不足教授耳。
现代文：吕恭立刻跪拜说： 今天遇见仙人真是我的大幸，只怕我糊涂愚笨，当不好仙人的徒弟。
English: Lyu Qiong immediately knelt down and said, "It is my great fortune to meet a fairy godmother today. I'm afraid I'm too stupid to be a good fairy godmother's apprentice."

古文：若见采收，是更生之愿也。 
现代文：如果仙人能收留点化，是我此生最大的愿望了。 
English: It would be my greatest wish in this life if the immortals could absorb the dots.

古文：即随仙人去二日，乃授恭秘方一首，因遣恭去曰： 可视乡里。 
现代文：吕恭就跟着仙人采了两天药，仙人授给他一个仙药秘方让他带回去，让他回家乡再看看亲人们。
English: Lyu Qiong took medicine for two days with the fairy godmother. The fairy godmother gave him a secret recipe to take back with him, so that he could go back to his hometown and see his relatives again.

古文：恭即拜辞，三人语恭曰： 公来二日，人间己二百年矣。 
现代文：吕恭向三位仙人辞别，仙人们说： 你跟我们采了两天药，世上已过了二百年了。 
English: Lyu Qiong bade farewell to the three immortals. The immortals said, "You have taken medicine with us for two days. Two hundred years have passed in the world.

古文：恭归家，但见空宅，子孙无复一人也。
现代文：吕恭回到家乡，见自己家中只剩下个破旧的空房子，也没有找到一个子孙后代。
English: After returning to her hometown, Lyu Qiong saw that only a dilapidated empty house remained in her home, and she did not find a single descendant.

古文：乃见乡里数世后人赵辅者，问吕恭家人皆何所在。
现代文：后来遇见一个当年乡亲几世后的一个后代，名叫赵辅，就向他打听吕恭家的后代都在哪里。
English: Later, he met a descendant of the villagers several generations back, named Zhao Fu, and asked him where all the descendants of the Lv Gong family were.

古文：辅曰： 君从何来，乃问此久远人也。
现代文：赵辅说： 先生是从哪儿来的呢？竟向我问这么久远的事。
English: Zhao said, "Where did the teacher come from? Why did he ask me such a long time ago?"

古文：吾昔闻先人说云，昔有吕恭者，持奴婢入太行山采药，遂不复还，以为虎狼所食，已二百余年矣。
现代文：我曾听前辈说当年有个吕恭带一仆一婢进太行山采药，再也没回来，可能是让虎狼吃掉了，至今已二百多年。
English: I once heard my predecessors say that there was a Lyu Qiong who took a servant and a maid to Taihang Mountain to collect medicine, and never came back. It may have been eaten by tigers and wolves. It has been more than 200 years since then.

古文：恭有数世子孙吕习者，居在城东十数里，作道士，民多奉事之。
现代文：听说吕恭有个几世后的孙子叫吕习住在城东十几里的地方，是位道士，老百姓都尊奉他。
English: It is said that Lyu Qiong had a grandson several generations later named Lyu Xi, who lived more than ten miles east of the city. He was a Taoist and was revered by the common people.

古文：推求易得耳。 
现代文：去打听一下，会很容易找到的。 
English: Ask around, it'll be easy to find.

古文：恭承辅言，到习家，扣门问讯。
现代文：吕恭按赵辅的话找到吕习家，敲门打听。
English: Lv Gong found Lv Xi's home and knocked on the door to inquire.

古文：奴出，问公从何来，恭曰： 此是我家，我昔随仙人去，至今二百余年。 
现代文：仆人开门问他找谁，吕恭说： 这是我家，我当年随仙人采药，至今已二百多年了。 
English: The servant opened the door and asked him who he was looking for. Lyu Qiong said, "This is my home. I used to collect medicines with the immortals, and it has been more than two hundred years since then.

古文：习闻之惊喜，跣出拜曰： 仙人来归，悲喜不能自胜。 
现代文：吕习又惊又喜，光脚跑出来跪拜说： 仙祖今天回来，真让我又惊又喜啊！ 
English: Lv Xi was both surprised and pleased. He ran out barefoot to kneel and said, "Xianzu has come back today. I'm really surprised and pleased!"

古文：公因以神方授习而去。
现代文：吕恭就把仙方传授给吕习，然后就走了。
English: Lv Gong then taught Lv Xi the Immortal Fang, and then left.

古文：习已年八十，服之即还少壮，至二百岁，乃入山中。子孙世世不复老死。
现代文：吕习当时已八十岁，服药后立刻变成青年，活到二百岁时也进了山，他的子孙后代也不再老死。
English: At that time, Lv Xi was already eighty years old. After taking the medicine, he immediately became a young man. He also went into the mountains when he was two hundred years old. His descendants will no longer die of old age.

古文：沈建
现代文：沈建
English: Shen Jian

古文：沈建，丹阳人也，世为长吏。
现代文：沈建是丹阳人，世代都作长吏。
English: Shen Jian is from Danyang and has been a magistrate for generations.

古文：建独好道，不肯仕宦，学导引服食之术，还年却老之法。
现代文：但唯独沈建不肯作官，专门研究道术，学习修炼服丹的方术和返老还童的秘诀。
English: However, only Shen Jian refused to be an official, specializing in the study of Taoism, learning to cultivate the methods of clothing and the secrets of rejuvenation.

古文：又能治病，病无轻重，治之即愈。奉事之者数百家。
现代文：他还会医术，病人不管病情轻重，经他一治就好，因而有好几百家人侍奉他。
English: He could also practice medicine, and patients, regardless of the severity of their illness, were cured by him. As a result, hundreds of family members served him.

古文：建尝欲远行，寄一婢三奴、驴一头、羊十口，各与药一丸。
现代文：有一次沈建要出远门，就把一名男仆、三名婢女、一头驴十只羊寄存在某人家里，让男女仆人和驴、羊都吃了一枚药丸。
English: Once, when Shen Jian wanted to go somewhere far away, he sent a manservant, three maidservants, a donkey and ten sheep to someone's home, and had the male and female servants, the donkey and the sheep all take a pill.

古文：语主人曰： 但累屋，不烦饮食也。 
现代文：沈建临上路时对那家主人说： 我把他们寄留在你家，只住你的房子，不用你给他们吃的。 
English: When Shen Jian was on his way, he said to the owner of the house, "I'll let them stay at your house. I'll only live in your house. You don't have to feed them."

古文：便去。
现代文：说罢就走了。
English: Just say the word and walk away.

古文：主人大怪之曰： 此客所寄十五口，不留寸资，当若之何。
现代文：那家主人挺惊讶，心想在我家连人加牲口寄存了十五口，却一个钱也不留，真拿他没办法。
English: The owner of the house was quite surprised. He thought to himself that he had stored fifteen people and animals in my house, but he didn't keep any money. There was really nothing he could do about it.

古文：建去后，主人饮奴婢，奴婢闻食气，皆逆吐不用；以草饲驴羊，驴羊避去不食，或欲抵触，主人大惊愕。
现代文：沈建走后，主人给仆人们吃饭，但他们一闻饭的气味就呕吐，根本不吃。拿草喂驴和羊，驴羊不但不吃，还对主人又顶又踢，主人十分奇怪惊讶。
English: After Shen Jian left, the master gave the servants food, but they vomited as soon as they smelled the smell of the meal and did not eat at all. They fed the donkeys and sheep with grass. The donkeys and sheep not only did not eat, but also kicked and kicked the master. The master was very surprised.

古文：百余日，奴婢体貌光泽，胜食之时，驴羊皆肥如饲。
现代文：虽然一百多天不吃饭，但仆人们面孔红润气色极好，比吃饭还要健康，驴和羊也是骠肥体壮，比精心喂养的还好。
English: Although they had not eaten for more than a hundred days, the servants were ruddy-faced and extremely good-looking, healthier than if they had eaten, and the donkeys and sheep were fat and strong, better than if they had been carefully fed.

古文：建去三年乃还，各以药一丸与奴婢驴羊，乃饮食如故。建遂断谷不食，轻举飞行。
现代文：沈建三年后回来，又给奴仆和驴羊吃下一枚药丸，他们才又开始正常的饮食。但沈建却从不饮食，仍健步如飞。
English: Shen Jian came back three years later and gave another pill to the servants and the donkey and the sheep, and they began to eat normally again. But Shen Jian never ate, and still walked like a bird.

古文：或去或还，如此三百余年，乃绝迹不知所之也。
现代文：他有时来有时去，这样过了三百多年，后来竟不再见到他，不知去了何处。
English: He came and went from time to time, and after more than three hundred years, we never saw him again, and we don't know where he went.

