古文： 天其运乎？
现代文： 天在自然运转吗？
English: Does the sky move by itself?

古文：地其处乎？
现代文：地在静止吗？
English: Is the Earth standing still?

古文：日月其争于所乎？
现代文：日月交替出没是在争夺居所吗？
English: Are sun-moon visitors competing for a place to live?

古文：孰主张是？
现代文：是谁在维系这些现象呢？
English: Who is sustaining these phenomena?

古文：孰维纲是？
现代文：谁在维系统带这些现象呢？
English: Who is causing these phenomena in the galaxy?

古文：孰居无事推而行是？
现代文：是谁闲瑕无事推动运行而形成这些现象呢？
English: Who is idly driving operations to create these phenomena?

古文：意者其有机缄而不得已乎？
现代文：揣测它们有什么主宰的机关而出于不得已呢？
English: Is it out of necessity that we speculate about the controlling organs?

古文：意者其运转而不能自止邪？
现代文：还是揣测它们运转而不能自己停下来呢？
English: Or do you expect them to run and not be able to stop themselves?

古文：云者为雨乎？
现代文：乌云是雨水蒸腾而成呢？
English: Are dark clouds formed by rainwater evaporation?

古文：雨者为云乎？
现代文：还是雨水是乌云降落而成呢？
English: Or does rainwater come from falling clouds?

古文：孰隆施是？
现代文：是谁在行云布雨？
English: Who is pulling the strings?

古文：孰居无事淫乐而劝是？
现代文：是谁闲居无事贪求欢乐而促成了这种现象？
English: Who are the idle, the pleasure-seekers who have contributed to this phenomenon?

古文：风起北方，一西一东，有上仿徨。孰嘘吸是？
现代文：风起于北方，一会儿西一会儿东，在天空中来回游动，是谁吐气或吸气造成了云彩的飘动？
English: The wind rises in the north, then in the west, then in the east, and swims back and forth in the sky. Who caused the clouds to flutter by exhaling or inhaling?

古文：孰居无事而披拂是？
现代文：还是谁闲居无事煽动而造成这样的现象？
English: Or who is idly inciting and causing such a phenomenon?

古文：敢问何故？ 
现代文：我斗胆地请教是些什么缘故？ 巫咸祒说： 来！
English: For what reason did I boldly ask for advice? Wuxian Yao said: Come!

古文：巫咸袑曰： 来，吾语女。
现代文：我告诉你。
English: I'm telling you.

古文：天有六极五常，帝王顺之则治，逆之则凶。
现代文：大自然本身就存在六合和五行，帝王顺应它便能治理好国家，违背它就会招来灾祸。
English: Nature itself has the six unities and five elements. If the emperor obeys it, he will be able to govern the country well. If he disobeys it, he will bring disaster.

古文：九洛之事，治成德备，临照下土，天下戴之，此谓上皇。 
现代文：顺应九州聚居之人的各种事务，致使天下治理而道德完备，光辉照临人间，天下人拥戴，这就叫做 上皇 。 
English: It is called the Retired Emperor who conforms to the various affairs of the people who live in Kyushu, so that the world is governed well and morality is complete, the glory shines on the world, and the world is embraced.

古文：商大宰荡问仁于庄子。
现代文：商的大宰荡问仁于庄子。
English: The merchant's grand vizier asked Zhuangzi for help.

古文：庄子曰： 虎狼，仁也。 
现代文：庄子说： 虎和狼也有仁爱。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: Tigers and wolves also have benevolence.

古文：曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：荡又问： 这如何解释？ 
English: He also asked: How can this be explained?

古文：庄子曰： 父子相亲，何为不仁！ 
现代文：庄子说： 虎狼父子相互亲爱，为什么不是仁？ 
English: Zhuangzi said, "Tiger Wolf father and son love each other dearly, why not Ren?

古文：曰： 请问至仁。 
现代文：荡又说： 请问什么是最高境界的仁。 
English: He also said, "What is the highest level of benevolence?"

古文：庄子曰： 至仁无亲。 
现代文：庄子说： 最高境界的仁就是没有亲情。 
English: Zhuangzi said: The highest level of benevolence is to have no family ties.

古文：大宰曰： 荡闻之，无亲则不爱，不爱则不孝。
现代文：大宰荡说： 我听说过，没有亲情就不会有爱，没有爱就不会有孝。
English: Dazai Wang said: I have heard that without kinship there can be no love, and without love there can be no filial piety.

古文：谓至仁不孝，可乎？ 
现代文：说最高境界的仁是没有孝心，这样可以吗？ 
English: Is it okay to say that the highest level of benevolence is no filial piety?

古文：庄子曰： 不然，夫至仁尚矣，孝固不足以言之。
现代文：庄子说： 不是如此，至高境界的仁是值得尊崇的，孝本来就不足以说明它。
English: Zhuangzi said, "Not so. The highest level of benevolence is worthy of respect. Filial piety is not enough to explain it.

古文：此非过孝之言也，不及孝之言也。
现代文：这并不是非孝的议论，而是与孝并无关联。
English: This is not an argument against filial piety, but has nothing to do with filial piety.

古文：夫南行者至于郢，北面而不见冥山，是何也？
现代文：向南行走的人到了楚国的都城郢，向北看则看不见冥山。这是什么原因呢？
English: People who walk to the south reach the capital city of Chu, but if they look to the north, they can't see Mount Hades. What is the reason for this?

古文：则去之远也。
现代文：用爱来尽孝容易，用无我淡泊的态度对待双亲就难。
English: It is easy to show filial piety with love, but it is difficult to treat parents with a selfless attitude.

古文：故曰：以敬孝易，以爱孝难；以爱孝易，而忘亲难；忘亲易，使亲忘我难；使亲忘我易，兼忘天下难；兼忘天下易，使天下兼忘我难。夫德遗尧、舜而不为也，利泽施于万世，天下莫知也，岂直大息而言仁孝乎哉！
现代文：用淡泊的态度对待父母容易，使双亲用淡泊的态度对待我则难。使双亲用淡泊的态度对待我容易，而用淡泊的态度去对待天下人则难。用淡泊的态度对待天下人容易，而让天下人都忘却自身则难，遗忘尧舜之德而顺从自然，利益恩泽被及万世，而天下人却并不知晓。难道还要叹息着去谈论仁和孝吗？
English: It is easy to treat one's parents with indifference, but it is difficult to make one's parents treat me with indifference. It is easy to make one's parents treat me with indifference, but it is difficult to treat the people of the world with indifference. It is easy to treat the people of the world with indifference, but it is difficult to make the people of the world forget themselves, forget the virtue of selflessness and obey nature. The benefits of benevolence are eternal, but the people of the world do not know. Do we still have to sigh and talk about benevolence and filial piety?

古文：夫孝悌仁义，忠信贞廉，此皆自勉以役其德者也，不足多也。
现代文：孝悌仁义，忠信贞廉，这些都是用来劝勉自身而劳苦真性的，不足以刻意标榜。
English: Filial piety, benevolence, loyalty, chastity, these are all used to exhort oneself, but hard work and sincerity are not enough to deliberately flaunt.

古文：故曰：至贵，国爵并焉；至富，国财并焉；至愿，名誉并焉。是以道不渝。 
现代文：所以说，最为珍贵的，一国的帝位可以弃之不顾；最大的心愿，任何名誉可以弃之不顾，所以大道是永恒不变的。 
English: Therefore, the most precious, a country's imperial throne can be abandoned; the greatest wish, any honor can be abandoned, so the road is eternal and unchanging.

古文：北门成问于黄帝曰： 帝张咸池之乐于洞庭之野，吾始闻之惧，复闻之怠，卒闻之而惑，荡荡默默，乃不自得。 
现代文：北门成向黄帝问道： 你在广漠的原野上演奏咸池乐曲，我起初听起来感到惊惧，再听下去就逐步松缓下来，听到最后却又感到迷惑不解，神情恍惚无知无识，竟而不知所措。
English: Beimen Chengxiang asked Huangdi: You are playing the Hamchi Music on a vast desert plain. At first, I was startled by the sound. After listening to it, I gradually relaxed. However, when I finally heard it, I felt puzzled and bewildered. I felt like I was in a trance, ignorant and clueless, and at a loss.

古文：帝曰： 汝殆其然哉！
现代文：黄帝说： 你恐怕会有那样的感觉吧！
English: Huang Di said: I'm afraid you will have that feeling!

古文：吾奏之以人，徵之以天，行之以礼义，建之以大清。
现代文：我因循人情来演奏乐曲，取法自然的规律，用礼义加以推进，用天道来确立。
English: I play music according to human feelings, taking the laws of nature, using etiquette to promote it, and using heaven to establish it.

古文：夫至乐者，先应之以人事，顺之以天理，行之以五德，应之以自然。然后调理四时，太和万物。
现代文：最美妙最高贵的乐曲，总是用人情来顺应，用天理来因循，用五德来推演，用自然来应合，然后方才调理于四季的序列，跟天地万物同和。
English: The most beautiful and most noble music always uses human feelings to conform, uses heavenly principles to follow, uses the five virtues to deduce, and uses nature to conform. Only then is it adjusted to the sequence of the four seasons and harmonized with all things in heaven and earth.

古文：四时迭起，万物循生。一盛一衰，文武伦经。一清一浊，阴阳调和，流光其声。蛰虫始作，吾惊之以雷霆。
现代文：乐声犹如四季更迭而起，万物都遵循这一变化而栖息生长；忽而繁茂忽而衰败，春季的生机和秋季的肃杀都在有条不紊地更迭；忽而清新忽而浊重，阴阳相互调配交和，流布光辉和与之相应的声响；犹如解除冬眠的虫豸开始活动，我用雷霆使它们惊起。
English: The music is as if the four seasons are changing, and all things are following this change and inhabiting and growing; suddenly flourishing, then decaying, the spring's vitality and the autumn's killing are changing in an orderly manner; suddenly fresh, then heavy, yin and yang harmonize with each other, spreading brilliance and the corresponding sound; as if the hibernating worms begin to move, I use thunder to wake them up.

古文：其卒无尾，其始无首。一死一生，一偾一起，所常无穷，而一不可待。
现代文：乐声的终结寻不到结尾，乐声的开始寻不到起头；一会儿消逝一会儿兴起，一会儿偃息一会儿亢进；变化的方式无穷无尽，全不可以有所期待。
English: The end of music cannot be found in the end, the beginning of music cannot be found in the beginning; one moment disappears, the next arises, the next breathes, and the next breathes again; the ways of change are endless, and none of them can be expected.

古文：汝故惧也。吾又奏之以阴阳之和，烛之以日月之明。
现代文：因此你会感到惊恐不安。 我又用阴阳的交和来演奏，用日月的光辉来照临整个乐曲。
English: Therefore, you will feel frightened and uneasy. I also play with the harmony of yin and yang, and use the brightness of the sun and moon to illuminate the entire music.

古文：其声能短能长，能柔能刚，变化齐一，不主故常。在谷满谷，在坑满坑。涂郤守神，以物为量。
现代文：于是乐声能短能长，能柔能刚，变化虽然遵循着一定的条理，却并不拘泥于故态和常规；流播于山谷山谷满盈，流播于坑凹坑凹充实；堵塞心灵的孔隙而使精神宁寂持守，一切用外物来度量。
English: As a result, music can be short or long, soft or hard, and although the changes follow a certain pattern, they are not rigidly adhered to the status quo and routine; spread in the valley valley full, spread in the pit pit full; block the pores of the soul and keep the spirit tranquil, all with foreign objects to measure.

古文：其声挥绰，其名高明。
现代文：乐声悠扬广远，可以称作高如上天、明如日月。
English: The music is melodious and far-reaching, and can be said to be as high as heaven and as bright as the sun and moon.

古文：是故鬼神守其幽，日月星辰行其纪。
现代文：因此连鬼神也能持守幽暗，日月星辰也能运行在各自的轨道上。
English: Therefore, even ghosts and gods can keep darkness, and the sun, moon and stars can also run in their respective orbits.

古文：吾止之于有穷，流之于无止。
现代文：我时而把乐声停留在一定的境界里，而乐声的寓意却流播在无穷无尽的天地中。
English: I sometimes keep the music in a certain realm, but the meaning of the music is broadcast in the endless world.

古文：子欲虑之而不能知也，望之而不能见也，逐之而不能及也。
现代文：我想思考它却不能知晓，我观望它却不能看见，我追赶它却总不能赶上；只得无心地伫立在通达四方而无涯际的衢道上，依着几案吟咏。
English: I want to think about it but I can't know it, I watch it but I can't see it, I chase it but I can't catch up with it; I just have to stand unconsciously on the four-way and boundless road, following a few cases.

古文：傥然立于四虚之道，倚于槁梧而吟： 目知穷乎所欲见，力屈乎所欲逐，吾既不及，已夫！ 
现代文：目光和智慧困窘于一心想要见到的事物，力气竭尽于一心想要追求的东西。我早已经赶不上了啊！
English: My eyesight and intelligence are exhausted by the things I want to see with all my heart, and my strength is exhausted by the things I want to pursue with all my heart. I already can't catch up!

古文：形充空虚，乃至委蛇。
现代文：形体充盈却又好像不复存在，方才能够随应变化。
English: The body is full but seems to have ceased to exist, and only then can it adapt to change.

古文：汝委蛇，故怠。吾又奏之以无怠之声，调之以自然之命。
现代文：你随应变化，因此惊恐不安的情绪慢慢平息下来。 我又演奏起忘情忘我的乐声，并且用自然的节奏来加以调协。
English: You go with the flow, so the jitters slowly subside, and I play the haunting music again, setting it to a natural rhythm.

古文：故若混逐丛生，林乐而无形，布挥而不曳，幽昏而无声。
现代文：因而乐声象是混同驰逐相辅相生，犹如风吹丛林自然成乐却又无有形迹；传播和振动均无外力引曳，幽幽暗暗又好象没有了一点儿声响。
English: Therefore, the music seems to blend and complement each other, just as the wind blows the jungle naturally into music, but there is no tangible trace; there is no external force for transmission and vibration, and it is dark and dark, and there seems to be no sound.

古文：动于无方，居于窈冥，或谓之死，或谓之生；或谓之实，或谓之荣。行流散徙，不主常声。
现代文：乐声启奏于不可探测的地方，滞留于深远幽暗的境界；有时候可以说它消逝，有时候又可以说它兴起；有时候可以说它实在，有时候又可说它虚华；演进流播飘散游徙，绝不固守一调。
English: The music begins in an undetectable place, lingering in a deep, dark realm; sometimes it can be said to disappear, sometimes it can be said to arise; sometimes it can be said to be real, sometimes it can be said to be unreal; evolving, spreading, drifting and wandering, never sticking to one tune.

古文：世疑之，稽于圣人。
现代文：世人往往迷惑不解，向圣人问询查考。
English: The world is often puzzled and asks the saints to investigate.

古文：圣也者，达于情而遂于命也。
现代文：所谓圣，就是通达事理而顺应于自然。
English: To be holy is to be reasonable and conform to nature.

古文：天机不张而五官皆备。此之谓天乐，无言而心说。
现代文：自然的枢机没有启张而五官俱全，这就可以称之为出自本然的乐声，犹如没有说话却心里喜悦。
English: The cardinal points of nature are not exaggerated and have all five senses, which can be called the original music, as if there is no speech but joy in the heart.

古文：故有焱氏为之颂曰： 听之不闻其声，视之不见其形，充满天地，苞裹六极。 
现代文：所以有焱氏为它颂扬说： 用耳听听不到声音，用眼看看不见形迹，充满于大地，包容了六极。 
English: Therefore, there are people who praise it, saying: "You can't hear the sound with your ears, you can't see the shape with your eyes, it fills the earth and embraces the six poles."

古文：汝欲听之而无接焉，而故惑也。乐也者，始于惧，惧故祟；吾又次之以怠，怠故遁；卒之于惑，惑故愚；愚故道，道可载而与之俱也。 
现代文：你想听却无法衔接连贯，所以你到最后终于迷惑不解。 这样的乐章，初听时从惶惶不安的境态开始，因为恐惧而认为是祸患；我接着又演奏了使人心境松缓的乐曲，因为松缓而渐渐消除恐惧；乐声最后在迷惑不解中终结，因为迷惑不解而无知无识似的；无知无识的浑厚心态就接近大道，接近大道就可以借此而与大道融合相通了。 
English: You want to listen to it, but you can't connect it coherently, so you end up puzzled. Such a piece of music, when first listening to it, starts from a state of panic and anxiety, because of fear it is considered a disaster; I then played a relaxing music, because of relaxation it gradually eliminates fear; the music finally ends in confusion, because of confusion it is like ignorance and ignorance; the thick mentality of ignorance and ignorance approaches the avenue, approaching the avenue can be used to merge with the avenue.

古文：孔子西游于卫，颜渊问师金曰： 以夫子之行为奚如？ 
现代文：孔子向西边游历到卫国。颜渊问师金道： 你认为夫子此次卫国之行怎么样？ 
English: Confucius traveled to the west to defend the country. Yan Yuan asked the teacher Jin Dao: What do you think of the master's defense of the country?

古文：师金曰： 惜乎！
现代文：师金说： 可惜呀，你的先生一定会遭遇困厄啊！ 
English: Shikin said, "It's a pity, your teacher will surely be in trouble!"

古文：而夫子其穷哉！ 
现代文：颜渊说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Yan Yuan said: Why?

古文：颜渊曰： 何也？ 师金曰： 夫刍狗之未陈也，盛以箧衍，巾以文绣，尸祝齐戒以将之。
现代文：师金说： 用草扎成的狗还没有用于祭祀，一定会用竹制的箱笼来装着，用绣有图纹的饰物来披着，祭祀主持人斋戒后迎送着。
English: Teacher Jin said: Dogs made of grass have not yet been used for sacrifices, they will definitely be carried in bamboo cages, draped with embroidered ornaments, and welcomed by the officiant after fasting.

古文：及其已陈也，行者践其首脊，苏者取而爨之而已。将复取而盛以箧衍，巾以文绣，游居寝卧其下，彼不得梦，必且数眯焉。
现代文：等到它已用于祭祀，行路人踩踏它的头颅和脊背，拾草的人捡回去用于烧火煮饭罢了；想要再次取来用于祭祀而拿竹筐装着它，拿绣有图纹的饰物披着它，游乐居处于主人的身旁，即使它不做恶梦，也会一次又一次地感受到梦魇似的压抑。
English: Wait until it has been used for sacrifice, pedestrians trample on its head and spine, and the grass picker picks it back up for cooking; if you want to take it again for sacrifice, take a bamboo basket to carry it, take embroidered ornaments to wear it, and the playhouse is next to the owner. Even if it does not have nightmares, it will feel nightmare-like depression again and again.

古文：今而夫子亦取先王已陈刍狗，聚弟子游居寝卧其下。
现代文：如今你的先生，也是在取法先王已经用于祭祀的草扎之狗，并聚集众多弟子游乐居处于他的身边。
English: Now your teacher, too, is taking the straw dog that was already used for sacrifice by the first king of the Dharma, and gathering many disciples to live happily by his side.

古文：故伐树于宋，削迹于卫，穷于商周，是非其梦邪？
现代文：所以在宋国大树下讲习礼法而大树被砍伐，在卫国游说而被铲掉了所有的足迹，在殷地和东周游历遭到困厄，这不就是那样的恶梦吗？
English: Therefore, to study etiquette under the big trees in Song and the big trees were cut down, to lobby in the motherland and all the footprints were wiped out, to travel in and around the east, and to be trapped, isn't this just such a nightmare?

古文：围于陈蔡之间，七日不火食，死生相与邻，是非其眯邪？夫水行莫如用舟，而陆行莫如用车。以舟之可行于水也，而求推之于陆，则没世不行寻常。
现代文：在陈国和蔡国之间遭到围困，整整七天没有能生火就食，让死和生成了近邻，这又不就是那压得喘不过气来的梦魇吗？ 在水上划行没有什么比得上用船，在陆地上行走没有什么比得上用车，因为船可以在水中划行而奢求在陆地上推着船走，那么终身也不能行走多远。
English: To be besieged between the states of Chen and Cai, to eat and drink for seven whole days without being able to light a fire, to have death and birth as close neighbors, is this not the nightmare of suffocation? To row on the water is nothing compared to using a boat, to walk on the land is nothing compared to using a car, because the boat can row in the water and the luxury of pushing the boat on the land, so you can't walk far for life.

古文：古今非水陆与？
现代文：古今的不同不就象是水面和陆地的差异吗？
English: Isn't the difference between ancient and modern times like the difference between water and land?

古文：周鲁非舟车与？
现代文：周和鲁的差异不就象是船和车的不同吗？
English: Isn't the difference between Zhou and Lu like the difference between a boat and a car?

古文：今蕲行周于鲁，是犹推舟于陆也！劳而无功，身必有殃。
现代文：如今一心想在鲁国推行周王室的治理办法，这就象是在陆地上推船而行，徒劳而无功，自身也难免遭受祸殃。
English: Now, he is bent on promoting the Zhou royal family's governance method in Lu. This is like pushing a boat on land. It is futile and futile, and he will inevitably suffer misfortune.

古文：彼未知夫无方之传，应物而不穷者也。且子独不见夫桔槔者乎？
现代文：他们全不懂得运动变化并无限定，只能顺应事物于无穷的道理。 况且，你没有看见那吊杆汲水的情景吗？
English: They do not understand that there is no limit to the movement of change, and can only conform to the principle that things are infinite.Besides, did you not see the scene of the boom drawing water?

古文：引之则俯，舍之则仰。
现代文：拉起它的一端而另一端便俯身临近水面，放下它的一端而另一端就高高仰起。
English: Pull it up one end and the other end bends down close to the water, put it down one end and the other end rises high.

古文：彼，人之所引，非引人者也。故俯仰而不得罪于人。
现代文：那吊杆，是因为人的牵引，并非它牵引了人，所以或俯或仰均不得罪人。
English: The boom is pulled by a person, not pulled by a person, so it's not a crime to tilt it up or down.

古文：故夫三皇五帝之礼义法度，不矜于同而矜于治。
现代文：因此说，远古三皇五帝时代的礼义法度，不在于相同而为人顾惜，在于治理而为人看重。
English: Therefore, it is said that the ancient three emperors and five emperors era of etiquette and law is not the same, but is cherished by people, and is valued by people in terms of governance.

古文：故譬三皇五帝之礼义法度，其犹柤梨橘柚邪！其味相反而皆可于口。故礼义法度者，应时而变者也。
现代文：拿三皇五帝时代的礼义法度来打比方，恐怕就像柤、梨、橘、柚四种酸甜不一的果子吧，它们的味道彼此不同然而却都很可口。 所以，礼义法度，都是顺应时代而有所变化的东西。
English: Taking the etiquette laws in the era of the three emperors and five emperors as an analogy, I'm afraid it's like the four fruits of different sweetness and sourness: ginger, pear, tangerine, and pomelo. Their taste is different from each other, but they are all delicious. Therefore, etiquette laws are all things that have changed in accordance with the times.

古文：今取猨狙而衣以周公之服，彼必龁啮挽裂，尽去而后慊。
现代文：如今捕捉到猿猴给它穿上周公的衣服，它必定会咬碎或撕裂，直到全部剥光身上的衣服方才心满意足。
English: Now that it has caught a monkey to dress it in last week's clothes, it will surely bite or tear them until it is satisfied with all the clothes off its body.

古文：观古今之异，犹囗狙之异乎周公也。
现代文：观察古今的差异，就象猿猴不同于周公。
English: Observe the differences between ancient and modern times, just as the monkey is different from Zhou Gong.

古文：故西施病心而颦其里，其里之丑人见之而美之，归亦捧心而颦其里。
现代文：从前西施心口疼痛而皱着眉头在邻里间行走，邻里的一个丑女人看见了认为皱着眉头很美，回去后也在邻里间捂着胸口皱着眉头。
English: Once upon a time, an ugly woman in the neighborhood saw and thought that frowning was beautiful, and when she returned, she also frowned in the neighborhood.

古文：其里之富人见之，坚闭门而不出；贫人见之，挈妻子而去之走。
现代文：邻里的有钱人看见了，紧闭家门而不出；贫穷的人看见了，带着妻儿子女远远地跑开了。
English: When the rich men of the neighborhood saw it, they shut themselves up in their houses and did not go out; when the poor men saw it, they took their wives and children and fled far away.

古文：彼知颦美而不知颦之所以美。
现代文：那个丑女人只知道皱着眉头好看却不知道皱着眉头好看的原因。
English: That ugly woman only knows how to look good with a frown, but not why she looks good with a frown.

古文：惜乎，而夫子其穷哉！ 
现代文：可惜呀，你的先生一定会遭遇厄运啊！
English: What a pity, your husband is sure to meet with bad luck!

古文：孔子行年五十有一而不闻道，乃南之沛见老聃。
现代文：孔子活到五十一岁还没有领悟大道，于是往南去到沛地拜见老聃。
English: Confucius lived to the age of fifty-one and did not understand the road, so he went south to Paidi to visit Laojiao.

古文：老聃曰： 子来乎？
现代文：老聃说： 你来了吗？
English: The old woman said, "Are you here?"

古文：吾闻子，北方之贤者也！子亦得道乎？ 
现代文：我听说你是北方的贤者，你恐怕已经领悟了大道吧？ 
English: I've heard you're the sage of the north. I'm afraid you've learned the hard way.

古文：孔子曰： 未得也。 
现代文：孔子说： 还未能得到。 
English: Confucius said: It has not yet been obtained.

古文：老子曰： 子恶乎求之哉？ 
现代文：老子说： 你是怎样寻求大道的呢？ 
English: Lao Tzu said: How do you seek the high road?

古文：曰： 吾求之于度数，五年而未得也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我在规范、法度方面寻求大道，用了五年的功夫还未得到。 
English: Confucius said, "I have been searching for the right road in terms of norms and laws, and it has taken me five years of effort, but I have yet to find it.

古文：老子曰： 子又恶乎求之哉？ 
现代文：老子说： 你又怎样寻求大道呢？ 
English: Lao Tzu said: How do you seek the road?

古文：曰： 吾求之于阴阳，十有二年而未得也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我又从阴阳的变化来寻求，十二年了还是未能得到。 
English: Confucius said, "I have also sought from the changes of yin and yang, but I have not been able to obtain it for twelve years."

古文：老子曰： 然，使道而可献，则人莫不献之于其君；使道而可进，则人莫不进之于其亲；使道而可以告人，则人莫不告其兄弟；使道而可以与人，则人莫不与其子孙。
现代文：老子说： 会是这样的。假使道可以用来进献，那么人们没有谁不会向国君进献大道；假使道可以用来奉送，那么人们没有谁不会向自己的双亲奉送大道；假使道可以传告他人，那么人们没有谁不会告诉给他的兄弟；假使道可以给与人，那么人们没有谁不会用来给与他的子孙。
English: Lao Tzu said: It will be like this. If the Tao can be used to make offerings, then there is no one who will not offer the road to the king; if the Tao can be used to offer, then there is no one who will not offer the road to his parents; if the Tao can be preached to others, then there is no one who will not tell his brother; if the Tao can be given to people, then there is no one who will not be used to give his children and grandchildren.

古文：然而不可者，无它也，中无主而不止，外无正而不行。
现代文：然而不可以这样做的原因，没有别的，内心不能自持因而大道不能停留，对外没有什么相对应因而大道不能推行。
English: However, there is no other reason why this cannot be done. The heart cannot sustain itself, so the road cannot be stopped. There is nothing corresponding to the outside, so the road cannot be promoted.

古文：由中出者，不受于外，圣人不出；由外入者，无主于中，圣人不隐。
现代文：从内心发出的东西，倘若不能为外者所接受，圣人也就不会有所传教；从外部进入内心的东西，倘若心中无所领悟而不能自持，圣人也就不会有所怜惜。
English: If what comes from the heart is not accepted by outsiders, the sage will not preach; if what comes from the outside is not understood by the heart, the sage will not have compassion.

古文：名，公器也，不可多取。
现代文：名声，乃是人人都可使用的器物，不可过多猎取。
English: Fame is a tool that can be used by everyone, so don't go hunting for it too much.

古文：仁义，先王之蘧庐也，止可以一宿而不可久处。觏而多责。古之至人，假道于仁，托宿于义，以游逍遥之虚，食于苟简之田，立于不贷之圃。
现代文：仁义，乃是前代帝王的馆舍，可以住上一宿而不可以久居，多次交往必然会生出许多责难。 古代道德修养高的至人，对于仁来说只是借路，对于义来说只是暂住，而游乐于自由自在、无拘无束的境域，生活于马虎简单、无奢无华的境地，立身于从不施与的园圃。
English: Righteousness and benevolence are the residences of the emperors of the previous generation. They can live for a night but not for a long time, and multiple interactions will inevitably produce many reproaches. The most highly moral and cultivated people in ancient times were only a loan for benevolence and only a temporary stay for righteousness, but they enjoyed the free and unrestrained realm, lived in a sloppy, simple, luxury-free state, and stood in a garden that never gave.

古文：逍遥，无为也；苟简，易养也；不贷，无出也。
现代文：自由自在、无拘无束，便是无为；马虎简单、无奢无华，就易于生存；从不施与，就不会使自己受损也无裨益于他人。
English: To be free and unrestrained is to do nothing; to be simple and without luxury is to survive; not to give is not to harm oneself and not to benefit others.

古文：古者谓是采真之游。以富为是者，不能让禄；以显为是者，不能让名。
现代文：古代称这种情况叫做神采真实的遨游。 把贪图财贿看作正确的人，不会让人利禄；把追求显赫看作正确的人，不会让人名声；迷恋权势的人，不会授人权柄。
English: In ancient times, this situation was called the wandering of the spirit and the truth; the greed for money and bribery as the right person will not make people profitable; the pursuit of prominence as the right person will not make people famous; the person who is infatuated with power will not give authority.

古文：亲权者，不能与人柄，操之则栗，舍之则悲，而一无所鉴，以窥其所不休者，是天之戮民也。
现代文：掌握了利禄、名声和权势便唯恐丧失而整日战栗不安，而放弃上述东西又会悲苦不堪，而且心中全无一点鉴识，眼睛只盯住自己所无休止追逐的东西，这样的人只能算是被大自然所刑戮的人。
English: A man who, when he has power, fame, and authority, trembles all the day long for fear of losing them, and who, when he gives them up, is wretched, and who has not a grain of knowledge in his heart, but his eyes are fixed on the object of his incessant pursuit, can only be described as a man who has been tortured by nature.

古文：怨、恩、取、与、谏、教、生杀八者，正之器也，唯循大变无所湮者为能用之。
现代文：怨恨、恩惠、获取、施与、谏诤、教化、生存、杀戮、这八种作法全是用来端正他人的工具，只有遵循自然的变化而无所阻塞滞留的人才能够运用它。
English: Resentment, favor, acquisition, bestowal, teasing, indoctrination, survival, killing, these eight practices are all tools for correcting others, and only those who follow the natural changes without being blocked can use it.

古文：故曰：正者，正也。
现代文：所以说，所谓正，就是使人端正。
English: Therefore, the so-called "correct" means to make people correct.

古文：其心以为不然者，天门弗开矣。 
现代文：内心里认为不是这样，那么心灵的门户就永远不可能打开。 
English: If you think otherwise, then the door of your heart will never be opened.

古文：孔子见老聃而语仁义。
现代文：孔子拜见老聃探讨仁义。
English: Confucius visited Laos to discuss benevolence and righteousness.

古文：老聃曰： 夫播糠眯目，则天地四方易位矣；蚊虻囋肤，则通昔不寐矣。
现代文：老聃说： 飞扬的糠屑进入眼睛，也会颠倒天地四方，蚊虻之类的小虫叮咬皮肤，就会让人通晓都难以入睡。
English: The old woman said, "Flying sawdust entering the eyes will also turn the world upside down, and small insects such as mosquitoes biting the skin will make it difficult for people to fall asleep.

古文：夫仁义惨然，乃愤吾心，乱莫大焉。
现代文：仁义给人的毒害就更为惨痛乃至令人昏愦糊涂，对人的祸乱没有什么比仁义更为厉害。
English: The poison of benevolence and righteousness is more painful and even bewildering, and there is nothing more powerful than benevolence and righteousness for man's calamity.

古文：吾子使天下无失其朴，吾子亦放风而动，总德而立矣！又奚杰杰然若负建鼓而求亡子者邪！
现代文：如果你想让天下不至于丧失淳厚质朴，你就应该顺应自然而行动，一切顺于自然规律行事，又何必那么卖力地去宣扬仁义，好像是敲着鼓去追赶逃亡的人似的呢？
English: If you want the world not to lose its purity and simplicity, you should act in accordance with nature, everything should follow the laws of nature, and why do you have to work so hard to promote benevolence and righteousness, as if you were beating a drum to chase a fugitive?

古文：夫鹄不日浴而白，乌不日黔而黑。黑白之朴，不足以为辩；名誉之观，不足以为广。
现代文：白色的天鹅不需要天天沐浴而毛色自然洁白，黑色的乌鸦不需要每天用黑色渍染而毛色自然乌黑，乌鸦的黑和天鹅的白都是出于本然，不足以分辨谁优谁劣；名声和荣誉那样的外在东西，更不足以播散张扬。
English: A white swan does not need to be bathed every day, and its fur is naturally white; a black crow does not need to be dyed black every day, and its fur is naturally black. The black of the crow and the white of the swan are from nature, and are not enough to distinguish who is superior or inferior; external things such as fame and honor are not enough to spread publicity.

古文：泉涸，鱼相与处于陆，相呴以湿，相濡以沫，不若相忘于江湖。 
现代文：泉水干涸了，鱼儿相互依偎在陆地上，大口出气来取得一点儿湿气，靠唾沫来相互得到一点儿润湿，不如在江河湖海中畅游而彼此相互忘却。 
English: The springs have dried up, and the fishes are clinging to each other on the land, breathing hard to get a little moisture, and spitting to get each other a little wet. It is better to swim in the rivers and lakes and forget about each other.

古文：孔子见老聃归，三日不谈。
现代文：孔子拜见老聃回来，整整三天都不说话。
English: Confucius did not speak for three days after returning from his visit to Laozi.

古文：弟子问曰： 夫子见老聃，亦将何规哉？ 
现代文：弟子问道： 先生见到老聃，对他作了什么诲劝吗？ 
English: The disciple asked, "When you saw Lao Zi, did you give him any advice?"

古文：孔子曰： 吾乃今于是乎见龙。
现代文：孔子说： 我直到如今才竟然在老聃那儿见到了真正的龙！
English: Confucius said, "It is only now that I have actually seen a real dragon in Laos!"

古文：龙，合而成体，散而成章，乘乎云气而养乎阴阳。
现代文：龙，合在一起便成为一个整体，分散开来又成为华美的文采，乘驾云气而养息于阴阳之间。
English: The dragon, when put together, becomes a whole, and when dispersed, it becomes a magnificent literary work, riding on the cloud and nourishing itself between yin and yang.

古文：予口张而不能嗋。予又何规老聃哉？ 
现代文：我大张着口久久不能合拢，我又哪能对老聃作出诲劝呢！ 
English: My mouth is wide open and I can't close it for a long time. How can I give advice to my wife?

古文：子贡曰： 然则人固有尸居而龙见，雷声而渊默，发动如天地者乎？
现代文：子贡说： 这样说，那么人难道有像尸体一样安稳不动而又像龙一样神情飞扬地显现，像疾雷一样震响而又像深渊那样沉寂，发生和运动犹如天地运动变化的情况吗？
English: Zigong said: So, then, is there a situation in which a person appears as stable and motionless as a corpse, but with a flying appearance like a dragon, with a sound like thunder and a silence like an abyss, and the occurrence and movement are like the movement of heaven and earth?

古文：赐亦可得而观乎？ 
现代文：我也能见到他并亲自加以体察吗？ 
English: Can I also see him and experience it for myself?

古文：遂以孔子声见老聃。
现代文：于是借助孔子的名义前去拜见老聃。
English: So he used the name of Confucius to visit Lao Zang.

古文：老聃方将倨堂而应，微曰： 予年运而往矣，子将何以戒我乎？ 
现代文：老聃正伸腿坐在堂上，轻声地应答说： 我年岁老迈，你将用什么来告诫我呢？ 
English: The old crone, sitting with outstretched legs in the hall, answered softly: "I am very old, what will you use to admonish me?

古文：子贡曰： 夫三皇五帝之治天下不同，其系声名一也。而先生独以为非圣人，如何哉？ 
现代文：子贡说： 远古时代三皇五帝治理天下各不相同，然而却都有好的名声，唯独先生您不认为他们是圣人，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "In ancient times, the three emperors and five emperors governed the world in different ways, but they all had good reputations. However, sir, you don't think they were saints. Why is that?

古文：老聃曰： 小子少进！
现代文：老聃说： 年轻人，你稍稍近前些！
English: The old woman said, "Young man, come a little closer.

古文：子何以谓不同？ 
现代文：你凭什么说他们各自有所不同？ 
English: On what basis do you say they are different?

古文：对曰： 尧授舜，舜授禹。禹用力而汤用兵，文王顺纣而不敢逆，武王逆纣而不肯顺，故曰不同。 
现代文：子贡回答： 尧让位给舜，舜让位给禹，禹用力治水而汤用力征伐，文王顺从商纣不敢有所背逆，武王背逆商纣而不顺服，所以说各不相同。 
English: Zigong replied: "Yan yielded to Han, Han yielded to Yu, Yu used force to control water and Tang used force to conquer, King Wen obeyed Shang and did not dare to rebel, King Wu disobeyed Shang and did not obey, so they are all different."

古文：老聃曰： 小子少进，余语汝三皇五帝之治天下：黄帝之治天下，使民心一。民有其亲死不哭而民不非也。
现代文：老聃说： 年轻人，你再稍微靠前些！我对你说说三皇五帝治理天下的事。黄帝治理天下，使人民心地淳厚保持本真，百姓有谁死了双亲并不哭泣，人们也不会加以非议。
English: The old woman said, "Young man, you should stand a little further forward. Let me tell you about the three kings and five emperors who ruled the world. The Yellow Emperor ruled the world and kept the people's hearts pure and honest. People did not cry when their parents died, and people did not criticize him.

古文：尧之治天下，使民心亲。民有为其亲杀其杀而民不非也。
现代文：唐尧治理天下，使百姓敬重双亲，百姓有谁为了敬重双亲依照等差而做到亲疏有别，人们同样也不会非议。
English: Tang Xuan ruled the world and made the people respect their parents. If there are people who respect their parents according to parity and do things differently, they will not be criticized.

古文：舜之治天下，使民心竞。民孕妇十月生子，子生五月而能言，不至乎孩而始谁，则人始有夭矣。
现代文：虞舜治理天下，使百姓心存竞争，怀孕的妇女十个月生下孩子，孩子生下五个月就张口学话，不等长到两、三岁就开始识人问事，于是开始出现夭折短命的现象。
English: The yakuza ruled the world and made the people competitive. Pregnant women gave birth to their children at the age of ten months, and the children learned to talk at the age of five months. They didn't start to ask questions until they were two or three years old, and the phenomenon of premature death and short life began to appear.

古文：禹之治天下，使民心变，人有心而兵有顺，杀盗非杀人。自为种而 天下 耳。是以天下大骇，儒墨皆起。
现代文：夏禹治理天下，使百姓心怀变诈，人人存有机变之心因而动刀动枪成了理所当然之事，杀死盗贼不算杀人，人们各自结成团伙而肆意于天下，所以天下大受惊扰，儒家、墨家都纷纷而起。
English: Xia Yu governed the world, so that the people's hearts were deceitful, and everyone had an organic change of heart, so it became a matter of course to use a knife and a gun. Killing a thief was not a homicide. People formed groups of their own and acted wantonly in the world. Therefore, the world was greatly disturbed, and Confucianism and Mohism arose one after another.

古文：其作始有伦，而今乎妇女，何言哉！
现代文：他们初始时也还有伦有理，可是时至今日以女为妇，还有什么可言呢！
English: In the beginning they had reason, but now that they are women, what more is there to say?

古文：余语汝：三皇五帝之治天下，名曰治之，而乱莫甚焉。
现代文：我告诉你。三皇五帝治理天下，名义上叫做治理，而扰乱人性和真情没有什么比他们更严重的了。
English: I tell you, the Three Kings and Five Emperors rule the world, nominally called governance, and nothing is more serious than them in disturbing humanity and true feelings.

古文：三皇之知，上悖日月之明，下睽山川之精，中堕四时之施。
现代文：三皇的心智就只是，对上而言遮掩了日月的光明，对下而言违背了山川的精粹，就中而言毁坏了四时的推移。
English: The wisdom of the three emperors only obscured the light of the sun and moon for the upper classes, violated the essence of mountains and rivers for the lower classes, and destroyed the four-hour transition for the middle classes.

古文：其知惨于蛎虿之尾，鲜规之兽，莫得安其性命之情者，而犹自以为圣人，不可耻乎？其无耻也！ 
现代文：他们的心智比蛇蝎之尾还惨毒，就连小小的兽类，也不可能使本性和真情获得安宁，可是还自以为是圣人。是不认为可耻吗，还是不知道可耻呢？ 
English: Their minds are more poisonous than a viper's tail, and even small animals cannot pacify their nature and true feelings, yet they think they are saints. Do they not think it is shameful, or do they not know it is shameful?

古文：子贡蹴蹴然立不安。
现代文：子贡听了惊惶不定，心神不安地站着。
English: Zigong listened with trepidation and stood uneasily.

古文：孔子谓老聃曰： 丘治《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》、《易》、《春秋》六经，自以为久矣，孰知其故矣，以奸者七十二君，论先王之道而明周、召之迹，一君无所钩用。
现代文：孔子对老聃说： 我研修《诗》《书》《礼》《乐》《易》《春秋》六部经书，自认为很久很久了，熟悉了旧时的各种典章制度；用违反先王之制的七十二个国君为例，论述先王的方略和彰明周公、召公的政绩，可是一个国君也没有取用我的主张。
English: Confucius said to Laozi: I have studied the six scriptures of "Poetry," "Scripture," "Ritual," "Music," "Elegance," and "Spring and Autumn," and I think that it has been a long time, and I have become familiar with the various award systems of the old days. I used the example of the seventy-two sovereigns who violated the system of the former king to discuss the strategy of the former king and the political achievements of highlighting Zhou Gong and summoning officials, but not a single sovereign used my idea.

古文：甚矣！
现代文：实在难啊！
English: It's really difficult!

古文：夫人之难说也？道之难明邪？ 
现代文：是人难以规劝，还是大道难以彰明呢？ 
English: Is it difficult to persuade people, or is it difficult to show the way?

古文：老子曰： 幸矣，子之不遇治世之君！
现代文：老子说： 幸运啊，你不曾遇到过治世的国君！
English: Lao Tzu said: Lucky you, you have never met a reigning sovereign!

古文：夫六经，先王之陈迹也，岂其所以迹哉！
现代文：六经，乃是先王留下的陈旧遗迹，哪里是先王遗迹的本原！
English: The Six Classics are the antiquated relics left behind by the former king. Where is the origin of the former king's relics?

古文：今子之所言，犹迹也。夫迹，履之所出，而迹岂履哉！
现代文：如今你所谈论的东西，就好像是足迹；足迹是脚踩出来的，然而足迹难道就是脚吗！
English: Now, what you are talking about is like a footprint; a footprint is made by a foot, but is a footprint a foot?

古文：夫白鶂之相视，眸子不运而风化；虫，雄鸣于上风，雌应于下风而风化。类自为雌雄，故风化。
现代文：白鶂相互而视，眼珠子一动也不动便相诱而孕；虫，雄的在上方鸣叫，雌的在下方相应而诱发生子；同一种类而自身具备雌雄两性，不待交合而生子。
English: The egrets look at each other, their eyes do not move, and they attract each other to conceive; the insects, the male calls at the top, the female at the bottom, respectively, and induces procreation; the same species and themselves have male and female sexes, do not wait for intercourse and have children.

古文：性不可易，命不可变，时不可止，道不可壅。
现代文：本性不可改变，天命不可变更，时光不可停留，大道不可壅塞。
English: Nature cannot be changed, destiny cannot be changed, time cannot be stopped, and the road cannot be blocked.

古文：苟得于道，无自而不可；失焉者，无自而可。 
现代文：假如真正得道，无论去到哪里都不会受到阻遏；失道的人，无论去到哪里都是此路不通。 
English: If you truly attain the way, no matter where you go, you will not be stopped; if you lose the way, no matter where you go, you will not be able to pass this way.

古文：孔子不出三月，复见，曰： 丘得之矣。
现代文：孔子三月闭门不出，再次见到老聃说： 我终于得道了。
English: Confucius closed his door in March and did not come out. When he saw Lao Zi again, he said, "I have finally attained the Way."

古文：乌鹊孺，鱼傅沫，细要者化，有弟而兄啼。
现代文：乌鸦喜鹊在巢里交尾孵化，鱼儿借助水里的泡沫生育，蜜蜂自化而生，生下弟弟，哥哥失爱就会啼哭。
English: Crows and magpies mate and hatch in the nest, fish reproduce with the help of foam in the water, bees spontaneously come into being and give birth to a baby brother, and if the older brother falls out of love, he will cry.

古文：久矣，夫丘不与化为人！
现代文：很长时间了，我没有能跟万物的自然变化相识为友！
English: For a long time, I have not been able to make friends with the natural changes of all things!

古文：不与化为人，安能化人。 
现代文：不能跟自然的变化相识为友，又怎么能教化他人！ 
English: You can't befriend natural changes, how can you educate others!

古文：老子曰： 可，丘得之矣！ 
现代文：老子听了后说： 好。孔丘得道了！ 
English: After listening to him, Lao Tzu said, "Good. Confucius has reached enlightenment!"

