古文：凡音之起，由人心生也。
现代文：大凡声音的产生，都是出于人类有能够产生思想感情的心。
English: The beginning of the great banal sound is produced by the human heart.

古文：人心之动，物使之然也。
现代文：人类思想感情的变化，是外界事物影响的结果。
English: But the changes in people's hearts are caused by external things.

古文：感于物而动，故形于声。
现代文：受外界事物的影响，人的思想感情产生了变动，就会用 声 表现出来。
English: When people's thoughts and feelings change under the influence of external things, it will be expressed in their voices.

古文：声相应，故生变；变成方，谓之音；比音而乐之，及干戚羽旄，谓之乐。
现代文：声非一种，其中有同有异。不同的声音互相配合，因而产生变化；变化形成一定的规律，就称之为音律。排比音律成为曲调，并配以干戚和羽旄，这便叫做 乐 。
English: There is more than one kind of sound, some of which are the same and some of which are different. Different sounds are combined with each other, resulting in changes; the changes form a certain pattern, which is called a melody. The arrangement of the melody becomes a melody, and it is accompanied by the stem and the feather, which is called "music."

古文：乐者，音之所由生也；其本在人心之感于物也。
现代文：从以上可知，所谓 乐 ，是由音所构成的，而其本源乃在于人心对于外界事物的感受。
English: From the above, it can be seen that the so-called "music" is composed of sound, and its origin lies in the feelings of the human heart for external things.

古文：是故其哀心感者，其声瞧以杀。其乐心感者，其声噍以缓。其喜心感者，其声发以散。其怒心感者，其声粗以厉。其敬心感者，其声直以廉。其爱心感者，其声和以柔。
现代文：所以，人心有了哀伤的感受，发出的声音便焦急而衰弱；人心有了快乐的感受，发出的声音就宽松舒缓；人心有了喜悦的感受，发出的声音就开朗而轻快；人心有了愤怒的感受，发出的声音便粗暴严厉；人心有了恭敬的感受，发出的声音就正直而端方；人心有了爱慕的感受，发出的声音就温和而柔顺。
English: Therefore, when there is a feeling of sadness in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is anxious and weak; when there is a feeling of happiness in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is loose and soothing; when there is a feeling of joy in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is cheerful and light; when there is a feeling of anger in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is rough and harsh; when there is a feeling of respect in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is honest and gentle; when there is a feeling of love in the heart, the sound emitted by the heart is gentle and soft.

古文：六者，非性也，感于物而后动。
现代文：这六种声音并非天性如此，而是人们的内心受到外界事物影响才造成的。
English: These six sounds are not natural, but are caused by people's hearts being affected by external things.

古文：是故先王慎所以感之者。
现代文：所以古代圣王十分重视用来感动人心的事物。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy kings attached great importance to things that moved people's hearts.

古文：故礼以道其志，乐以和其声，政以一其行，刑以防其奸。
现代文：用礼来引导人们的意志，用乐来调和人们的性情，用政令来统一人们的行动，用刑罚来防止人们做坏事。
English: Use rituals to guide people's will, use music to harmonize people's temperament, use decrees to unify people's actions, and use punishments to prevent people from doing bad things.

古文：礼乐刑政，其极一也；所以同民心而出治道也。凡音者，生人心者也。
现代文：用礼、用乐、用政令、用刑罚，手段虽然不同，但目的一样，就是要统一民心而实现天下大治。凡是音，皆产生于心。
English: Using etiquette, using music, using government orders, using punishments, although the means are different, the goal is the same, which is to unify the people's hearts and achieve world peace. All sounds are born in the heart.

古文：情动于中，故形于声。
现代文：感情发动于心，所以就表现为声。
English: Emotions are triggered in the mind, so they manifest as sound.

古文：声成文，谓之音。
现代文：把声组成动听的曲调，就叫做音。
English: The sound that makes up a beautiful melody is called sound.

古文：是故治世之音安以乐，其政和。乱世之音怨以怒，其政乖。亡国之音哀以思，其民困。
现代文：所以太平盛世的音，曲调安详而欢乐，反映了当时政治的和谐；混乱世道的音，其曲调怨恨而愤怒，反映了当时政治的紊乱渗亡国之音，其曲调哀伤而深沉，反映了当时人民的困苦。
English: Therefore, the sound of a peaceful and prosperous world, with a serene and joyful tune, reflected the political harmony of the time; the sound of a chaotic world, with a resentful and angry tune, reflected the political turmoil of the time; the sound of a ruined country, with a mournful and deep tune, reflected the hardships of the people at that time.

古文：声音之道，与政通矣。
现代文：由此看来，声音和政治是相通的：有什么样的政治就有什么样的声音。
English: From this point of view, sound and politics are interrelated: what kind of politics there is, there is what kind of sound.

古文：宫为君，商为臣，角为民，征为事，羽为物。
现代文：宫声代表君，商声代表臣，角声代表民，微声代表事，羽声代表物。
English: In five voices, the middle palace is you, the merchant is the vassal, the corner is the people, the recruitment is the matter, and the feather is the thing.

古文：五者不乱，则无怗懘之音矣。
现代文：如果这五声不乱，就不会出现不和谐的曲调。
English: If these five voices are not disturbed, there will be no discordant melody.

古文：宫乱则荒，其君骄。商乱则陂，其官坏。角乱则忧，其民怨。征乱则哀，其事勤。羽乱则危，其财匮。
现代文：如果宫声混乱则其音散漫，象征着国君的骄悠；商声混乱则其音不正，象征着官员的腐败；角声混乱则其音忧伤，象征着百姓的不满；徽声混乱则其音悲哀，象征着百姓的摇役太重；羽声混乱则其音危急，象征着物资匾乏。
English: If the palace voice is chaotic, its sound is diffuse, symbolizing the arrogance of the sovereign; the commercial voice is chaotic, its sound is unfair, symbolizing the corruption of officials; the horn voice is chaotic, its sound is sad, symbolizing the dissatisfaction of the people; the crest voice is chaotic, its sound is sad, symbolizing the heavy burden of the people; the feather voice is chaotic, its sound is critical, symbolizing the shortage of materials.

古文：五者皆乱，迭相陵，谓之慢。
现代文：如果五声皆乱，秩序荡然，那就会奏出所谓的慢音。
English: All five voices are inaccurate, that is, the phased invasion of the mausoleum is called slow.

古文：如此，则国之灭亡无日矣。
现代文：到了这一地步，国家的灭亡也就不剩几天了。
English: At this point, the country's demise is just days away.

古文：郑卫之音，乱世之音也，比于慢矣。
现代文：郑、卫之音，属于乱世之音，接近于慢音了。
English: Zheng, Wei's tone, belongs to the sound of the chaotic world, and is close to the slow tone.

古文：桑间濮上之音，亡国之音也，其政散，其民流，诬上行私而不可止也。
现代文：桑间蹼上之音，属于亡国之音，它反映了国家政治的极端混乱，老百姓的流离失所，统治者的欺上瞒下自私自利而不可救药。
English: The sound of mulberry trees rustling is the sound of a dying country. It reflects the extreme chaos of the country's politics, the displacement of the people, and the rulers' deceitful and selfish self-interest.

古文：凡音者，生于人心者也。乐者，通伦理者也。
现代文：凡音，都是出于人心。而比音高级的乐，则是与社会伦理相通的。
English: Plain tones are from the human heart, while high-pitched music is connected to social ethics.

古文：是故知声而不知音者，禽兽是也；知音而不知乐者，众庶是也。
现代文：所以懂得声而不懂得音为何物的，那是禽兽；懂得音而不懂得乐为何物的，那是普通百姓。
English: Therefore, those who only know the sound but do not know how to harmonize are beasts; those who only know the rhythm but do not know how to create music are ordinary people.

古文：唯君子为能知乐。
现代文：只有君子才懂得乐。
English: Only a gentleman knows how to have fun.

古文：是故审声以知音，审音以知乐，审乐以知政，而治道备矣。
现代文：所以君子才能从辨别声而进而懂得音，从辨别音而进而懂得乐，从辨别乐而进而懂得政事，于是就有了一整套的治国方法。
English: Therefore, the detailed examination of the sound to understand the rhythm, the examination of the rhythm to understand the music, the examination of the music to understand the political situation, and the method of governing the world in this way are also complete.

古文：是故不知声者不可与言音，不知音者不可与言乐。
现代文：所以，对于不懂得声的人，就没法和他再进一步谈音；对于不懂得音的人，就没法和他再进一步谈乐。
English: Therefore, for those who do not understand the voice, it is impossible to further discuss the sound with him; for those who do not understand the sound, it is impossible to further discuss the music with him.

古文：知乐则几于礼矣。
现代文：懂得乐的人也就近乎懂得礼了。
English: People who know how to have fun also almost know how to be polite.

古文：礼乐皆得，谓之有德。
现代文：礼乐都能够懂得，那就叫做有德。
English: It is called virtuous to be able to understand all the rituals and music.

古文：德者得也。
现代文：德，就是得到的意思。
English: De, which means to get.

古文：是故乐之隆，非极音也。食飨之礼，非致味也。
现代文：所以，无论多么隆重的乐，并不是为了极尽听觉上的享受；无论多么盛大的食飨之礼，并不是为了极尽味觉上的享受。
English: Therefore, no matter how grand the music, it is not for the enjoyment of hearing; no matter how grand the food, it is not for the enjoyment of taste.

古文：清庙之瑟，朱弦而疏越，壹倡而三叹，有遗音者矣。
现代文：举例来说，演奏清庙》乐章所用的瑟，上面是朱色丝弦，下边是稀疏的孔，奏出的声音并不是多么悦耳，一个人领头唱，只有三个人应和，其目的显然不在于追求动听。
English: For example, the horn used to play the "Qing Temple" movement has vermilion silk strings on the top and sparse holes on the bottom. The sound it produces is not very pleasant. One person leads the singing, and only three people sing in harmony. Its purpose is clearly not to pursue beautiful sound.

古文：大飨之礼，尚玄酒而俎腥鱼，大羹不和，有遗味者矣。
现代文：又如大飨之礼，以水代酒而且放在前列，盘子里放的是生肉生鱼，肉汁也不加任何调料，其目的显然也不在于追求好吃。
English: In the etiquette of the grand banquet, wine is advocated, raw fish is used as the filling, and the soup is a single-flavored salty broth, without five flavors, however, there is another taste in addition to the actual taste.

古文：是故先王之制礼乐也，非以极口腹耳目之欲也，将以教民平好恶而反人道之正也。
现代文：由此看来，古先圣王制礼作乐，其目的并不是要满足人们口腹耳目的享受，而是要教育人民辨别好坏，回到做人的正道上来。
English: Therefore, it is said that the ancient holy kings formulated ritual music, not to satisfy the appetites of the mouth, stomach and ears, but to teach the people in this way, to have the correct likes and dislikes, and thus to return to the right path of humanity.

古文：人生而静，天之性也；感于物而动，性之欲也。
现代文：人生下来是好静的，这是先天赋于的本性。受到外界的影响而变为好动，这是本性受到了引诱。
English: People are born calm, this is the nature that they are born with. They are influenced by the outside world and become active, this is the nature that is seduced.

古文：物至知知，然后好恶形焉。
现代文：人的认识和外界事物相交接，就会表现为两种态度：喜好或厌恶。
English: When an external object comes around, it is perceived by the mind, and then likes and dislikes are formed.

古文：好恶无节于内，知诱于外，不能反躬，天理灭矣。
现代文：喜好或厌恶的态度如果从人的自身得不到节制，再加上对于外界事物的引诱不能自我反省和正确对待，那么人的天性就会完全丧失。
English: If the attitude of liking or disliking cannot be controlled by oneself, coupled with the temptation of external things that cannot be self-reflected and treated correctly, then human nature will be completely lost.

古文：夫物之感人无穷，而人之好恶无节，则是物至而人化物也。
现代文：本来外界事物就在不断地影响着人，如果再加上人在主观上对自己的好恶反应不加限制，那就等于外界事物和人一接触就把人完全征服了。
English: External things give people endless feelings, and if people's likes and dislikes are unrestrained, they will be assimilated by the things around them.

古文：人化物也者，灭天理而穷人欲者也。
现代文：人被外界事物完全征服，就等于人的天性完全丧失，放纵人欲。
English: If a person is assimilated by a foreign object, it will destroy the heavenly principle and exhaust the human desire.

古文：于是有悖逆诈伪之心，有淫泆作乱之事。
现代文：人到了这一地步，就会产生犯上作乱欺诈虚伪之心，就会干出纵欲放荡胡作非为之事。
English: When people reach this stage, they will have the heart to commit disorder, fraud and hypocrisy, and will indulge in debauchery and wantonness.

古文：是故强者胁弱，众者暴寡，知者诈愚，勇者苦怯，疾病不养，老幼孤独不得其所，此大乱之道也。
现代文：以致于强者压迫弱者，人多的欺负人少的，聪明人欺骗老实人，勇猛者折磨怯懦者，有病的人得不到照顾，老幼孤独者也得不到关怀。这是天下大乱的办法，行不通的。
English: So that the strong oppress the weak, the many tyrannize the few, the wise deceive the honest, the brave torment the cowardly, the sick go uncared for, and the old and the lonely receive no care.

古文：是故先王之制礼乐，人为之节；衰麻哭泣，所以节丧纪也；钟鼓干戚，所以和安乐也；昏姻冠笄，所以别男女也；射乡食飨，所以正交接也。
现代文：有鉴于此，古代圣王就制礼作乐，为人们制定出节制的办法：有关丧服、哭泣的规定，这是用来节制丧事的；钟鼓干戚等乐器舞具，这是用来调节安乐的；男大当婚，女大当嫁，这是用来区别男女的；一射乡食飨，这是用来规范人们交往的。
English: In view of this, the ancient holy kings made rituals and music, and worked out a method of restraint for people: regulations on funeral clothes and weeping, which were used to control funerals; musical instruments such as gongs and drums, which were used to regulate well-being; when men marry, when women marry, this is used to distinguish between men and women; and when people eat, this is used to regulate people's interactions.

古文：礼节民心，乐和民声，政以行之，刑以防之，礼乐刑政，四达而不悖，则王道备矣。
现代文：用礼来节制民心，用乐来调和民性，用政令加以推行，用刑罚加以防范。礼、乐、刑、政，如果这四个方面都得到贯彻而不发生梗阻，也就具备王道政治了。
English: Use ritual to restrain the people's heart, use music to reconcile the people's nature, use government decrees to implement it, and use criminal penalties to prevent it. If these four aspects of ritual, music, punishment, and politics are all implemented without obstruction, we will have royal politics.

古文：乐者为同，礼者为异。
现代文：乐的作用在于协调上下，礼的作用在于区别贵贱。
English: The characteristic of music is to seek common ground, while the characteristic of etiquette is to seek differences.

古文：同则相亲，异则相敬，乐胜则流，礼胜则离。
现代文：上下协调就会互相亲近，贵贱区别就会互相尊重。过分强调乐会使人际关系随便，过分强调礼会使人际关系疏远。
English: Upward and downward coordination will bring people closer to each other, and the difference between high and low will respect each other. Too much emphasis on music will make interpersonal relationships casual, and too much emphasis on etiquette will alienate interpersonal relationships.

古文：合情饰貌者礼乐之事也。
现代文：要使人际关系内心感情融洽外表互相尊重，这就是礼乐应尽的职能了。
English: To make interpersonal relationships internally harmonious and outwardly respect each other, this is the function that ritual music should fulfill.

古文：礼义立，则贵贱等矣；乐文同，则上下和矣；好恶着，则贤不肖别矣。
现代文：礼的制度建立了，贵贱的等级才有区别。乐的文采协调了，上下的关系才能和睦。善恶的标准明确了，好人与坏人也就容易区别了。
English: The system of etiquette has been established, and only then can there be a distinction between high and low levels. The literature of music has been coordinated, and the relationship between the upper and lower levels can be harmonious. The standard of good and evil has been clarified, and it is easy to distinguish between good people and bad people.

古文：刑禁暴，爵举贤，则政均矣。
现代文：用刑罚来禁止强暴，用爵位来推举贤能，政治也就公平了。
English: Punishments are used to prohibit violence, titles of nobility are used to promote virtue, and politics becomes fair.

古文：仁以爱之，义以正之，如此，则民治行矣。
现代文：用仁来爱护人民，用义来纠正邪恶。这样一来，老百姓就能治理得好了。
English: Use benevolence to love and protect the people, and use righteousness to correct evil. In this way, the people can be governed well.

古文：乐由中出，礼自外作。
现代文：乐是从内心发出，礼是从外部表现。
English: Pleasure is self-generated, while etiquette is self-imposed.

古文：乐由中出故静，礼自外作故文。
现代文：因为乐从内心发出，所以诚实无伪；因为礼从外部表现，所以文质彬彬。
English: Because music emanates from the heart, it is honest and genuine; because etiquette is expressed from the outside, it is refined.

古文：大乐必易，大礼必简。
现代文：最高级的乐一定是平缓的，最隆重的礼一定是简朴的。
English: Therefore, the tunes and instruments of grand music must be very simple, and the grand ceremony must be very simple.

古文：乐至则无怨，礼至则不争。
现代文：乐深入民心，就会消除怨恨；礼得到贯彻，就会消除争斗。
English: If the entertainment is well done, there will be no grudge, if the ceremony is well done, there will be no dispute.

古文：揖让而治天下者，礼乐之谓也。
现代文：古代圣王之所以能以谦恭礼让就把天下治理得井井有条，正是由于礼乐在起作用。
English: The so-called "give in and rule the world" refers to ruling the world with music.

古文：暴民不作，诸侯宾服，兵革不试，五刑不用，百姓无患，天子不怒，如此，则乐达矣。
现代文：没有乱民闹事，诸侯归服，兵革不用，刑罚不用，百姓无所忧虑，天子无所不满，做到了这一步，就表明乐已经深入民心了。
English: There was no riot, the lords submitted, there was no need for war, there was no need for punishment, the people had nothing to worry about, and the emperor had nothing to be dissatisfied with. If this step was achieved, it would show that music had penetrated the hearts of the people.

古文：合父子之亲，明长幼之序，以敬四海之内天子如此，则礼行矣。
现代文：四海之内，使父子关系密切，长幼之序分明，大家都敬爱天子，做到了这一步，就表明礼得到贯彻了。
English: Within the four seas, the relationship between father and son is close, the order of the eldest and youngest is clear, and everyone respects the heavenly son. If this step is achieved, it shows that the ritual has been implemented.

古文：大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节。
现代文：最高尚的乐像天地那样的和谐，最隆重的礼又像天地那样的有别。
English: Great music unites all things with heaven and earth in the same way, and great worship restrains all things with heaven and earth in the same way.

古文：和故百物不失，节故祀天祭地，明则有礼乐，幽则有鬼神。
现代文：由于和谐，所以万物各得其所；由于有别，所以要祭天祀地。人世间有礼乐，幽冥中有鬼神。
English: Because of harmony, all things have their proper place; because of difference, they should be offered to heaven and earth. There is ritual music in the world, and there are ghosts and gods in the dark.

古文：如此，则四海之内，合敬同爱矣。
现代文：这样，四海之内就能互敬互爱了。
English: In this way, we can respect and love each other within the four seas.

古文：礼者殊事合敬者也；乐者异文合爱者也。
现代文：礼，是通过不同的仪式而教人互敬；乐，是通过不同的声律而教人互爱。
English: Rites teach people to respect each other through different ceremonies; music teaches people to love each other through different vocal rhythms.

古文：礼乐之情同，故明王以相沿也。
现代文：礼乐的社会功能相同，所以历代明王在继承之外也有所损益。
English: This feeling of reverence and love is always the same, and it has been inherited from ancient wise emperors from generation to generation.

古文：故事与时并，名与功偕。
现代文：所以，礼应具有时代特色，而乐的名称也要与天子的功劳一致。
English: so that the ritual music is linked to the times, and the fame is linked to the merits.

古文：故钟鼓管磬，羽龠干戚，乐之器也。屈伸俯仰，缀兆舒疾，乐之文也。簠簋俎豆，制度文章，礼之器也。升降上下，周还裼袭，礼之文也。
现代文：所以说，钟鼓管磐，是乐的器具；而屈伸俯仰的动作，一开一合忽慢忽快的变化，是乐的表现形式。置篡姐豆，制度文章，是行礼所用的器具；升降上下，周旋锡袭，是礼的表现形式。
English: Therefore, the bell, the drum, and the pipe are instruments of music; and the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane, the movement of the crane.

古文：故知礼乐之情者能作，识礼乐之文者能述。
现代文：所以，凡是懂得礼乐社会功能的人就能创作新的礼乐，而只是记住礼乐表现形式的人却只能复述旧的礼乐。
English: Therefore, anyone who understands the social function of ritual music can create new ritual music, but those who only remember the expression of ritual music can only retell the old ritual music.

古文：作者之谓圣，述者之谓明；明圣者，述作之谓也。
现代文：能创作的人叫做圣，能复述的人叫做明。所谓 明 和 圣 ，指的就是复述和创作。
English: Those who can create are called saints, and those who can retell are called sages. The so-called sages and sages refer to retelling and creation.

古文：乐者，天地之和也；礼者，天地之序也。
现代文：乐，体现了天地间的和谐；礼，体现了天地间的秩序。
English: Music is produced by imitating the harmony of heaven and earth; ritual is produced by imitating the orderliness of heaven and earth.

古文：和故百物皆化；序故群物皆别。
现代文：因其和谐，所以万物都能融洽共处；因其秩序，所以万物都又有其差别。
English: Because of its harmony, all things can coexist harmoniously; because of its order, all things have their differences.

古文：乐由天作，礼以地制。
现代文：乐是法天而作，礼是仿地而制。
English: Music is made according to the heavens, and ritual is made according to the patterns of the earth.

古文：过制则乱，过作则暴。
现代文：礼的制作破坏了秩序就会引起混乱，乐的制作破坏了和谐就会导致偏激。
English: If the system is overstrained, it will cause disasters due to the differences between the rich and the poor, and if it is overstrained, it will cause violence due to the discord between the upper and lower classes.

古文：明于天地，然后能兴礼乐也。
现代文：弄清楚礼乐与天地的关系，然后才能制礼作乐。
English: Only when we understand these properties of heaven and earth can we make music.

古文：论伦无患，乐之情也；欣喜欢爱，乐之官也。
现代文：歌辞与歌曲配合得体，是乐的实情。使人高兴喜欢，是乐的功能。
English: Harmony between words and reality is the keynote of music; joy in love is the cause of music.

古文：中正无邪，礼之质也，庄敬恭顺。礼之制也。
现代文：中正无邪，是礼的本质。使人庄敬恭顺，是礼的功能。
English: Being upright and innocent is the essence of etiquette. Making people dignified, respectful and obedient is the function of etiquette.

古文：若夫礼乐之施于金石，越于声音，用于宗庙社稷，事乎山川鬼神，则此所与民同也。
现代文：至于使礼乐借助钟馨等乐器发出声音，用于祭祀宗庙社樱，用于祭祀山川鬼神，在这方面，从天子到人民都是一样的。
English: As for making music with the help of musical instruments such as bells and incense for the purpose of offering sacrifices to the ancestral spirits of temples and shrines, and for offering sacrifices to the spirits of mountains and rivers, in this respect, it is the same from the Son of Heaven to the people.

古文：王者功成作乐，治定制礼。
现代文：一个朝代的开创者，在大功告成以后才制定乐，政治安定才制定礼。
English: When the work is accomplished, music is made, and when the political situation is stable, a ceremony is held.

古文：其功大者其乐备，其治辩者其礼具。
现代文：功劳越大，他所制的乐也就越完备；政治越安定，他所制的礼也就越完善。
English: The greater the merit, the more perfect the music; the more stable the politics, the more perfect the etiquette.

古文：干戚之舞非备乐也，孰亨而祀非达礼也。
现代文：只有手执干戚的武舞，不能算完备的乐；用熟食祭祀，不能算至上之礼。
English: Only the martial dance of the hand-holding relatives cannot be considered complete music; the sacrifice with cooked food cannot be considered the supreme gift.

古文：五帝殊时，不相沿乐；三王异世，不相袭礼。
现代文：五帝不同时，因而不沿用相同的音乐；三王不同代，因而不继承同样的礼仪。
English: The five emperors did not reign at the same time, so they did not use the same music; the three kings did not come from the same generation, so they did not inherit the same etiquette.

古文：乐极则忧，礼粗则偏矣。
现代文：乐走向极端便会使人忧虑；礼没有限度就会出现偏邪。
English: If the entertainment is too excessive, it will be a waste of time, and there will be sorrow afterwards. If the etiquette is too simple, it is not easy to be thorough, and there are often omissions.

古文：及夫敦乐而无忧，礼备而不偏者，其唯大圣乎？
现代文：至于能够做到爱好乐但没有沉迷忘返之忧，礼数完善但不失中正无邪之质的，大概只有圣人吧。
English: As for being happy without being sad, and having a complete and unbroken ritual, isn't that something only a great saint can do?

古文：天高地下，万物散殊，而礼制行矣。
现代文：从现象看来，天在上，地在下，万物个各不相同，礼就是按照这种差异制定的。
English: From the perspective of phenomena, heaven is above, earth is below, and all things are different. Rites are formulated according to this difference.

古文：流而不息，合同而化，而乐兴焉。
现代文：从性质看来，天地之气流动不停，调和万物一同进化，乐就是依据这种规律兴起的。
English: From the perspective of nature, the qi of heaven and earth flows continuously, harmonizing all things to evolve together, and music is based on this law.

古文：春作夏长，仁也；秋敛冬藏，义也。
现代文：春生夏长，体现着仁的精神；秋收冬藏，体现着义的精神。
English: Spring born, summer long, nurturing all things, this is benevolence; autumn convergence, winter storage, storage decision, this is righteousness.

古文：仁近于乐，义近于礼。
现代文：仁的精神接近于乐，义的精神接近于礼。
English: Music can potter all things, and is close to benevolence, and the celebrant is decisive, so righteousness is close to propriety.

古文：乐者敦和，率神而从天，礼者别宜，居鬼而从地。
现代文：乐的作用是和同，跟随着神而归属于天；礼的作用是辨别差异，跟随着鬼而归属于地。
English: The function of music is to harmonize, to follow God and belong to heaven; the function of ritual is to discern differences, to follow the devil and belong to earth.

古文：故圣人作乐以应天，制礼以配地。
现代文：所以圣人制乐以顺天，制礼以配地。
English: That's why saints make music according to the heavens and rites according to the earth.

古文：礼乐明备，天地官矣。
现代文：礼乐明确而完备，也就是天地各自发挥其职能了。
English: The liturgical music is detailed and complete, and heaven and earth each have their own function.

古文：天尊地卑，君臣定矣。
现代文：天尊在上，地卑在下，君臣关系就依此确定了。
English: Heaven is noble, earth is lowly, the relationship between monarchs and ministers is like heaven and earth, and their status is determined.

古文：卑高已陈，贵贱位矣。
现代文：高的是山，低的是泽，贵贱的位置也就确定了。
English: The high is the mountain, the low is the lake, and the high and low positions are determined.

古文：动静有常，小大殊矣。
现代文：运动静止有一定常态，大小也就区分开来。
English: Movement at rest has a certain normality, and size is also differentiated.

古文：方以类聚，物以群分，则性命不同矣。
现代文：动物按照类别聚集，植物按照群属区分，各自不同的天性就显示出来了。
English: When intangibles such as spells and sexes are grouped together according to kind, and different things are distinguished according to kind, then their fates will also be different.

古文：在天成象，在地成形；如此，则礼者天地之别也。
现代文：在天上有日月星辰风雷等不同现象，在地上有山川草木鸟兽等不同形态，礼就是这样体现着天地之间的各种区别。
English: In the sky there are different phenomena such as the sun, moon, stars, wind and thunder, and on the ground there are different forms such as mountains, rivers, plants, trees, birds and beasts. Rites thus reflect the various differences between heaven and earth.

古文：地气上齐，天气下降，阴阳相摩，天地相荡，鼓之以雷霆，奋之以风雨，动之以四时，暖之以日月，而百化兴焉。
现代文：地气上升，天气下降，阴阳相互摩擦，天地互相激荡，雷霆来鼓动，风雨来滋润，四时来运转，日月来照耀，万物化育生长。
English: The earth's atmosphere rises, the weather falls, yin and yang rub against each other, heaven and earth stir up each other, thunder to encourage, wind and rain to moisturize, four o'clock to operate, sun and moon to shine, all things grow and grow.

古文：如此则乐者天地之和也。
现代文：乐也就是这样体现着天地间的和谐。
English: This is how music embodies the harmony between heaven and earth.

古文：化不时则不生，男女无辨则乱升；天地之情也。
现代文：化育不和时节，就不会生长；男女不加区别，混乱就会产生。这是天地间的常情。
English: If there is no harmony between the seasons, there will be no growth; if there is no distinction between men and women, there will be chaos. This is the normal situation between heaven and earth.

古文：及夫礼乐之极乎天而蟠乎地，行乎阴阳而通乎鬼神；穷高极远而测深厚。
现代文：说到礼乐的功能，上达于天，下至于地，随着阴阳之气流行，可以通于鬼神，一切最高最远最深之处无不到达。
English: When it comes to the function of ceremonial music, the highest reaches the heavens, the lowest reaches the earth, with the popularity of yin and yang, it can pass through ghosts and gods, and all the highest, farthest and deepest places can not be reached.

古文：乐着大始，而礼居成物。
现代文：乐显示创始万物的天，礼依托着生成万物的地。
English: Music shows the heaven that founded all things, while worship supports the earth that gave birth to all things.

古文：着不息者天也，着不动者地也。
现代文：显示着不停运动的是天，显示着凝聚静止的是地。
English: He who is born and does not die is heaven, he who is born and does not move is earth.

古文：一动一静者天地之间也。
现代文：一动一静，就生成了天地间的一切。
English: One movement, one stillness, and everything in heaven and earth comes into being.

古文：故圣人曰礼乐云。
现代文：所以圣人所说的礼乐，就是这样。
English: That is why the sacred music, as the sages called it, is just that.

古文：昔者，舜作五弦之琴以歌南风，夔始制乐以赏诸侯。
现代文：从前舜制作五弦之琴来演奏《南风》，夔开始制乐来赏赐诸侯。
English: Once upon a time, Zou made a five-stringed fiddle to play "South Wind," and Zou began to make music to reward the princes.

古文：故天子之为乐也，以赏诸侯之有德者也。
现代文：由此看来，天子的制乐，是为了奖赏诸侯中有德行的人。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven made music in order to reward those virtuous princes.

古文：德盛而教尊，五谷时熟，然后赏之以乐。
现代文：诸侯如果德行隆盛，尊重教化，不失农时，五谷丰登，天子才会把乐赏赐给他。
English: If the lords prosper in virtue, respect enlightenment, and do not lose the peasants, the grain will be abundant, and the Son of Heaven will give him the reward.

古文：故其治民劳者，其舞行缀远；其治民逸者，其舞行缀短。
现代文：所以，凡是治下人民劳困的，赏给他的舞队就人员稀少；凡是治下人民安乐的，赏给他的舞队就人员众多。
English: Therefore, whenever there is hardship among the people under his rule, there will be few people in the dance team awarded to him; whenever there is happiness among the people under his rule, there will be many people in the dance team awarded to him.

古文：故观其舞，知其德；闻其谥，知其行也。
现代文：所以，观察诸侯的舞队，就能知道他的品德如何；这就好比听到某人的溢号，就可以知道他的生前行事一样。
English: Therefore, by observing the dance team of a lord, one can know what his character is like; it is just like hearing someone's trumpet call, one can know what he did before he died.

古文：《大章》，章之也。
现代文：尧之乐叫《大章》，意思是尧的德行昭彰。
English: The music of the dragonfly is called "Daizhang," which means the virtue of the dragonfly.

古文：《咸池》，备矣。
现代文：黄帝之乐叫《咸池》，意思是黄帝之德普施天下。
English: The music of the Yellow Emperor is called "Hamchi," which means that the Yellow Emperor is the best in the world.

古文：《韶》，继也。
现代文：舜之乐叫《韶》，意思是舜能绍继尧之德行。
English: The music of the cormorant is called "Cormorant," which means that the cormorant can emulate the virtue of the cormorant.

古文：《夏》，大也。
现代文：禹之乐叫《夏》，意思是禹能发扬光大尧舜之德。
English: Yu's music is called "Summer," which means that Yu can carry forward the virtue of magnanimity.

古文：殷周之乐，尽矣。
现代文：殷周两代的音乐，是十分详尽的了。
English: The music of the two generations of Yin Zhou is very detailed.

古文：天地之道，寒暑不时则疾，风雨不节则饥。
现代文：按照天地运行的规律，该热不热该冷不冷人就会出现疾病，风雨不调就会发生饥荒。
English: According to the law of the movement of heaven and earth, if the cold and heat do not arrive on time, diseases will occur, and if the wind and rain are unrestrained, famine will occur.

古文：教者，民之寒暑也；教不时则伤世。
现代文：乐教对于人民来说就好比是寒暑交替，教化不适时就会损害世道人心。
English: For the people, music education is like the alternation of hot and cold weather. If the education is not appropriate, it will damage the world's moral conscience.

古文：事者民之风雨也；事不节则无功。
现代文：礼制对于人民来说就好比是风雨，礼制没有节制办事就不会奏效。
English: For the people, etiquette is like the wind and rain. Without moderation, etiquette will not work.

古文：然则先王之为乐也。以法治也，善则行象德矣。
现代文：由此看来，先王的制乐，就是用它来作为治理人民的一种方法，做得好，民众的行动就会表现出高尚的道德。
English: From this point of view, the first king's music-making is to use it as a way to govern the people. If done well, the people's actions will show high morals.

古文：夫豢豕为酒，非以为祸也，而狱讼益繁，则酒之流生祸也。
现代文：譬如养猪酿酒，本不是为了制造祸端，但是打官司的却日益增多，这就是饮酒过度引出的祸患。
English: For example, raising pigs and brewing alcohol was not originally intended to create a disaster, but the number of lawsuits is increasing, which is the scourge of excessive drinking.

古文：是故先王因为酒礼，壹献之礼，宾主百拜，终日饮酒而不得醉焉；此先王之所以备酒祸也。
现代文：所以先王制定了酒礼，光是 一献 的礼，就要求宾主互相多次拜谢，这样一来，即使整天饮酒也不会醉倒。这就是先王用来防备饮酒惹祸的方法。
English: Therefore, the former king developed a wine ceremony. For just one gift, he asked the guests to thank each other many times, so that even if they drank all day, they would not get drunk. This is the method used by the former king to prevent drinking from causing trouble.

古文：故酒食者所以合欢也；乐者所以象德也；礼者所以缀淫也。
现代文：所以喝酒吃饭，是为了皆大欢喜，增进友谊。乐是用来表现德行的，礼是用来制止越轨行为的。
English: Therefore, drinking and eating is to make everyone happy and promote friendship. Fun is used to show virtue, and etiquette is used to stop deviant behavior.

古文：是故先王有大事，必有礼以哀之；有大福，必有礼以乐之。
现代文：所以先王有了死丧之类大事，一定要用适当的礼表示悲哀；先王有了喜庆之类的大事，一定要用适当的礼表达欢乐。
English: Therefore, when the former king had a death or other major event, he must use appropriate etiquette to express sorrow; when the former king had a joyous event, he must use appropriate etiquette to express joy.

古文：哀乐之分，皆以礼终。
现代文：悲哀和欢乐的程度，都以礼来限制。
English: The degree of sorrow and joy is limited by the etiquette.

古文：乐也者，圣人之所乐也，而可以善民心，其感人深，其移风易俗，故先王着其教焉。
现代文：乐是圣人所喜爱的，它可以改善民心，感人至深，容易移风易俗，所以先王才注重乐的教化。
English: Music is loved by sages, it can improve people's hearts, it is deeply moving, it is easy to change customs, so the first king paid attention to the enlightenment of music.

古文：夫民有血气心知之性，而无哀乐喜怒之常，应感起物而动，然后心术形焉。
现代文：人都具有血气，又有知好歹的本性，但其喜怒哀乐的感情却不是固定不变的。
English: All people are born with a good nature and a good-natured nature, but their emotions are not fixed and unchanging.

古文：是故志微杀之音作，而民思忧。
现代文：这取决于外界是怎样的感动人的内心，人的内心也就表现出相应的感情。
English: It depends on how the outside world is moving the person's heart, and the person's heart will show corresponding emotions.

古文：啴谐慢易、繁文简节之音作，而民康乐。粗厉猛起、奋末广贲之音作，而民刚毅。廉直、劲正、庄诚之音作，而民肃敬。宽裕肉好、顺成和动之音作，而民慈爱。流辟邪散、狄成涤滥之音作，而民淫乱。
现代文：譬如说，在演奏细微急促的曲调时，人们就感到忧郁；在演奏宽和、平缓、含义丰富而节奏简明的曲调时，人们就感到舒畅；在演奏粗厉、发声有力而收声昂奋、充满激情的曲调时，人们就感到振奋；在演奏清明、正直、端庄、诚恳的曲调时，人们就感到肃然起敬；在演奏宽舒、圆润、流畅、柔和的曲调时，人们就感到慈爱；在演奏流荡、邪僻、轻桃、放纵的曲调时，人们就感到淫乱。
English: For example, one feels melancholy when playing a subtle, rapid melody; one feels comfortable when playing a broad, smooth, meaningful and concise rhythm; one feels exhilarated when playing a rough, powerful, high-pitched and passionate melody; one feels reverence when playing a clear, honest, dignified and sincere melody; one feels love when playing a comfortable, rounded, smooth and soft melody; one feels lewd when playing a wandering, perverse, light peach and indulgent melody.

古文：是故先王本之情性，稽之度数，制之礼义。
现代文：所以先王在作乐时，必依据人的性情，参考音律的度数，使其清浊高下各得其宜。
English: Therefore, when making music, the former king must rely on people's temperament and refer to the degree of the melody to make it clear and high.

古文：合生气之和，道五常之行，使之阳而不散，阴而不密，刚气不怒，柔气不慑，四畅交于中而发作于外，皆安其位而不相夺也；然后立之学等，广其节奏，省其文采，以绳德厚。
现代文：既合乎造化的平和，又依循五常的德行，使其阳气发扬而不至流散，阴气收敛而不至闭塞，含刚毅之气而不至发怒，有柔顺之气而不至胆怯，四者交融于中而表现在外，皆安于其位而不互相妨害。然后订立学习的进度，增益其节奏，审查其文采，以量度德的厚薄。
English: In accordance with the peace of creation, and in accordance with the five constant virtues, let the yang expand and not dissipate, the yin converge and not be blocked, the spirit of fortitude not be angry, and the spirit of gentleness not be timid. The four are intermingled in the middle and expressed outside, and they are all in their place and do not interfere with each other. Then set the progress of learning, increase its rhythm, review its literature, and measure the thickness of virtue.

古文：律小大之称，比终始之序，以象事行。使亲疏贵贱、长幼男女之理，皆形见于乐，故曰： 乐观其深矣。 
现代文：同时比照音律度数的匀称，排列章节起讫的次序，以使五声各像其代表之物，使亲疏、贵贱、长幼、男女之间的伦理关系都表现在乐中。所以古人说： 从乐当中可以观察到发人深省的东西。 
English: At the same time, according to the symmetry of the musical rhythm, the arrangement of the chapters and the order of the cymbals, so that each of the five voices resembles its representative, so that the ethical relationships between relatives and strangers, high and low, old and young, and men and women are all reflected in the music. Therefore, the ancients said: From the music, we can observe things that are thought-provoking.

古文：土敝则草木不长，水烦则鱼鳖不大，气衰则生物不遂，世乱则礼慝而乐淫。
现代文：土地贫脊，草木就不生长；在搅混的水里，鱼鳖就长不大；阴阳之气衰弱，生物就长不成熟；世道混乱，礼就会废弛而乐就放纵无拘。
English: If the land is poor, the plants will not grow; if the water is muddled, the fish's gills will not grow; if the yin and yang are weak, the living things will not grow; if the world is chaotic, the etiquette will be lax and the pleasure will be unrestrained.

古文：是故其声哀而不庄，乐而不安，慢易以犯节，流湎以忘本。广则容奸，狭则思欲，感条畅之气而灭平和之德。
现代文：因为放纵无拘，所以听起来其声悲哀却不庄重，快乐却不安详，散漫简易而节奏紊乱，流连缠绵而无所归宿，声一宽缓就包含着邪恶，声一急促就挑动情欲，感发出人们的跌宕情绪，消灭人们平和的德性。
English: Because indulgence is unrestrained, its voice sounds sad but undignified, happy but uneasy, rambling and simple, but the rhythm is disordered, lingering and without a home, the voice contains evil as soon as it is broad, and the voice provokes lust as soon as it is rapid, causing people's ups and downs, and destroying people's peaceful virtue.

古文：是以君子贱之也。
现代文：所以，君子是鄙视这种音乐的。
English: That is why gentlemen despise this kind of music.

古文：凡奸声感人，而逆气应之；逆气成象，而淫乐兴焉。
现代文：凡是邪恶之声影响于人，人身上的邪恶之气就与之呼应；邪恶之气成为一时的风尚，于是淫乐就产生了。
English: Whenever the voice of evil influences a person, the evil spirit in that person responds to it; the evil spirit becomes a passing fad, and lewdness results.

古文：正声感人，而顺气应之；顺气成象，而和乐兴焉。
现代文：凡是纯正之声影响于人，人身上的纯正之气就与之呼应；纯正之气成为一时的风尚，于是和乐就产生了。
English: Whenever the pure voice influences a person, the pure spirit in the person responds to it; the pure spirit becomes a momentary fashion, and harmony is born.

古文：倡和有应，回邪曲直，各归其分；而万物之理，各以其类相动也。
现代文：一唱一和，互相呼应。乖违与邪僻，弯曲与直正，各有各的朋类，这也就是说天下万物都贯穿着这么一条理：同类相应。
English: One song, one harmony, echoing each other. The perverse and the perverse, the crooked and the straight, each has its own kind, which is to say that everything in the world is permeated with such a principle: the same kind of corresponding.

古文：是故君子反情以和其志，比类以成其行。
现代文：所以君子就摒弃淫溺之情，以调和自己的心志， 效法好的榜样以成就自己的德行。
English: Therefore, it is only the superior gentleman who restrains his emotions and conforms to his heart's desire, and compares the virtuous with the virtuous in order to create his virtuous moral sentiments.

古文：奸声乱色，不留聪明；淫乐慝礼，不接心术。
现代文：邪恶的声不听，杂乱的色不看；淫荡之乐和非礼之礼，心中根本没有它的位置；惰慢歪邪的习气，不让它沾染身体。
English: Evil voices are not heard, disorderly colors are not seen; lascivious pleasures and indecencies have no place in the heart; sluggish and perverse habits are not allowed to contaminate the body.

古文：惰慢邪辟之气不设于身体，使耳目鼻口、心知百体皆由顺正以行其义。
现代文：使耳目、口鼻、心灵和身体的各个部分都沿着正道，以履行其职能。
English: Let every part of the ear, eye, nose, mouth, mind and body follow the right path to perform their functions.

古文：然后发以声音，而文以琴瑟，动以干戚，饰以羽旄，从以箫管。
现代文：然后砚发为声音，用琴瑟来伴奏；跳武舞时手执干戚，跳文舞时手执羽旎，用箫管来伴奏。
English: Then it bursts into sound, with the accompaniment of a zither; when dancing a martial dance, the hand holds a stick; when dancing a literary dance, the hand holds a feather duster, with the accompaniment of a gong.

古文：奋至德之光，动四气之和，以着万物之理。
现代文：这祥的乐就能够展现至高道德的光辉，调动四气的协和，从而昭示万物之理。
English: This auspicious music can show the brilliance of the highest morality, mobilize the harmony of the four winds, and thus reveal the truth of all things.

古文：是故清明象天，广大象地，终始象四时，周还象风雨。
现代文：因此，这样的乐，其清澈明朗像天，其无所不载像地，其终而复始像四时，其周回旋转像风雨。
English: Therefore, this music is as clear and bright as the sky, as all-pervading as the earth, as endlessly repeating as the four o'clock, and as whirling as the wind and rain.

古文：五色成文而不乱，八风从律而不奸，百度得数而有常。
现代文：虽然乐器的色彩五彩缤纷，但却井然有序。虽然八音杂奏，但也不互相干扰；乐舞虽富于变化，但也像百刻计时那样有一定之规。
English: Although the colors of the musical instruments are colorful, they are well-ordered. Although there is an eight-note medley, they do not interfere with each other; although the music and dance are full of changes, they also have certain rules like the hundred-hour time.

古文：小大相成，终始相生。倡和清浊，迭相为经。
现代文：高音与低音相辅相成，十二律互相配合，或倡或和，或清或浊，轮番为主。
English: The treble and the bass complement each other, and the twelve rhythms complement each other, either advocating or harmonizing, or clarifying or muffling, mainly in rotation.

古文：故乐行而伦清，耳目聪明，血气和平，移风易俗，天下皆宁。
现代文：所以，这样的乐流行就能使伦类向善，耳聪目明，心气平和，移风易俗，天下皆宁。
English: Therefore, if happiness can be practiced, people can be clearly classified and not confused with each other; the ears and eyes are clear and not disturbed by evil voices and evil colors; the blood is peaceful and the violence is stopped; the customs are easy to move and belong to simplicity, and everyone in the world can enjoy peace.

古文：故曰：乐者乐也。
现代文：所以说：乐这个东西，是让人快乐的。
English: That's why I say: this thing called "fun" makes people happy.

古文：君子乐得其道，小人乐得其欲。
现代文：但是君子快乐的是得到了仁义，小人快乐的是满足了私欲。
English: The high-ranking gentlemen rejoiced in the fact that they could obtain the truth of the world from music, and the commoners rejoiced in the fact that they could satisfy their selfish desires from music.

古文：以道制欲，则乐而不乱；以欲忘道，则惑而不乐。
现代文：用仁义来约束私欲，其结果是得到快乐而不会迷乱；只顾私欲而忘掉仁义，就会陷入迷惑而得不到真正的快乐。
English: If you restrain your selfish desires with morality, you will be able to obtain true joy, but not joylessness; if you forget morality because of your selfish desires, you will not obtain true joy because of the confusion of your true nature.

古文：是故君子反情以和其志，广乐以成其教，乐行而民乡方，可以观德矣。
现代文：推就所以前面说过，君子要摒弃淫溺之情以调和自己的心志，广乐教来完成教化，乐教推行则人民就归向仁义之道，至此，可以通过乐教看到君子之德了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman restrains his emotions in order to make his mind harmonious, and promotes happiness to promote his enlightenment. If happiness can be implemented and the people's hearts can be moralized, then the morality of the people can be observed.

古文：德者性之端也。
现代文：所谓德，是人性的发端。
English: The so-called virtue is the origin of human nature.

古文：乐者德之华也。
现代文：所谓乐，则是由德开放出来的花朵。
English: The so-called music is the flower that blooms from virtue.

古文：金石丝竹，乐之器也。
现代文：金石丝竹，是乐器。
English: Kinseki silk bamboo is a musical instrument.

古文：诗言其志也，歌咏其声也，舞动其容也。
现代文：诗是抒发人的心志的，而歌则是拉长声调表达心志的声音，舞则是用种种姿态表达心志的动作。
English: Poetry is the expression of a person's spirit, while song is the sound of an elongated tone expressing the spirit, and dance is the movement of expressing the spirit with various postures.

古文：三者本于心，然后乐气从之。
现代文：诗、歌、舞三者都是发自内心，然后用乐器为之伴奏。
English: The poem, song and dance all come from the heart and are then accompanied by musical instruments.

古文：是故情深而文明，气盛而化神。
现代文：因此，乐所表达的心志，情感深厚而文采鲜明，气氛浓烈而使人潜移默化。
English: Therefore, the aspirations expressed by the music are deep and vivid, and the atmosphere is strong and makes people subtle.

古文：和顺积中而英华发外，唯乐不可以为伪。
现代文：和顺的品德积累于心，才能使乐的精华表现于外。有什么样的德，便有什么样的乐，只有乐是虚伪不了的。
English: The essence of joy can only be expressed externally if the character of harmony is accumulated in the heart. Whatever kind of virtue, there will be whatever kind of joy. Only joy cannot be false.

古文：乐者，心之动也；声者，乐之象也。文采节奏，声之饰也。
现代文：乐，是心灵的感动；声音，是乐的表现形式；施律节奏，是对声音的修饰。
English: Music is the moving of the soul; sound is the form of expression of music; rhythm is the embellishment of sound.

古文：君子动其本，乐其象，然后治其饰。
现代文：君子从心灵的感动出发，喜爱音乐的形式，然后加以整理修饰。
English: The heart of a gentleman is moved by the principle of morality as an external thing, and rejoices in its external image and sound, and then makes an effort to decorate the sound, which produces music.

古文：是故先鼓以警戒，三步以见方，再始以着往，复乱以饬归。
现代文：所以《大武》之乐的表演，先敲鼓叫众人心中做好准备，再走三步表示将要舞蹈。开始重复一次，再往下进行；结束曲也重复一次，舞者才退下。
English: Therefore, the performance of the music of "Daibu" starts with beating the drum to prepare the hearts of the people, and then takes three steps to indicate that there will be a dance. The beginning is repeated once, and then it goes down; the ending song is also repeated once, and the dancers retreat.

古文：奋疾而不拔，极幽而不隐。
现代文：舞者步伐迅疾，但不乱套离谱；音乐极其幽深，但却不隐晦。
English: The dancers' steps are fast, but not wildly erratic; the music is extremely deep, but not obscure.

古文：独乐其志，不厌其道；备举其道，不私其欲。
现代文：既能独自满足个人的意志，又不厌弃其中包含的道理；全面地体现了仁义之道，因而不至于私自放纵情欲。
English: It can be seen that the composer of "Wu" is very pleased with the intention of felling strawberries, but does not abandon the moral methods to achieve this intention; he has done all these moral methods, and is not motivated by selfishness.

古文：是故情见而义立，乐终而德尊。
现代文：这种音乐既表现了情感，又树立了道义。乐舞结束，武王的德性也就得到了尊重。
English: This kind of music not only expresses emotion, but also establishes morality. When the music and dance are over, King Wu's virtue is also respected.

古文：君子以好善，小人以听过。
现代文：君子听了这样的音乐，更加爱好善德；小人听了这样的音乐，也可以用来防备自己的过错。
English: When a gentleman listens to such music, he is more likely to be virtuous; when a villain listens to such music, it can also be used to guard against his own mistakes.

古文：故曰：生民之道，乐为大焉。
现代文：所以说:治民的方法，乐是最重要的。
English: Therefore, he said: the method of governing the people, happiness is the most important.

古文：乐也者施也；礼也者报也。
现代文：乐，是一种施与；礼，则是一种报答。
English: Pleasure is a gift; courtesy is a reward.

古文：乐，乐其所自生；而礼，反其所自始。
现代文：乐，用来表现对王者功业的喜爱；礼，用来追念王者祖先的恩情。
English: The purpose of music is to express joy for the emotions born in one's heart, while the purpose of ritual is to worship the achievements of one's ancestors.

古文：乐章德，礼报情反始也。
现代文：乐表彰功德，礼报答恩情、追念始祖。
English: The role of music is to promote merit, while the role of etiquette is to reflect on how one has won the hearts of the people and to reflect on the reasons for this.

古文：所谓大辂者，天子之车也。龙旗九旒，天子之旌也。青黑缘者，天子之宝龟也。
现代文：称作 大辂 的，那是天子的车子；龙旗有九旒，那是天子的旌旗；有青黑色边缘的龟甲，那是天子的宝龟。
English: That which is called the Great Kite is the Chariot of the Son of Heaven; that which is called the Dragon's Banner, having nine points, is the Kite of the Son of Heaven; and that which is called the Turtle, having a blue-black edge, is the Turtle of the Son of Heaven.

古文：从之以牛羊之群，则所以赠诸侯也。
现代文：再加上成群的牛羊，那便是天子赐给有功诸侯的礼物。
English: Together with herds of cattle and sheep, it is a gift from the Son of Heaven to the meritorious princes.

古文：乐也者，情之不可变者也。礼也者，理之不可易者也。
现代文：乐，表达人的不可改变的情感；礼，体现了永恒不变的伦理。
English: Music expresses man's unchangeable emotions, while etiquette embodies the eternal and unchanging ethics.

古文：乐统同，礼辨异，礼乐之说，管乎人情矣。
现代文：乐调和同一，礼辨别差异。礼乐的学说，贯通了全部人情。
English: The melody is the same, the etiquette is to distinguish the difference. The doctrine of etiquette permeates all human feelings.

古文：穷本知变，乐之情也；着诚去伪，礼之经也。
现代文：追究心灵的本源而了解其变化，这是乐的真情；表明诚实的精神而消除虚伪的态度，这是礼的纲领。
English: Reaching deep into the original source and being able to change at any time are the content characteristics of music; highlighting honesty and eliminating fraud is the essence of etiquette.

古文：礼乐偩天地之情，达神明之德，降兴上下之神，而凝是精粗之体，领父子君臣之节。
现代文：礼乐依顺天地的规律，贯彻神明的德行，调动上下的精神，形成大小不同的仪式，调整父子君臣之间的规矩。
English: Rituals follow the laws of heaven and earth, implement the virtues of the gods, mobilize the spirit of the upper and lower classes, form ceremonies of different sizes, and adjust the rules between father and son.

古文：是故大人举礼乐，则天地将为昭焉。
现代文：所以伟大的人物施行礼乐，天地也将要为之大放光明。
English: Therefore, if the high-ranking wise men and sages can act according to the ritual music, heaven and earth will become bright for this.

古文：天地欣合，阴阳相得，煦妪覆育万物，然后草木茂，区萌达，羽翼奋，角觡生，蛰虫昭苏，羽者妪伏，毛者孕鬻，胎生者不殰，而卵生者不殈，则乐之道归焉耳。
现代文：天地之间，阴阳二气蒸发，互相配合，温润覆载，养育万物。
English: Between heaven and earth, yin and yang evaporate, cooperate with each other, and nurture all things.

古文：乐者，非谓黄钟大吕弦歌干扬也，乐之末节也，故童者舞之。
现代文：乐，并不就是说的黄钟大吕、奏乐跳舞，这只不过是乐的次要部分，所以由儿童来充当舞者。
English: Music is not the same as dancing, which is only a secondary part of music, so children act as dancers.

古文：铺筵席，陈尊俎，列笾豆，以升降为礼者，礼之末节也，故有司掌之。
现代文：铺设筵席，陈列祭器，依上下进退的动作来行礼，这也是礼的次要部分，所以只需由司仪小官执掌。
English: The laying of the table, the display of the sacrificial vessels, and the salute according to the up and down movement, which is also a secondary part of the salute, so it only needs to be handled by the officiating clerk.

古文：乐师辨乎声诗，故北面而弦；宗祝辨乎宗庙之礼，故后尸；商祝辨乎丧礼，故后主人。
现代文：乐师只能辨别声律和诗句，所以只能在堂下面朝北弹琴。宗祝只不过了解宗庙的具体仪式，所以只能站在尸的后面。商祝只懂得丧葬的礼仪，所以只能站在主人后面。
English: Musicians can only distinguish between vocal rhythms and verses, so they can only play the piano facing north under the hall. Zongzhu only understands the specific rituals of the ancestral temple, so he can only stand behind the corpse. Shangzhu only understands the funeral etiquette, so he can only stand behind the owner.

古文：是故德成而上，艺成而下；行成而先，事成而后。
现代文：所以，能懂得礼乐的道德意义的属上乘，而只是在礼乐的具体仪式和技能上有所成就的则属下乘。德行的完善是首要的，而具体事务的完成是次要的。
English: Therefore, those who can understand the moral meaning of the ritual music are superior, but those who have only achieved something in the specific rituals and skills of the ritual music are subordinate. The perfection of virtue is primary, and the completion of specific affairs is secondary.

古文：是故先王有上有下，有先有后，然后可以有制于天下也。
现代文：所以先王有上有下，有主有次，这样才能制作礼乐，推行于天下。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy king stipulated that there should be a distinction between the upper and the lower, and that there should be order in succession, and only then should the ritual music be made and promulgated to the world.

古文：魏文侯问于子夏曰： 吾端冕而听古乐，则唯恐卧；听郑卫之音，则不知倦。
现代文：魏文侯向子夏问道： 我要是穿戴礼服礼帽听古乐，就唯恐打磕睡。要是听郑、卫之音，则不知疲倦。
English: Wei Wenhou asked Xiang Zixia: If I wear a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat to listen to ancient music, I am afraid of falling asleep. If I listen to Zheng and Wei, I will not get tired.

古文：敢问：古乐之如彼何也？新乐之如此何也？ 
现代文：请问古乐让我产生那样的感觉是什么原因，而新乐又让我产生这样的感觉，又作何解释呢？ 
English: What is the reason why ancient music makes me feel that way, and what is the explanation for why new music makes me feel that way?

古文：子夏对曰： 今夫古乐，进旅退旅，和正以广。
现代文：子夏回答道： 所谓古乐：表演时同进同退，整齐划一；唱歌时曲调平和中正而宽广。
English: Zixia replied: The so-called ancient music: when performing, it advances and retreats at the same time, neatly uniform; when singing, the melody is peaceful, moderate and broad.

古文：弦匏笙簧，会守拊鼓，始奏以文，复乱以武，治乱以相，讯疾以雅。
现代文：各种管弦乐器都在静候扮鼓的指挥，柑鼓一响，众乐并作。开始表演时击鼓，结束表演时击饶收束。用相来调节收场之歌曲，用雅来控制音乐的节奏。
English: All kinds of orchestral instruments are waiting for the conductor to play the drums. When the mandolin is rung, the music is played simultaneously. At the beginning of the performance, the drums are beaten, and at the end of the performance, the rap is closed. Use the phase to adjust the closing song, and use elegance to control the rhythm of the music.

古文：君子于是语，于是道古，修身及家，平均天下。
现代文：表演完毕，君子还要发表一通议论，借古喻今，当然不外乎都是修身齐家治国平天下的道理。
English: After the performance, the gentleman will also publish a discussion, using ancient metaphors, of course, it is nothing more than the principle of self-cultivation and the rule of the country.

古文：此古乐之发也。
现代文：这就是古乐的演奏情形。
English: This is how ancient music is played.

古文：今夫新乐，进俯退俯，奸声以滥，溺而不止；及优侏儒，糅杂子女，不知父子。
现代文：所谓新乐：舞蹈的动作参差不齐，唱歌的曲调邪恶放荡，使人沉酒其中难以自拔。再加上徘优侏儒的逗趣，男女混杂，父子不分。
English: The so-called new music: the dance moves are uneven, the singing tunes are wicked and debauched, making people drunk, which is hard to extricate themselves. Plus the teasing of the wandering dwarf, men and women are mixed, regardless of father and son.

古文：乐终不可以语，不可以道古。
现代文：表演完毕，无论说明什么道理，也谈不上借古喻今。
English: After the performance, no matter what the reason, it is impossible to talk about borrowing ancient metaphors.

古文：此新乐之发也。
现代文：这就是新乐的演奏情形。
English: This is how the new music is played.

古文：今君之所问者乐也，所好者音也！夫乐者，与音相近而不同。 
现代文：现在您问的是乐，而您所喜欢的是音。 乐 和 音 虽然相似，但却是不同的。 
English: Now you are asking about music, and what you like is sound.

古文：文侯曰： 敢问何如？ 
现代文：文侯说： 请问此话怎讲？ 
English: Wen Hou said: How should I say this?

古文：子夏对曰： 夫古者，天地顺而四时当，民有德而五谷昌，疾疢不作而无妖祥，此之谓大当。
现代文：子夏答道： 古时候天地运行正常，四季风调雨顺，人民道德高尚而五谷丰登，疾病不生，也没有灾祸，这叫做太平盛世。
English: Zixia replied: In ancient times, the heavens and earth operated normally, the four seasons were harmonious, the people's morals were noble and the wealth was abundant, diseases did not occur, and there were no disasters. This is called the Taiping Shengshi.

古文：然后圣人作为父子君臣，以为纪纲。
现代文：然后圣人兴起，定下君臣父子的名分，作为人际关系的准则。
English: Then the sages arose and established the father-son relationship as the norm for interpersonal relationships.

古文：纪纲既正，天下大定。
现代文：准则有了，于是天下大治。
English: Once the guidelines are in place, the whole world will be governed by them.

古文：天下大定，然后正六律，和五声，弦歌诗颂，此之谓德音；德音之谓乐。
现代文：天下大治，然后考正乐律，调和五声，演奏乐器来歌唱，创作诗篇来赞颂，这就叫做 德音 。德音才能称作乐。
English: When the world is at peace, then the melody is corrected, the five voices are harmonized, musical instruments are played to sing, and poems are composed to praise. This is called tone. Tone can only be called music.

古文：《诗》云：此之谓也。今君之所好者，其溺音乎？ 
现代文：说的就是这个意思。如今您所喜好的，大概是叫做溺音的玩意儿吧！ 
English: That's what I mean. What you like now is probably something called drowning!

古文：文侯曰： 敢问溺音何从出也？ 
现代文：文侯又问道： 请问溺音从何而来呢？ 
English: Wen Hou also asked: Where does the drowning sound come from?

古文：子夏对曰： 郑音好滥淫志，宋音燕女溺志，卫音趋数烦志，齐音敖辟乔志；此四者皆淫于色而害于德，是以祭祀弗用也。
现代文：子夏答道： 郑国之音多是男女偷情，使人心志淫荡，宋国之音留恋妻妾，使人意志消沉；卫国之音节奏急促，使人心情烦乱；齐国之音傲慢邪僻，使人志骄意满。这四国之音，都偏重于色情而有害于道德，所以是不用之于祭祀的。《诗经》上说： 肃雍和鸣之音，祖先才喜欢听。
English: Zixia replied: Zheng Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Gu

古文：《诗》云：夫肃肃，敬也；雍雍，和也。
现代文：所谓肃肃，就是肃敬之义；所谓雍雍，就是和谐之义。
English: The so-called solemnity is the meaning of reverence; the so-called Yong Yong is the meaning of harmony.

古文：夫敬以和，何事不行？
现代文：如果能做到既肃敬又和谐，还有什么事办不成呢？
English: With respect and harmony, what can't succeed?

古文：为人君者谨其所好恶而已矣。
现代文：当国君的，能对自己的好恶采取谨慎态度就好了。
English: When you're the ruler of a country, it's good to be cautious about your likes and dislikes.

古文：君好之，则臣为之。上行之，则民从之。
现代文：因为国君喜欢什么，臣下也就跟着喜欢什么；君长做什么，百姓也就跟着做什么。《诗经》上说： 诱导民众是很容易的。 
English: Because what the sovereign likes, his subjects will also like; what the sovereign does, the people will also do. "The Book of Songs" says, "It is easy to lead the people astray."

古文：《诗》云，此之谓也。 
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: "The Book of Songs" said: King Wen's merits are great and breathtaking, and people will always miss him.

古文：然后，圣人作为鼗、鼓、椌、楬、埙、篪，此六者德音之音也。
现代文：然后才有圣人出来，制成靴、鼓、控、褐、壤、挽，这六种乐器，是能够发出德音的乐器。
English: Only then did the sage come out and make shoes, drums, cymbals, cymbals, cymbals, clappers, and cymbals, these six musical instruments are musical instruments that can emit de tones.

古文：然后钟磬竽瑟以和之，干戚旄狄以舞之，此所以祭先王之庙也，所以献酬酳酢也，所以官序贵贱各得其宜也，所以示后世有尊卑长幼之序也。
现代文：然后再用钟、馨、竿、笙来伴奏，使文质相杂，再加上手执午、戚、旎、翟的舞蹈。这样的乐就可以用来祭祀先王之庙了，就可以用来设宴接待宾客了，就可以用来排列官爵高低，身份贵贱而无不得当了，就可以启示后人，使他们懂得有尊卑长幼的次序了。
English: This music can be used to worship the temple of the former king, it can be used to host banquets and receive guests, it can be used to rank high and low officials and nobles, and it can be used to reveal to future generations that there is an order of superiority and inferiority between the eldest and the youngest.

古文：钟声铿，铿以立号，号以立横，横以立武。君子听钟声则思武臣。
现代文：钟声洪亮，洪亮就可以用来发号施令，有了号令就会使人充满勇气，充满勇气则战无不胜。因此，君子听到钟声，就会想到武将。
English: The bell is loud, and loudness can be used to give orders, and with orders, people will be full of courage, and with courage, they are invincible. Therefore, when a gentleman hears the bell, he will think of a warrior.

古文：石声磬，磬以立辨，辨以致死。
现代文：磐声坚定有力，坚定有力的声音使人明辨是非，明辨是非就会为真理献身。
English: The voice of the Lord is powerful and sure; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty and power; it is a discerner of the thoughts of the heart.

古文：君子听磬声则思死封疆之臣。
现代文：因此，君子听到磐声，就会想到那些为保卫国家而捐躯之臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the sound of the gong, he will miss the minister who defends the fiefdom.

古文：丝声哀，哀以立廉，廉以立志。
现代文：琴瑟之声悲哀，悲哀的声音使人清廉刚正，清廉刚正就会守志不阿。
English: The sound of silk and string music is sad. Sadness can establish an honest style, and honesty can make people aspire.

古文：君子听琴瑟之声则思志义之臣。
现代文：因此，君子听到琴瑟之声，就会想到刚正不阿之臣。
English: Therefore, listening to the sound of the harp will make you miss the minister who has a strong will.

古文：竹声滥，滥以立会，会以聚众。
现代文：管乐器的声音宽广，宽广的声音使人会合，会合就能聚众。
English: Bamboo musical instruments sound promiscuous, promiscuous makes people have the intention of gathering, and a heart of gathering can gather many things.

古文：君子听竽笙箫管之声，则思畜聚之臣。
现代文：因此，君子听到管乐器的声音，就会想到善于安抚百姓之臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the sound of a wind instrument, he will think of a minister who is good at appeasing the people.

古文：鼓鼙之声讙，讙以立动，动以进众。
现代文：鼓擎之声喧闹，喧闹的声音让人激动，激动就会率众前进。
English: The sound of the drum is boisterous, the boisterous sound is exciting, and the excitement will lead the crowd forward.

古文：君子听鼓鼙之声，则思将帅之臣。
现代文：因此，君子听到鼓覃之声，就会想到将帅之臣。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman hears the sound of a drum, he will think of a handsome general.

古文：君子之听音，非听其铿枪而已也，彼亦有所合之也。
现代文：由此看来，君子听音乐，并不是只听那铿锵悦耳的声音，而是要从乐声中听出某种会心的东西来。 
English: From this point of view, when a gentleman listens to music, he does not just listen to the pleasant sound, but wants to hear something heartfelt from the music.

古文：宾牟贾侍坐于孔子，孔子与之言及乐，曰： 夫《武》之备戒之已久，何也？ 
现代文：宾牟贾在孔子身边陪坐，孔子和他谈话。当话题涉及乐时，孔子问道： 《大武》表演开始前长时间的击鼓警众，你说象征什么呢？ 
English: When the topic of music came up, Confucius asked, "Police officers beating drums for a long time before the performance of "Great Warrior," what do you think it symbolizes?"

古文：对曰： 病不得众也。 
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 象征武王开始伐封时担心得不到众诸侯的支持。 
English: Binmuja replied, "It means that King Wu was worried that he would not get the support of the lords when he began to cut down the trees.

古文： 咏叹之，淫液之，何也？ 对曰： 恐不逮事也。 
现代文：孔子又问： 《武》乐的曲调曼长，绵延不绝，这又象征什么呢？ 
English: Confucius also asked: "The melody of "Wu" music is long and continuous. What does this symbolize?

古文： 发扬蹈厉之已蚤，何也？ 
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 象征武王担心诸侯率兵迟到，赶不上参加战斗。 
English: What does it mean that the "Wu" dance is vigorous and powerful from the very beginning?

古文：对曰： 及时事也。  武坐致右宪左，何也？ 对曰： 非武坐也。 
现代文：孔子又问： 舞蹈一开始就威武雄壮地举手顿足，这又象征什么呢？ 
English: Confucius also asked: At the beginning of the dance, the dancers raised their hands and feet in a majestic manner. What does this symbolize?

古文： 声淫及商，何也？ 
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 这象征及时抓住战机，速战速决。 
English: What is the reason for the lascivious singing, which shows the illegitimate purpose of coveting the power of merchants and kings?

古文：对曰： 非《武》音也。 
现代文：孔子又问： 《武》舞的跪姿是右膝着地，左膝抬起，这象征什么呢？ 
English: Confucius also asked, "What is the meaning of the actor kneeling on his right leg and standing on his left leg in "Wu Bui"?

古文：子曰： 若非《武》音，则何音也？ 
现代文：宾牢贾答道： 您所说的跪姿不是《武》舞的跪法。 
English: Confucius said, "If it is not the original tune of the Wu Dance, what tune is it?

古文：对曰： 有司失其传也。
现代文：孔子又问： 有人说《武》乐之歌有贪图商朝政权的意思，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Confucius also asked: Why does the vocal music in "Wu Bui" excessively express a murderous spirit?

古文：若非有司失其传，则武王之志荒矣。 
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 这根本就不是《武》乐之音。 孔子又问： 如果不是《武》乐之音，那又是什么音呢？ 
English: Binmuja replied, "This is a mistake made by the music masters." Confucius said, "Yes."

古文：子曰： 唯！
现代文：宾牟贾答道： 这恐怕是乐官传授有差错。
English: Binmuja replied, "I'm afraid this is a mistake made by the music teacher.

古文：丘之闻诸苌弘，亦若吾子之言是也。 
现代文：如果不是乐官传授有差错，那就是武王一时胡涂了。 孔子说： 是的。
English: Confucius said, "Yes, if there is no mistake in the music teacher's teaching, then King Wu has made a mistake.

古文：宾牟贾起，免席而请曰： 夫《武》之备戒之已久，则既闻命矣，敢问：迟之迟而又久，何也？ 
现代文：我从袋弘那儿听来的，和您所讲的一模一样。 宾牟贾闻言站起，离开席位，恭恭敬敬地问道： 关于《武》乐表演开始前为什么要长时间击鼓警众等问题，已经领教了。
English: What I heard from Fukurokuhiro was exactly the same as what you said. Binmujia Wenguang stood up, left his seat, and respectfully asked: Regarding the question of why the police should beat the drums for a long time before the performance of "Wu," I have already received advice.

古文：子曰： 居！吾语汝。
现代文：而舞者每舞完一节都要亮相好大一会儿，请问这是象征什么呢？ 
English: And the dancers have to appear for a long time after each dance. What does this symbolize?

古文：夫乐者，象成者也；总干而山立，武王之事也；发扬蹈厉，大公之志也。
现代文：孔子说： 请坐下，听我慢慢给你讲。首先要明白，乐这种东西，它是象征已经完成之事的。从《武》的细节上讲，舞者手持盾牌，稳立如山，这象征武王的威重之容。舞者举手顿足，威武雄壮，这象征太公的必胜决心。
English: Confucius said: "Please sit down and listen to me slowly. First of all, you must understand that music is a symbol of something that has already been accomplished. From the details of "Wu," the dancer holds a shield and stands as steady as a mountain, which symbolizes the dignified appearance of King Wu. The dancer raises his hands and feet, majestic and strong, which symbolizes the great prince's determination to win.

古文：《武》乱皆坐，周、召之治也。
现代文：《武》舞表演到最后演员都跪了下来，这象征周公、召公的以文治替代武功。
English: At the end of the "Wu" dance performance, the actors all knelt down, which symbolized that Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong replaced martial arts with literature.

古文：且夫《武》，始而北出，再成而灭商。三成而南，四成而南国是疆，五成而分周公左召公右，六成复缀以崇。
现代文：再从《武》乐的表演过程来讲，第一节象征武王北出孟津等待诸侯会合，第二节象征武王灭商，第三节象征回师向南，第四节象征南国归入版图，第五节时舞者分为两列，这象征周公和召公一左一右地辅佐天子，第六节时舞者回到表演开始的位置，这象征诸侯凯旋，尊崇武王为天子。
English: In terms of the performance process of the "Wu" music, the first section symbolizes the departure of King Wu from the north to Mengjin to wait for the meeting of the princes, the second section symbolizes the death of the merchants, the third section symbolizes the return to the south, the fourth section symbolizes the inclusion of the southern country into the territory, the dancers are divided into two rows in the fifth section, which symbolizes Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong supporting the heavenly son on the left and right, and the dancers return to the position at the beginning of the performance in the sixth section, which symbolizes the triumphant return of the princes and reveres King Wu as the heavenly son.

古文：天子夹振之而驷伐，盛威于中国也。分夹而进，事早济也，久立于缀，以待诸侯之至也。
现代文：在表演过程中，有时在舞队的两侧各有一人摇动铎铃，而舞者以戈矛四度击刺，这象征军威雄壮，威振中国；有时舞者象将帅部署士卒，又摇动铎铃夹队而进，这象征要早一点渡河伐封。至于舞者站在舞位上久立不动，这象征武王在等待各路诸侯的到来。
English: During the performance, sometimes on both sides of the dance team, one person shakes the bell, and the dancer stabs four times with a spear, which symbolizes the military power and strength, threatening China; sometimes the dancer deploys soldiers like a general, and shakes the bell clip to advance, which symbolizes crossing the river a little earlier. As for the dancer standing on the dance floor for a long time, this symbolizes the king waiting for the arrival of the princes.

古文：且女独未闻牧野之语乎？武王克殷反商。
现代文：再说，你难道没有听说过对《武》乐的评论吗？
English: Besides, haven't you heard the reviews of Wu Le?

古文：未及下车而封黄帝之后于蓟，封帝尧之后于祝，封帝舜之后于陈。
现代文：武王战胜了殷封王，来到了殷都，未等下车，就把黄帝的后代封于蓟，把帝尧的后代封 于祝，把帝舜的后代封于陈。
English: King Wu defeated the king of Yinfu and came to Yindu. Before he got off the train, he sealed the descendants of the Yellow Emperor in Yan, the descendants of the Emperor in Zhu, and the descendants of the Emperor in Chen.

古文：下车而封夏后氏之后于杞，投殷之后于宋。封王子比干之墓，释箕子之囚，使之行商容而复其位。
现代文：下车以后又封夏禹的后代于祀，把商汤的后代安置于宋，整修了王子比干的墓，把箕子从牢中释放出来，让他去寻访商代的礼乐之官并且官复原位。
English: After getting off the train, the descendants of Xia Yu were enshrined, the descendants of Shang Tang were placed in Song, the tomb of Prince Bi Gan was renovated, and the mule was released from prison, allowing him to visit the ceremonial officials of the Shang Dynasty and restore them to their original positions.

古文：庶民弛政，庶士倍禄。
现代文：为民众废除了殷封的苛捐杂税，为一般士人成倍地增加棒禄。
English: Abolished the oppressive rule of King Yin Zhao and increased the salary of officials.

古文：济河而西，马散之华山之阳，而弗复乘；牛散之桃林之野，而弗复服。车甲衅而藏之府库，而弗复用。
现代文：然后渡过黄河向西，把驾车的马放牧于华山南面，表示不再用它们拉战车；把牛放牧于桃林的原野，表示不再役使它们；把兵车恺甲盖好包好以后收藏到府库里，表示不再使用它们。
English: Then they crossed the Yellow River to the west, and put the driving horses to pasture in the south of Huashan Mountain, indicating that they would no longer be used to pull the chariot; the cattle were grazed in the field of the peach grove, indicating that they would no longer be used; after wrapping the armor cover of the chariot, they were stored in the prefectural treasury, indicating that they would no longer be used.

古文：倒载干戈，包之以虎皮；将帅之士，使为诸侯；名之曰建櫜。
现代文：把干戈等武器倒放，用虎皮包裹起来，这叫做 把干戈束之高阁 。
English: It is called "Kangorakushu no Takakaku" (Kangorakushu no Takakaku) to put the weapons such as kangorakus upside down and wrap them with tiger skin.

古文：然后知武王之不复用兵也。
现代文：把带兵的将帅封为诸侯。这样一来，普天之下都知道武王不再用兵打仗了。
English: In this way, the whole world knew that King Wu would no longer fight with soldiers.

古文：散军而郊射，左射狸首，右射驺虞，而贯革之射息也。
现代文：解散了军队，在郊外的学宫举行射箭比赛。诸侯在东郊习射时，奏《狸首》之曲；天子在西郊习射时，奏《验虞》之曲。
English: The army was disbanded, and an archery competition was held in the suburban school palace. When the princes were practicing archery in the eastern suburbs, they played the tune of "The Tuxiu," and when the heavenly sons were practicing archery in the western suburbs, they played the tune of "Checking the Risk."

古文：裨冕搢笏，而虎贲之士说剑也。
现代文：战场上那种穿透恺甲的射箭停止了。大家都穿上了礼服，戴着礼帽，腰插笛板，而勇士也不身带佩剑了。
English: The armor-piercing archery of the battlefield has ceased; everyone is dressed in ceremonial robes and caps, with a flute at their waist, and warriors no longer carry swords.

古文：祀乎明堂而民知孝。
现代文：天子在明堂祭祀祖先，而民众也就懂得孝道了。
English: The Son of Heaven is worshipping his ancestors in Myeongdong, and the people are learning about filial piety.

古文：朝觐然后诸侯知所以臣，耕藉然后诸侯知所以敬。
现代文：诸侯定期朝见天子，然后诸侯就懂得如何做臣下了。天子亲自耕种藉田，然后诸侯就懂得如何敬祖了。
English: The lords regularly visit the emperor, and then the lords know how to be vassals. The emperor himself cultivates the rented fields, and then the lords know how to respect the ancestors.

古文：五者，天下之大教也。
现代文：这五件事，是对天下进行教化的重大举措。
English: These five things are major measures to educate the world.

古文：食三老五更于大学，天子袒而割牲，执酱而馈，执爵而酳，冕而总干，所以教诸侯之弟也。
现代文：在太学中宴请三老、五更，天子袒开衣襟亲自切割牲肉，捧着酱请他们吃，端起酒请他们漱口，还头戴礼帽，手执盾牌，为他们起舞。这是示范诸侯怎样敬老养老。
English: In Taigaku Middle School, the Three Elders and the Five Elders were invited to a banquet, and the prince, with his shirt open, personally cut the meat of the livestock, holding the sauce, invited them to eat, brought the wine and asked them to rinse their mouths, and also wore a ceremonial hat and held a shield, and danced for them. This was a demonstration of how the princes respected the elderly.

古文：若此则周道四达，礼乐交通。则夫《武》之迟久，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：像这样，周代的教化就普及四海，礼乐都得到贯彻，而这又非一朝一夕之功，由此看来，舞者每舞完一节都要亮相好大一会儿，不也是理所当然的吗？ 
English: In this way, the enlightenment of the Zhou Dynasty spread all over the world, and the ritual music was implemented, and this was not an overnight achievement. From this point of view, it is natural that the dancers should appear for a long time after each dance.

古文：君子曰：礼乐不可斯须去身。
现代文：君子说：礼乐不可片刻离身。
English: The gentleman said, "The ritual music must not leave your body for a moment.

古文：致乐以治心，则易直子谅之心油然生矣。
现代文：深刻体会乐的作用并用以陶冶内心，平易正直慈爱诚信的心就会自然而然地产生。
English: The pursuit of using music to govern the hearts of the people, and the hearts of peace, honesty, love, and integrity will come into being.

古文：易直子谅之心生则乐，乐则安，安则久，久则天，天则神。
现代文：有了平易正直慈爱诚信之心就自然感到快乐，感到快乐就会心神安宁，心神安宁就会生命长久，久而久之就会被人信之如天，畏之如神。
English: Peaceful, honest, dear, and honest hearts will produce happiness, happy hearts will produce peace of mind, peace of mind will produce a long life, and long life will make people believe in the same way as they believe in heaven, and if they are extremely fearful, they will be like worshipping gods.

古文：天则不言而信，神则不怒而威，致乐以治心者也。
现代文：这就有如天虽不言，而四季的交替从不失信；神虽不怒，而人人敬畏其威。
English: It is as if the heavens do not speak, but the four seasons never fail; as if God does not get angry, but everyone fears his might.

古文：致礼以治躬则庄敬，庄敬则严威。
现代文：这就是深刻体会乐的作用从而陶冶内心的结果。
English: This is the result of deeply experiencing the role of music to cultivate the heart.

古文：心中斯须不和不乐，而鄙诈之心入之矣。外貌斯须不庄不敬，而易慢之心入之矣。
现代文：深刻体会礼的作用并用来整伤自身的外貌，就会给人以庄重恭敬之感，这种庄重恭敬之感又会使人感到威严。如果内心有片刻的不和不乐，鄙卑诈伪的念头就会乘隙而入；如果外貌有片刻的不庄不敬，轻易怠慢的心志就会乘隙而入。
English: If you deeply understand the role of etiquette and use it to improve your appearance, you will give people a sense of dignity and respect. This sense of dignity and respect will make people feel dignified. If there is a moment of discontent and unhappiness in the heart, the idea of contempt and fraud will take advantage of the gap; if the appearance has a moment of undignified disrespect, the spirit of easy neglect will take advantage of the gap.

古文：故乐也者，动于内者也；礼也者，动于外者也。
现代文：所以说，乐这个东西，是影响人的内心的；礼这个东西，是影响人的外貌的。
English: So pleasure works on the inside; politeness works on the outside.

古文：乐极和，礼极顺，内和而外顺，则民瞻其颜色而弗与争也；望其容貌，而民不生易慢焉。
现代文：乐追求的目标在于和，礼追求的自标在于顺。内心和悦而外貌恭顺，那么民众只要看到他的脸色就不会与他相争了，只要望见他的容貌就不敢有轻慢的念头了。
English: The goal of pursuing music is harmony, and the self-designation of pursuing etiquette is harmony. If the heart is harmonious and the appearance is respectful, then the people will not fight with him as long as they see his face. As long as they see his face, they will not dare to have frivolous thoughts.

古文：故德辉动于内，而民莫不承听；理发诸外，而民莫不承顺。
现代文：由此可见，面色和善发自内心而民众莫不乐于听从，动作中规展现于外而民众莫不乐于顺从。
English: From this, it can be seen that good looks and good deeds come from the heart and the people are not willing to obey, and the rules of action are shown outside and the people are not willing to obey.

古文：故曰：致礼乐之道，举而错之，天下无难矣。
现代文：所以说：深刻的体会礼乐之道，并将它用来治理天下，就没有什么难办的事情了。
English: Therefore, he said, there is nothing difficult about having a profound understanding of the way of ritual music and using it to govern the world.

古文：乐也者，动于内者也；礼也者，动于外者也。
现代文：乐这个东西，是影响到人的内心的；礼这个东西，是影响到人的外貌的。
English: Pleasure works on the heart, while etiquette works on one's appearance and demeanor.

古文：故礼主其减，乐主其盈。
现代文：所以礼注重谦逊退让，乐注重丰满充实。
English: Therefore, etiquette focuses on modesty and concession, while pleasure focuses on fullness.

古文：礼减而进，以进为文：乐盈而反，以反为文。
现代文：礼虽注重谦让，但也要自我勉励，以自我勉励为美；乐虽注重丰满充实，但也要自我抑制，以自我抑制为美。
English: Rite, although focusing on modesty, but also self-encouragement, with self-encouragement for beauty; music, although focusing on fullness and fullness, but also self-restraint, with self-restraint for beauty.

古文：礼减而不进则销，乐盈而不反则放；故礼有报而乐有反。
现代文：礼注重谦让，如不自我勉励，就会由于谦让过分而导致礼数有缺。
English: Courtesy focuses on modesty, if you do not encourage yourself, it will lead to a lack of courtesy due to excessive modesty.

古文：礼得其报则乐，乐得其反则安；礼之报，乐之反，其义一也。
现代文：礼的自我勉励，乐的自我抑制，都是为了做到恰到好处，所以二者的道理是一样的。
English: The self-encouragement of etiquette and the self-restraint of music are both aimed at doing just the right thing, so the reason for both is the same.

古文：夫乐者乐也，人情之所不能免也。
现代文：音乐和舞蹈，是让人快乐的，这是人之常情，不可或缺。
English: "Le" means "happiness" and is essential to human nature.

古文：乐必发于声音，形于动静，人之道也。
现代文：人有了快乐的事，一定要通过声音来表示，一定要表现于动作，这也是人之常情。
English: When people have something to be happy about, it must be expressed through sound, and it must be expressed through movement. This is also a common human emotion.

古文：声音动静，性术之变，尽于此矣。
现代文：声音和动作，作为表达人的心情变化的手段，也不外乎就这两点了。
English: The changes in human nature, emotions, and tactics are all expressed in the sounds and actions.

古文：故人不耐无乐，乐不耐无形。形而不为道，不耐无乱。
现代文：所以人不能没有快乐，快乐又不能不通过声音和动作表现出来，对这种表现如果不给以引导，就不能不出乱子。
English: Therefore, a person cannot be without happiness, and happiness cannot be without being expressed through sounds and movements. If this expression is not guided, there will be chaos.

古文：先王耻其乱，故制雅、颂之声以道之，使其声足乐而不流，使其文足论而不息，使其曲直繁瘠、廉肉节奏足以感动人之善心而已矣。不使放心邪气得接焉，是先王立乐之方也。
现代文：先王认为出乱子是件丢人的事，所以特地制定《雅》《颂》之声加以引导；使声的曲调足以让人感到快乐而不放荡，使其文辞足以讲求义理而不塞窒，使其声调的曲折与平直、复杂与简单、刚强与柔和、急促与缓慢足以感动人的善心就可以了，不要使放荡之心与邪恶之念影响人心。这就是先王制乐的原则。
English: The forefather thought that it was a shameful thing to make a mess, so he specially formulated the voices of "Gracious" and "Ode" to guide it; the tone of the voice is enough to make people feel happy but not debauched, the words are enough to seek truth and reason without being stuffy, and the twists and turns of the tone are enough to move people's good hearts. Don't let the heart of debauchery and evil thoughts affect the heart of the people. This is the principle of the forefather's music.

古文：是故乐在宗庙之中，君臣上下同听之则莫不和敬；在族长乡里之中，长幼同听之则莫不和顺；在闺门之内，父子兄弟同听之则莫不和亲。
现代文：所以这样的乐，如果在宗庙之中演奏，君臣上下一道来听，就无不和谐肃敬；在地方上演奏，长幼一道来听，就无不和洽顺从；在家门内演奏，父子兄弟一道来听，就无不和睦相亲。
English: Therefore, if such music is played in the ancestral temple, and the monarchs and ministers come to listen, there will be no disharmony and respect; if it is played in the countryside, and the elders and children come to listen, there will be no disharmony and obedience; if it is played at home, and the father and son come to listen together, there will be no disharmony and friendship.

古文：故乐者审一以定和，比物以饰节；节奏合以成文。所以合和父子君臣，附亲万民也，是先王立乐之方也。
现代文：所以，这样的乐，是审定一个基调以定调和之音，再配上各种乐器表现其节奏，使节奏合成为乐章，就可以用来使父子、君臣各安其位，和谐相处，使普天之下的百姓亲附。这就是先王制乐的原则。
English: Therefore, this kind of music is to validate a keynote with a fixed-tone harmonic sound, and then match it with various musical instruments to express its rhythm, so that the rhythm can be combined into a musical movement, which can be used to make father and son, monarchs and ministers, each in their place, live in harmony, and make the people under the whole world adhere. This is the principle of the first king's music.

古文：故听其雅、颂之声，志意得广焉；执其干戚，习其俯仰诎伸，容貌得庄焉；行其缀兆，要其节奏，行列得正焉，进退得齐焉。
现代文：这样的乐，听其《雅》《颂今之声，纯正的思想就会占据脑海；手执盾斧一类的舞具，练习舞蹈的俯仰屈伸姿态，容貌就会变得庄严。按照固定的舞位舞域行进，与乐曲的节奏取得一致，行列就很规矩，进退就很整齐。
English: This kind of music, listening to its "Elegance" and "Ode to the Voice of the Present," pure thoughts will occupy the mind; holding a dance tool such as a shield and axe, practicing the dance's pitching and flexing posture, the appearance will become solemn.

古文：故乐者天地之命，中和之纪，人情之所不能免也。
现代文：所以，乐可以说是天地之间最能合同的东西，是协调世间万物的纲纪，是人情不可缺少的东西。
English: Therefore, music can be said to be the best contract between heaven and earth, it is the discipline to coordinate all things in the world, and it is an indispensable thing for human beings.

古文：夫乐者，先王之所以饰喜也，军旅鈇钺者，先王之所以饰怒也。
现代文：乐这个东西，是先王用来表示喜悦的；军队和刑罚这一套，是先王用来表示愤怒的。
English: The former king used the word "fun" to express joy; the former king used the words "army" and "punishment" to express anger.

古文：故先王之喜怒，皆得其侪焉。喜则天下和之，怒则暴乱者畏之。
现代文：由此看来，先王的喜悦和愤怒，都找到了相应的表达手段：先王喜悦，则百姓们也跟着喜悦；先王愤怒，则暴乱之徒就害怕。
English: From this point of view, the former king's joy and anger have both found corresponding means of expression: when the former king is happy, the people are also happy; when the former king is angry, the rioters are afraid.

古文：先王之道，礼乐可谓盛矣。
现代文：先王的治国之道，礼乐可是起了重大的作用啊。
English: The former king's way of governing the country, but the music played a significant role.

古文：子赣见师乙而问焉，曰： 赐闻声歌各有宜也，如赐者，宜何歌也？ 
现代文：子贡去拜访师乙而向他请教，说： 我听说唱歌要适合各人的性格。
English: Zigong went to visit Teacher B and asked him for advice, saying, "I've heard that singing should suit everyone's personality.

古文：师乙曰： 乙贱工也，何足以问所宜？
现代文：像我这样性格的人适合唱什么歌？ 师乙答道： 我是一个卑贱的乐工，哪里配得上回答您的问题。
English: What kind of song is suitable for someone with my personality to sing? Teacher B replied: I am a lowly musician, so I am not worthy to answer your question.

古文：请诵其所闻，而吾子自执焉：宽而静、柔而正者宜歌颂。
现代文：我只能告诉您一点我知道的情况，听了以后，由您自己作出判断。宽厚安静、柔和正直的人，适合唱《颂》。
English: I can only tell you what I know, and you can judge for yourself after listening. Generous, quiet, gentle and honest people are suitable for singing "Ode."

古文：广大而静、疏达而信者宜歌大雅。
现代文：志意宏大而安静，疏朗通达而诚信的人，适合唱《大雅》。
English: Those who are ambitious and quiet, clear-headed and honest, are suitable for singing "Great Elegance."

古文：恭俭而好礼者宜歌小雅。
现代文：恭慎而好礼的人，适合唱《小雅》。
English: A discreet and courteous person is suitable for singing "Xiao Ya."

古文：正直而静、廉而谦者宜歌风。
现代文：正直而安静、廉约而谦让的人，适合唱《国风》。
English: People who are honest and quiet, honest and humble, are suitable for singing "The National Wind."

古文：肆直而慈爱者宜歌商；温良而能断者宜歌齐。
现代文：坦率而慈爱的人，适合唱《商》。温良而果断的人，适合唱《齐》。
English: A frank and loving person is suitable for singing "Merchant." A gentle and decisive person is suitable for singing "Qi."

古文：夫歌者，直己而陈德也。
现代文：唱歌这件事，就是直接表达自己的心情，展示 自己的品德。
English: Singing is a matter of directly expressing one's own feelings and displaying one's own character.

古文：动己而天地应焉，四时和焉，星辰理焉，万物育焉。
现代文：自己唱了起来以后，会觉得天地也在响应，阴阳和顺，星辰按序运行，万物各得其所。
English: After singing by yourself, you will feel that heaven and earth are also responding, yin and yang are harmonious, the stars run in order, and everything has its place.

古文：故商者，五帝之遗声也。商人识之，故谓之商。
现代文：《商》是五帝遗留下来的歌曲，因为商代人把它记了下来，所以叫做《商》。
English: "Merchant" is a song left behind by the Five Emperors. It is called "Merchant" because the merchant's representative wrote it down.

古文：齐者三代之遗声也，齐人识之，故谓之齐。
现代文：《齐》是三王遗留下来的歌曲，因为齐国人把它记了下来，所以叫做《齐》。
English: "Qi" is a song left behind by the three kings, because the people of Qi wrote it down, so it is called "Qi."

古文：明乎商之音者，临事而屡断，明乎齐之音者，见利而让。
现代文：明白《商》曲真谛的人，遇事总能果断。明白《齐》曲真谛的人，能够见利而让。
English: Those who understand the true meaning of "Shang" will always be able to make a decisive decision. Those who understand the true meaning of "Qi" will be able to see the benefits and make concessions.

古文：临事而屡断，勇也；见利而让，义也。
现代文：遇事总能果断，这是勇；能够见利而让，这是义。
English: He showed courage when he repeatedly interrupted the incident; he showed loyalty when he saw that profit could be made.

古文：有勇有义，非歌孰能保此？
现代文：这种有勇有义的人，如果不是通过歌声表达出来谁能知道？
English: With courage and righteousness, what else but song can make a person maintain such a character?

古文：故歌者，上如抗，下如队，曲如折，止如槁木，倨中矩，句中钩，累累乎端如贯珠。
现代文：所以就歌者的旋律变化来说，或上仰而高亢，或下降而低沉，或拐弯如物之折断那般干脆，或停顿如枯树那般沉寂，平直之音合乎曲尺，回环之音合乎圆规，连绵不断之音恰似一串珍珠。
English: Therefore, as far as the singer's melody changes are concerned, whether it is uplifting and high-pitched, or descending and low-pitched, or turning as crisp as a broken thing, or pausing as silent as a dead tree, the flat sound is in line with the scale, the looping sound is in line with the circle, and the continuous sound is like a string of pearls.

古文：故歌之为言也，长言之也。
现代文：所以唱歌也是说话，只不过是拉长声调的说话罢了。
English: Song is also a language, a language of long tones.

古文：说之，故言之；言之不足，故长言之；长言之不足，故嗟叹之；嗟叹之不足，故不知手之舞之，足之蹈之也。 子贡问乐。
现代文：心里高兴，就想说话；说话还不足以表达这种高兴，就拖长声调来说；拖长声调还不足以表达，那就加上咏叹吁磋；咏叹吁磋还不足以表达，那就情不自禁地手舞足蹈。 子贡问乐。
English: If you are happy in your heart, you want to talk; if talking is not enough to express this happiness, you should draw a long tone; if the long tone is not enough to express, then add a sigh; if the sigh is not enough to express, then you can't help but dance.

