古文：大舜云∶ 书用识哉！ 
现代文：大舜曾说： 书写以记载过错。 
English: Dazhao once said: "Writing is to record faults."

古文：所以记时事也。
现代文：因为书是用以记载时事的。
English: Because books are used to record current events.

古文：盖圣贤言辞，总为之书，书之为体，主言者也。
现代文：凡是古代圣贤的言辞，都总称为书；书的作用，主要就是用来记言的。
English: All the words of the ancient sages are always called books; the function of books is mainly to record words.

古文：扬雄曰∶ 言，心声也；书，心画也。
现代文：扬雄就说： 言，是人的内心发出的声音；书，则是表达心思的符号。
English: Yang Xiong said, "Speech is the voice that comes out of a person's heart, while a book is a symbol that expresses one's thoughts.

古文：声画形，君子小人见矣。 
现代文：发出声音，写成文字，君子与小人的不同就表现出来了。 
English: The difference between a gentleman and a villain is shown when they utter a sound and write it down.

古文：故书者，舒也。
现代文：所以，书就是舒展的意思。
English: Therefore, the book is the meaning of stretching.

古文：舒布其言，陈之简牍，取象于夬，贵在明决而已。
现代文：把言辞舒展散布开，写在简板之上，就成了书；《周易·系辞》用《夬卦》来象征书契，就是取文字以明确断决为贵的意思。
English: If you stretch and spread the words and write them on the board, it will become a book; "Zhou Yi · Diction" uses "卦" to symbolize the book contract, which means that it is expensive to take words and make clear decisions.

古文：三代政暇，文翰颇疏。
现代文：夏、商、周三代的政务不多，书面的文件也很少应用。
English: The Xia, Shang and San dynasties did not do much in the way of government, and written documents were rarely used.

古文：春秋聘繁，书介弥盛。绕朝赠士会以策，子家与赵宣以书，巫臣之遗子反，子产之谏范宣，详观四书，辞若对面。
现代文：到了春秋时期，诸侯之间聘问频繁，持书往来的使者很多：如秦国大夫绕朝赠策书给晋国大夫士会，郑国大夫子家派使臣送信给晋国大夫赵盾，楚国的屈巫从晋国送信给楚公子侧，郑国大夫子产寄信劝告晋国的士匄。仔细读这四封书信，其辞就像在相对面谈。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, there were frequent enquiries between the princes, and many emissaries came and went with letters: for example, the Qin State Doctor went around the DPRK to present a policy book to the Jin State Doctor's Association, the Zheng State Doctor's son sent an envoy to the Jin State Doctor Zhao Dun, the Chu State Qu witch sent a letter from the Jin State to the Chu Prince's side, and the Zheng State Doctor's son sent a letter to advise the Jin State scholar. Carefully read these four letters, their words are like in a face-to-face interview.

古文：又子叔敬叔进吊书于滕君，固知行人挈辞，多被翰墨矣。
现代文：又如滕文公死后，鲁国大夫叔弓为使者到滕国送弔书。
English: For example, after the death of Teng Wenkong, Lu Guodong's doctor, Shuqiu, sent a condolence book as an envoy to Teng Guodong.

古文：及七国献书，诡丽辐辏；汉来笔札，辞气纷纭。
现代文：由此可见，春秋时期的外交使节，大都已经携带书面文件了。到战国时的献书，多用奇丽的文字组成。汉以后的书札，文辞气度纷纭复杂。
English: From this, it can be seen that most diplomatic envoys in the Spring and Autumn Period already carried written documents. Donations to the Warring States Period were mostly composed of beautiful characters. After the Han Dynasty, the style of writing was varied and complex.

古文：观史迁之《报任安》，东方之《谒公孙》，杨恽之《酬会宗》，子云之《答刘歆》，志气槃桓，各含殊采；并杼轴乎尺素，抑扬乎寸心。
现代文：读司马迁的《报任安书》、东方朔的《与公孙弘书》、杨恽的《报会宗书》、扬雄的《答刘歆书》等，写得志气宏大，各有异采；都是组织辞采于尺素之上，字里行间荡漾着方寸之心。
English: Reading Sima Qian's "Announcement of Appointment," Dongfang Shuo's "A Letter to His Grandson," Yang Hui's "A Letter to His Grandson," Yang Xiong's "Answer to Liu Xun," etc., they are written with great ambition and each has its own brilliance; they are all organized words on the scale, and the heart of the square is vibrating between the lines.

古文：逮后汉书记，则崔瑗尤善。
现代文：到东汉时期的书记，则以崔瑗写得最好。
English: As far as the secretaries of the Eastern Han Dynasty are concerned, Cui Yao is the best.

古文：魏之元瑜，号称翩翩；文举属章，半简必录；休琏好事，留意词翰，抑其次也。
现代文：三国时的阮瑀，曹丕称其 书记翩翩 ；魏文帝搜集孔融的遗作，即使半片竹简也要收录；应璩爱好缀集时事，很注意书记的写作：但这已是较差的作者。
English: Nguyn Th at the time of the Three Kingdoms, Cao Pi called him a "brilliant secretary"; Emperor Wei collected Kong Rong's posthumous works, even if only half a piece of bamboo was to be included; Ying Quan liked to collect current affairs, and paid great attention to the secretary's writing: but this was already a poor author.

古文：嵇康《绝交》，实志高而文伟矣；赵至叙离，乃少年之激切也。
现代文：魏末嵇康的《与山巨源绝交书》，就是志气高大、文辞宏伟的作品了。西晋赵至的《与嵇茂齐书》，是年轻人的心情激切之作。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, Yu Kang's "Book of Friendship with Mountains and Mountains" is a work of high ambition and magnificent words. West Jin Zhao Zhi's "Book of Friendship with Mountains and Mountains" is a passionate work for young people.

古文：至如陈遵占辞，百封各意；弥衡代书，亲疏得宜：斯又尺牍之偏才也。
现代文：至于西汉陈遵，他口授下属作书，数百封信，各有不同用意；汉末祢衡代黄祖写信，该亲该疏，各得其当：这两位又是作书的偏才了。
English: As for Chen Zun of the Western Han Dynasty, he dictated hundreds of letters to his subordinates, each with a different intention. At the end of the Han Dynasty, You Heung wrote a letter to Huang Zu on behalf of Huang Zu. It was up to each of them to choose which letter to write. Both of them were talented writers.

古文：详总书体，本在尽言，言所以散郁陶，托风采，故宜条畅以任气，优柔以怿怀；文明从容，亦心声之献酬也。
现代文：仔细总结书这种体制，本在于把话说透彻，是用以舒散郁积的心情，表达美好的言行；因此，应该条理畅达而放任志气，从容不迫而悦其胸怀。
English: The system of carefully summarizing the book is to make the words thorough, to relieve the mood of depression, and to express the good words and deeds; therefore, it should be well-organized and let go of ambition, unhurried and pleasing to the mind.

古文：若夫尊贵差序，则肃以节文。
现代文：能够条理畅达和从容不迫，就有效地发挥相互赠答、交流思想的作用了。
English: To be able to reach out in an orderly and unhurried manner is to effectively play the role of mutual feedback and exchange of ideas.

古文：战国以前，君臣同书，秦汉立仪，始有表奏，王公国内，亦称奏书，张敞奏书于胶后，其义美矣。
现代文：至于尊贵有别，就须严肃地合于礼仪。战国以前，君臣上下都用书；到秦汉时期确立仪法，臣下对帝王开始用表奏；在诸侯王国中，也称 奏书 ；如西汉张敞对胶东王太后的奏书，其意义是美好的。
English: Before the Warring States period, princes and ministers all used books; during the Qin and Han dynasties, ceremonies and laws were established, and subjects began to play for the emperor; in princely kingdoms, it is also known as a playbook; for example, the Western Han Dynasty Zhang Zhang's playbook for the Queen Mother of Jiaodong, its meaning is beautiful.

古文：迄至后汉，稍有名品，公府奏记，而郡将奉笺。记之言志，进己志也。笺者，表也，表识其情也。
现代文：到了东汉，逐渐有了名位等级的不同：对三公上书称 奏记 ，对郡守上书称 奏笺 。 记 是言志，就是对上表达自己的情志。 笺 就是表，就是表明自己的情志。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, there were gradually different levels of prestige: for the three princes, the letter was called "Sonokki," and for the county governor, the letter was called "Sonohaku." "Sonohaku" is a word, which means to express one's own feelings. "Shaku" is a table, which means to express one's own feelings.

古文：崔寔奏记于公府，则崇让之德音矣；黄香奏笺于江夏，亦肃恭之遗式矣。
现代文：东汉崔寔给大将军梁冀的奏记，则是崇尚谦让的好作品了；黄香给江夏太守的奏笺，就是严肃恭敬的遗范了。
English: The report of the Eastern Han Dynasty Cui Jie to the general Liang Jie is a good work advocating modesty; the report of Huang Xiang to the Empress Dowager of Jiangxi is a serious and respectful legacy.

古文：公幹笺记，丽而规益，子桓弗论，故世所共遗。若略名取实，则有美于为诗矣。
现代文：汉末刘桢的笺记，写得华丽而有益于规劝，曹丕在《典论·论文》中没有论及他的笺记，因而一般人都不知道；如抛开名称而看实质，刘桢的笺记更美于他的诗篇。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Liu Xi's memoirs were written in a magnificent style and were useful for persuasion. Cao Xi did not discuss his memoirs in the "Analects and Essays," so the general public did not know about them. If we put aside the name and look at the essence, Liu Xi's memoirs are more beautiful than his poems.

古文：刘廙谢恩，喻切以至，陆机自理，情周而巧，笺之为美者也。
现代文：三国时刘廙的《上疏谢徙署丞相仓曹属》，所用比喻极为确切；陆机自辩其枉罪的表笺，说理周密而文辞巧妙：这可算是笺表的佳作了。
English: When the Three Kingdoms, Liu Wei's "Cang Cao, Minister of the Migration Department of the Shang Sui Dynasty," the metaphor used is extremely accurate; Lu Ji's self-justification is well reasoned and cleverly worded: this can be regarded as a fine work of the watch.

古文：原笺记之为式，既上窥乎表，亦下睨乎书，使敬而不慑，简而无傲，清美以惠其才，彪蔚以文其响，盖笺记之分也。
现代文：查笺记的格式，上和表奏接近，下与书记相似；要像表奏那样恭敬，但没有畏惧的表示；可以像书札那样从简，但不能表现得傲慢无礼。用清丽的文笔以施展其才能，借光华的盛采以加强其感人的力量：这就是笺记的基本特点。
English: The format of the recitation should be similar to that of a recital, with the upper part close to that of a recital and the lower part similar to that of a secretary; it should be respectful like a recital, but without showing fear; it can be simple like a bookplate, but it should not show arrogance; it should show its talent with a clear writing, and strengthen its touching power with a brilliant flourish: these are the basic characteristics of a recitation.

古文：夫书记广大，衣被事体，笔札杂名，古今多品。
现代文：书记的内容十分广大，它包括各种各样的事体。笔札的名目更为繁杂，古今门类甚多。
English: The contents of the secretary are very extensive, it includes all kinds of things. The names of the cards are more complicated, there are many categories from ancient to modern.

古文：是以总领黎庶，则有谱籍簿录；医历星筮，则有方术占式；申宪述兵，则有律令法制；朝市征信，则有符契券疏；百官询事，则有关刺解牒；万民达志，则有状列辞谚：并述理于心，著言于翰，虽艺文之末品，而政事之先务也。故谓谱者，普也。
现代文：关于总领百姓事务的，则有谱、籍、簿、录；关于医药、历法和星象占卜的，则有方、术、占、试；关于申明法令和讲兵法的，则有律、令、法、制；关于朝廷和商业方面讲求凭信的，则有符、契、券、疏；关于各种官吏之间询问事情的，则有关、刺、解、牒；关于百姓表达情志的，则有状、列、辞、谚等等。所有这些，都是从内心出发来叙述事理，在笔札上写下言辞；虽然是各种文辞的下品，却是处理政事的要务。所谓 谱 ，就是普。
English: For the affairs of the commander-in-chief and the people, there are records, registers, books, and records; for medicine, calendars, and astrological divination, there are methods, techniques, divination, and tests; for the declaration of laws and regulations and the teaching of military tactics, there are rules, orders, laws, and systems; for the imperial court and commerce, there are proofs, deeds, vouchers, and accounts; for various officials to inquire about things, there are relevant, sting, solution, ultimatum; for the people to express their feelings, there are status, column, words, proverb, etc. All of these are to describe the facts from the heart and

古文：注序世统，事资周普，郑氏谱《诗》，盖取乎此。籍者，借也。
现代文：编著世代相承的统系，必须完整普遍，汉代郑玄为《诗经》编的《诗谱》，就是取这个意思。所谓 籍 ，就是借。
English: In order to compile a lineage that is passed down from generation to generation, it must be complete and universal. This is the meaning of the "Poetic Genealogy" compiled by Zheng Xuan for the "Book of Songs" in the Han Dynasty. The so-called "citizenship" is borrowed.

古文：岁借民力，条之于版，春秋司籍，即其事也。簿者，圃也。
现代文：古代每年借用百姓的劳力，要记在简板上；《左传》中所说 司晋之典籍 ，就指此事。所谓 簿 ，就是圃。
English: In ancient times, the labor of the people was borrowed every year, and it should be recorded on the board; the classic book of Sijin mentioned in "Zhuan" refers to this matter. The so-called book is the garden.

古文：草木区别，文书类聚，张汤、李广，为吏所簿，别情伪也。录者，领也。
现代文：和各种草木分别种植于园圃一样，有关文案也是分类汇集在文簿里面。汉代的张汤、李广，都曾被官吏按簿问罪，就是为了辨别真伪。所谓 录 ，就是领。
English: As with various plants and trees planted separately in the garden, the relevant texts are also classified and collected in the textbook. Zhang Tang and Li Guang in the Han Dynasty were both accused by officials according to the book, in order to distinguish between the true and the false. The so-called record is the collar.

古文：古史《世本》，编以简策，领其名数，故曰录也。方者，隅也。
现代文：如记载古史的《世本》，就是编成简策，总的记录诸侯大夫的户籍，所以叫做 录 。所谓 方 ，就是隅。
English: For example, the "World Book," which records ancient history, is compiled into a compendium, a general record of the household registration of the vassals, so it is called "record." The so-called side is the corner.

古文：医药攻病，各有所主，专精一隅，故药术称方。
现代文：用医药治病，各有主治之疾，用药的人也专精某个方面，所以称用药之术为 方 。
English: The use of medicine to treat diseases, each has its own disease to treat, and the person who uses medicine also specializes in a certain aspect, so the use of medicine is called the way.

古文：术者，路也。
现代文：所谓 术 ，就是路。
English: The so-called art is the way.

古文：算历极数，见路乃明，《九章》积微，故以为术，《淮南》、《万毕》，皆其类也。占者，觇也。
现代文：要用最精的技术推算，道路才看得清楚；《九章算术》积聚了数学的精妙，所以称之为 术 。淮南王刘安的《万毕术》，也是这方面的著作。所谓 占 ，就是觇。
English: It is necessary to use the most sophisticated technical calculation to see the road clearly; "Nine Chapters of Arithmetic" has accumulated the subtlety of mathematics, so it is called 術. Huainan King Liu An's "Wan Bi Shu" is also a work in this area. The so-called 占 is.

古文：星辰飞伏，伺候乃见，登观书云，故曰占也。式者，则也。
现代文：根据星辰的变化来占验往来升降的吉凶，要通过观察才能看清；古人是登上观台进行观察而书写云物气色的变化，所以叫做 占 。所谓 式 ，就是则。
English: According to the changes of the stars, it is necessary to observe the rise and fall of the fortunes to see clearly; the ancients climbed the observation platform to observe and write the changes in the appearance of the clouds, so it is called 占. The so-called 式, that is, 则.

古文：阴阳盈虚，五行消息，变虽不常，而稽之有则也。律者，中也。
现代文：天地之间阴阳五行的消长盛衰，虽然变化无常，但考察其变化是有一定法则的。所谓 律 ，就是中。
English: The waxing and waning of the five elements of yin and yang between heaven and earth, although changeable, but there is a certain law to examine its changes. The so-called law is the middle.

古文：黄钟调起，五音以正，法律驭民，八刑克平，以律为名，取中正也。令者，命也。
现代文：乐律由黄钟起调，五声都据以正音。用法律来治理百姓，根据周代所制八法就能处理公平。用 律 这个名称，就是取公平中正之意。所谓 令 ，就是命。
English: The melody starts from the yellow bell, and the five tones are all based on the positive tone. Using the law to govern the people, according to the eight laws made by the Zhou Dynasty, it can deal with fairness. The name of the law is to take the meaning of fairness and justice. The so-called order is life.

古文：出命申禁，有若自天，管仲下令如流水，使民从也。
现代文：发出命令，申明禁戒，有如从天而降。管仲说下令如流水，意思是使百姓顺从。
English: To issue an order, to declare a prohibition, is like descending from the sky. Guanzhong said that an order is like flowing water, meaning to make the people obey.

古文：法者，象也。
现代文：所谓 法 ，就是象。
English: The so-called law is the elephant.

古文：兵谋无方，而奇正有象，故曰法也。制者，裁也。
现代文：军事上的谋略没有一定，但战术的奇正有一定的兵法，所以称之为 法 。所谓 制 ，就是裁。
English: The military strategy is not certain, but the tactical strategy has a certain method of warfare, so it is called law. The so-called system is to cut.

古文：上行于下，如匠之制器也。符者，孚也。
现代文：由上而下贯彻执行，犹如工匠依照规矩制造器具。所谓 符 ，就是孚。
English: It is carried out from the top down, just as craftsmen make tools according to rules. The so-called "fu" is fu.

古文：征召防伪，事资中孚。
现代文：为了防上征聘召集的虚伪，就依靠出自内心的诚信。
English: In order to prevent the hypocrisy of the recruitment call, they rely on the sincerity from the heart.

古文：三代玉瑞，汉世金竹，末代从省，易以书翰矣。契者，结也。
现代文：夏、商、周三代用玉制的信物，汉代用铜虎和竹箭代替，魏晋以后从简，就改用书翰了。所谓 契 ，就是结。
English: In the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties, gifts made of jade were used, in the Han dynasty, bronze tigers and bamboo arrows were used instead, and after the Wei and Jin dynasties, it was changed to calligraphy. The so-called 契, is the knot.

古文：上古纯质，结绳执契，今羌胡征数，负贩记缗，其遗风欤！券者，束也。
现代文：上古时期的人很质朴，以结绳为契约；至今羌人胡人验数，以及商贩记钱的办法，大概就是古代结绳为契的遗风吧。所谓 券 ，就是束。
English: In ancient times, people were very simple, and contracts were made by tying ropes; to this day, the practice of asking people to guess the number, as well as the way merchants keep track of money, is probably a legacy of the ancient practice of tying ropes. So-called vouchers are bundles.

古文：明白约束，以备情伪，字形半分，故周称判书。
现代文：明确的约束，是为了防止虚伪。剖开约券上的文字各执一半，所以周代称为 判书 。
English: A clear constraint is to prevent hypocrisy. The words on the opening of the contract are divided in half, so Zhou Dynasty is called "judgment."

古文：古有铁券，以坚信誓；王褒髯奴，则券之谐也。
现代文：古代还有丹书铁券，用以确保信誓。汉代王褒的《僮约》，可说是约券的楷模了。
English: In ancient times, there were also Dan Shu iron coupons, which were used to secure oaths. The Han Dynasty King Bao's "Covenant," can be said to be a model of the contract.

古文：疏者，布也。
现代文：所谓 疏 ，就是布。
English: The so-called 疏, is cloth.

古文：布置物类，撮题近意，故小券短书，号为疏也。关者，闭也。
现代文：布置陈列事物，只是摘要写明其大意，所以对短小的字据叫做 疏 。所谓 关 ，就是闭。
English: When arranging and displaying things, it is only necessary to write a summary of its meaning, so the short and small words are called sparse. The so-called close is closed.

古文：出入由门，关闭当审；庶务在政，通塞应详。
现代文：进出都要经过门，关闭就必须慎重。各种事务决定于当时的政局，政局的顺利或阻塞是应该详细了解的。
English: All matters are determined by the political situation at the time, and the success or failure of the political situation should be understood in detail.

古文：韩非云∶ 孙亶回，圣相也，而关于州部。 
现代文：《韩非子》中曾说： 公孙亶回虽然是圣明之相，却起于地方官吏。 
English: "Han Feizi" once said: Although Gongsun Xinghui is a holy figure, he originated from local officials.

古文：盖谓此也。
现代文：讲的就是这个道理。所谓 刺 ，就是达。
English: That's what they all say.

古文：刺者，达也。诗人讽刺，周礼三刺，事叙相达，若针之通结矣。
现代文：《诗经》的作者写诗以讽刺统治者，《周礼》中说断狱要向三种人逐一询问。
English: The author of the "Book of Poems" wrote poems to satirize the ruler, and the "Weekly Ritual" said that the prison break should ask three kinds of people one by one.

古文：解者，释也。
现代文：这种依次到达的方式，就像用针的刺通到底。
English: This sequential approach is like threading a needle all the way to the end.

古文：解释结滞，征事以对也。牒者，叶也。
现代文：所谓 解 ，就是释。解释凝结积滞的问题，证验有关之事加以核对。所谓 牒 ，就是叶。
English: The so-called solution is interpretation. Explain the problem of condensation accumulation, and verify the relevant matters. The so-called ultimatum is leaf.

古文：短简编牒，如叶在枝，温舒截蒲，即其事也。
现代文：用短小的竹简编成碟，就像树枝上的树叶；汉代路温舒截断蒲叶编成牒，就是这种事例。
English: A short bamboo stick is used to make a plate, just like the leaves on a tree branch; the Han Dynasty Lu Wenshu cut off the leaves and made it into a bowl, this is an example.

古文：议政未定，故短牒咨谋。
现代文：议论政事尚未作出决定，便用简短的牒文相商议。
English: If a decision has not yet been made on a political issue, a brief written statement is used to discuss the issue.

古文：牒之尤密，谓之为签。
现代文：牒文中更为细密的一种叫做 签 。
English: A more detailed type of ultimatum is called a "signature."

古文：签者，纤密者也。
现代文：所谓 签 ，就是细密的意思。
English: The so-called "sign" means "detail."

古文：状者，貌也。
现代文：所谓 状 ，就是貌：描述其本原，采取其事实。
English: The so-called state is the appearance: describe its origin, take its facts.

古文：体貌本原，取其事实，先贤表谥，并有行状，状之大者也。
现代文：古代贤人死后，要给他追赠谥号，同时写一篇死者生平事迹的行状，这是较重要的一种状文。所谓 列 ，就是陈。
English: After the death of an ancient sage, it is necessary to give him a posthumous posthumous name, and at the same time write a deed of the deceased's life and deeds, which is a more important one. The so-called column is Chen.

古文：列者，陈也。陈列事情，昭然可见也。
现代文：把有关内容一一列举陈述出来，问题就显而易见了。
English: List the relevant contents one by one, and the problem is obvious.

古文：辞者，舌端之文，通己于人。
现代文：所谓 辞 ，就是口头上的言辞，由自己转达给他人。
English: The so-called speech is verbal speech, conveyed by oneself to others.

古文：子产有辞，诸侯所赖，不可已也。
现代文：《左传》中说，郑国于产善于言辞，诸侯都全靠它，可见言辞是不可没有的。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said that Zheng Guo is good at rhetoric in production, and all the princes rely on it. It can be seen that rhetoric is indispensable.

古文：谚者，直语也。
现代文：所谓 谚 ，就是直质的话。
English: So-called proverbs are straightforward words.

古文：丧言亦不及文，故吊亦称谚。
现代文：丧弔父母的话不能有文采，所以弔辞也叫 谚 。
English: The words used to mourn one's parents cannot be literary, so the eulogy is also known as a proverb.

古文：廛路浅言，有实无华。
现代文：民间的谚语，也是有实无华的。
English: Folk sayings, too, have no substance.

古文：邹穆公云 囊漏储中 ，皆其类也。
现代文：春秋时邹穆公说的 口袋虽漏仍在其中 ，就是这类话了。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Zou Moukong said that although the pocket was leaking, it was still in it. This is the kind of thing that happens.

古文：《牧誓》曰∶ 古人有言，牝鸡无晨。 
现代文：《尚书·牧誓》中说， 古人有言，母鸡不司晨。 
English: According to "Shangshu · Pastoral Oath," the ancients said that the hen does not crow in the morning.

古文：《大雅》云 人亦有言 、 惟忧用老 ，并上古遗谚，《诗》《书》所引者也。
现代文：《诗经·大雅》说： 人亦有言，因忧而老。 这都是古代遗留下来的谚语，《诗经》、《尚书》所引用过的。
English: "Shijing · Daya" said: People also have a saying that they grow old because of worries.These are all proverbs left over from ancient times, quoted by "Shijing" and "Shangshu."

古文：至于陈琳谏辞，称 掩目捕雀 ，潘岳哀辞，称 掌珠 、 伉俪 ，并引俗说而为文辞者也。
现代文：至于陈琳在《谏何进召外兵》中说的 掩目捕雀 ，潘岳在哀弔之作中用的 掌珠 、 伉俪 等，都是引用民间俗语写成的。
English: As for Chen Lin's "Covering one's eyes to catch a bird" in "How to Invite Foreign Soldiers," the "palm bead" and "beak" used by Pan Yue in his work of mourning are all written by quoting folk sayings.

古文：夫文辞鄙俚，莫过于谚，而圣贤《诗》《书》，采以为谈，况逾于此，岂可忽哉！
现代文：文辞的鄙俗，没有超过谚语的了，可是古代圣贤在《诗经》、《尚书》中，也采为言谈，何况不如谚语鄙俗的种种书记，岂能忽视呢！
English: The vulgarity of words is no more than that of proverbs, but the ancient sages in the "Book of Songs" and the "Song of Songs" also adopted it as speech, and what's more, they couldn't ignore the vulgarity of proverbs!

古文：观此众条，并书记所总∶或事本相通，而文意各异，或全任质素，或杂用文绮，随事立体，贵乎精要；意少一字则义阙，句长一言则辞妨，并有司之实务，而浮藻之所忽也。
现代文：上述六类各四条，都包括在书记之中：其中有的本是相通的，但文意各不相同；有的完全用质朴之辞，有的则杂以文采。应根据情况的不同来确定体制，而以精当简要为贵。意思缺少一字就会不全面，一句之中多一个不必要的字也有防害。这都是各级官吏必须实行的，而为追求浮华藻饰的作者所忽略。
English: The four articles of each of the six categories mentioned above are included in the secretaries: some of them are basically the same, but the meaning is different; some are completely simple, and some are mixed with literary style. The system should be determined according to different situations, and it is important to be concise. The meaning will not be complete without one word, and one more unnecessary word in a sentence will also be harmful. These are all things that officials at all levels must implement, but are ignored by authors in pursuit of flashy decoration.

古文：然才冠鸿笔，多疏尺牍，譬九方堙之识骏足，而不知毛色牝牡也。
现代文：但有的作者其才气虽为巨著之冠，却常常疏于书札小文，这就如善于相马的九方堙，虽能识别千里骏马，却不能辨别马的毛色和雌雄。
English: However, some authors, although their talent is the crown of a great work, often neglect the small text of the book. This is like Jiufangyao, who is good at horse-sighting, although he can recognize thousands of horses, he cannot distinguish the horse's hair color and male and female.

古文：言既身文，信亦邦瑞，翰林之士，思理实焉。
现代文：文辞不仅可以美化作者自身，也是一个国家的光彩；因此，文坛之土，应该考虑从事实务。总结：
English: Literature can not only beautify the author himself, but also the glory of a country; therefore, the land of literature should consider from the actual business.

古文：赞曰∶文藻条流，托在笔札。
现代文：文章的各种支流，都容纳在笔札之中。
English: The various tributaries of the article are contained in the pen.

古文：既驰金相，亦运木讷。
现代文：有的要驰骋文采，有的则运用朴质。
English: Some want to excel in literature, while others use simplicity.

古文：万古声荐，千里应拔。
现代文：优秀的书札使作者声名显扬于万古，影响很快就传遍千里。
English: The author's fame spread through the ages thanks to his excellent bookplates, and his influence soon spread across thousands of miles.

古文：庶务纷纶，因书乃察。
现代文：众多纷杂的政务，就靠书记得以明察。
English: Many complicated government affairs rely on books to remember and observe.

