古文：起重光作噩，尽旃蒙大渊献，凡十五年。
现代文：起，止，一共十五年。
English: A total of fifteen years.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平四年
现代文：汉明帝永平四年
English: Emperor Hanming of Yongping's Fourth Year

古文：春，帝近出观览城第，欲遂校猎河内；东平王苍上书谏；帝览奏，即还宫。
现代文：春季，明帝出宫，在附近观览洛阳城楼宅第，打算随后去河内郡行猎。东平王刘苍上书劝止。明帝看到奏书后，立即回宫。
English: In the spring, Emperor Ming went out of the palace to inspect the Luoyang castle nearby, intending to go hunting in Hanoi County afterwards. Dongping King Liu Cang wrote a letter to dissuade him. Emperor Ming saw the letter and immediately returned to the palace.

古文：秋，九月，戊寅，千乘哀王建薨，无子，国除。
现代文：秋季，九月戊寅，千乘哀王刘建去世。因无子嗣，封国撤除。
English: In the autumn, in September of Wu Yin, Liu Jian, the King of the Thousand Immortals, passed away. As he had no children, his fief was revoked.

古文：冬，十月，乙卯，司徒郭丹、司空冯鲂免，以河南尹沛国范迁为司徒，太仆伏恭为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月乙卯，将司徒郭丹、司空冯鲂免职，将河南尹、沛国人范迁任命为司徒，太仆伏恭任命为司空。
English: In the winter, in October, Guo Dan, the steward, and Feng Yao, the steward, were relieved of their duties, and Fan Qian, a Henan Yin and Pei Guo Ren, was appointed as the steward, and Fu Qiong, the eunuch, was appointed as the steward.

古文：恭，湛之兄子也。
现代文：伏恭是伏湛哥哥的儿子。
English: Fuxiong is the son of Fuzhan's elder brother.

古文：陵乡侯梁松坐怨望、县飞书诽谤，下狱死。
现代文：陵乡侯梁松因怨恨朝廷、悬挂匿名书进行诽谤而被捕入狱，处以死刑。
English: Lingxiang Hou Liang Song was arrested and sentenced to death for defaming the imperial court by hanging up an anonymous book.

古文：初，上为太子，太中大夫郑兴子众以通经知名，太子及山阳王荆因梁松以缣帛请之，众曰： 太子储君，无外交之义。
现代文：当初，皇上做太子的时候，太中大夫郑兴之子郑众以精通儒家经典而闻名于世。太子和山阳王刘荆曾让梁松用绸缎作礼物聘请郑众做门客，郑众说： 太子是王储，没有同外界随便交往的道理。
English: At the beginning, when the emperor was crown prince, Zheng Zong, the son of the imperial physician Zheng Xing, was famous in the world for his mastery of Confucian classics. The prince and the king of Shanyang, Liu Jing, had asked Liang Song to use silk brocade as a gift to hire Zheng Zong as a concierge. Zheng Zong said: The prince is the crown prince, there is no reason to casually interact with the outside world.

古文：汉有旧防，蕃王不宜私通宾客。 
现代文：汉朝有旧时禁令，亲王也不应私自招徕宾客。 
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was an old-time prohibition that princes should not invite guests without permission.

古文：松曰： 长者意，不可逆。 
现代文：梁松说： 这是上面的意思，不可忤逆。 
English: Liang Song said: This is the above meaning, it cannot be reversed.

古文：众曰： 犯禁触罪，不如守正而死。 
现代文：郑众说： 与其违禁犯罪，不如坚守正道而死。 
English: Zheng Zong said: Instead of committing forbidden crimes, it is better to stick to the right path and die.

古文：遂不往。
现代文：便拒绝梁松之请，没有应聘前往。
English: So they didn't go.

古文：及松败，宾客多坐之，唯众不染于辞。
现代文：及至梁松获罪，宾客们多被指控有罪，唯独郑众不受案中供辞的牵连。
English: By the time Liang Song was found guilty, most of the guests had been charged with crimes, but Zheng Zong was not implicated in the case by his confession.

古文：于窴王广德将诸国兵三万人攻莎车，诱莎车王贤，杀之，并其国。
现代文：于阗王广德率领各国兵众三万人进攻莎车，用计引诱莎车王贤，将他杀死，吞并了莎车国。
English: King Guangde of Yunnan led 30,000 soldiers from all over the world to attack Yarko, lured King Xian of Yarko with tricks, killed him, and annexed Yarko.

古文：匈奴发诸国兵围于窴，广德请降。
现代文：于是，匈奴调发西域诸国军队包围了于阗，广德请求投降。
English: As a result, the Huns dispatched the armies of the Western Regions to encircle Yunnan, and Guangde requested surrender.

古文：匈奴立贤质子不居征为莎车王，广德又攻杀之，更立其弟齐黎为莎车王。
现代文：匈奴便将贤生前送来做人质的儿子不居徵立为莎车王。后来，广德再次进攻莎车，杀死了不居徵，改立他的弟弟齐黎为莎车王。
English: The Xiongnu then sent the son of Xian Sheng, who had been sent to serve as a hostage, as the king of Yarko. Later, Guangde attacked Yarko again, killed Yarko, and re-established his brother Zili as the king of Yarko.

古文：东平王苍自以至亲辅政，声望日重，意不自安，前后累上疏称： 自汉兴以来，宗室子弟无得在公卿位者，乞上骠骑将军印绶，退就蕃国。 
现代文：东平王刘苍由于自己是明帝至亲而辅佐大政，又声望日高，内心感到不安，曾先后多次上书道： 自从汉朝开国以来，皇族子弟无一人身居公卿要位，我请求奉还骠骑将军的印信绶带，退官并前往封国。 
English: Dongping King Liu Cang, because he was a close relative of Emperor Ming and assisted the great power, and his reputation was growing, felt uneasy in his heart. He had written several times: Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, none of the royal children have held the important position of nobles. I request that I be given back the imperial seal and sash of the general, retire and go to the feudal state.

古文：辞甚恳切，帝乃许苍还国，而不听上将军印绶。
现代文：奏书辞意十分恳切。于是明帝便允许刘苍返回封国，但不准他奉还骠骑将军的印信绶带。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming allowed Liu Cang to return to the vassal state, but did not allow him to return the general's seal and sash.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平五年
现代文：永平五年春季，二月，刘苍免官返回封国。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Yongping, in February, Liu Cang was dismissed and returned to the country.

古文：春，二月，庚戌，苍罢归籓。帝以骠骑长史为东平太傅，掾为中大夫，令史为王家郎，加赐钱五千万，布十万匹。冬，十月，上行幸鄴；是月还宫。
现代文：明帝任命骠骑将军府长史为东平国太傅，掾史为中大夫，令史为王府郎。特赐东平王五千万钱，十万匹布。冬季，十月，明帝出行，临幸邺。
English: Emperor Ming appointed the cavalry general Fuchang Shi as Dongping Guotaifu, Fuchang Shi as Zhongdafu, and Lingshi as Wangfuro. Dongping Wang was specially awarded 50 million yuan and 100,000 pieces of cloth. In winter, in October, Emperor Ming traveled to Linhongyi.

古文：十一月，北匈奴寇五原；十二月，寇云中。南单于击却之。
现代文：当月返回京城皇宫。十一月，北匈奴侵犯五原郡；十二月，侵犯云中郡，被南匈奴单于击退。
English: In November, the Northern Huns invaded Wuhuan County; in December, they invaded Yunzhong County, but were repulsed by the Southern Huns.

古文：是岁，发遣边民在内郡者，赐装钱，人二万。
现代文：本年，征发遣返迁到内地的边疆居民，赏赐治装费，每人二万钱。
English: This year, frontier residents who have been sent to the inland for repatriation will be rewarded with a handling fee of up to 20,000 yuan per person.

古文：安丰戴侯窦融年老，子孙纵诞，多不法。
现代文：安丰戴侯窦融年事已高，他的子孙放纵荒唐，作了许多不法之事。
English: Anfeng Daihong Dou Rong is very old, and his descendants indulge in absurdities and have done many illegal things.

古文：长子穆尚内黄公主。矫称阴太后诏，令六安侯刘盱去妇，以女妻之。
现代文：窦融的长子窦穆是内黄公主的夫婿，他假传阴太后的旨意，命令六安侯刘盱休掉原妻，而将自己的女儿嫁给了刘盱。
English: Dou Mu, the eldest son of Dou Rong, was the husband of Princess Neiguang. He falsely transmitted the will of the Empress Dowager Yin and ordered Liu Ye, the Prince of Li'an, to divorce his wife and marry his daughter to Liu Ye.

古文：盱妇家上书言状，帝大怒。
现代文：刘盱原妻的娘家上书控告此事，明帝大怒，将窦穆兄弟全部罢免。
English: The daughter of Liu Yao's former wife wrote to the emperor to complain about this, and the emperor was so angry that he dismissed all the Dou Mu brothers.

古文：尽免穆等官，诸窦为郎吏者，皆将家属归故郡，独留融京师；融寻薨。
现代文：凡窦氏家族中作官的，一律带着家属返回原郡，只留窦融一人在京城。窦融不久便去世了。
English: All officials in the Dou family returned to the original county with their families, leaving only Dou Rong in Beijing. Dou Rong died soon after.

古文：后数岁，穆等复坐事与子勋、宣皆下狱死。
现代文：几年后，窦穆等人再次遭到指控，连同窦穆的儿子窦勋和窦宣，一道被捕入狱，处以死刑。
English: A few years later, Dou Mu and others were again accused, and together with Dou Mu's sons Dou Xun and Dou Xuan, they were arrested and sentenced to death.

古文：久之，诏还融夫人与小孙一人居雒阳。
现代文：又过了很久，明帝才下诏准许窦融的夫人和小孙一人回到洛阳居住。
English: It took a long time before Emperor Ming issued an edict allowing Dou Rong's wife and one of his grandsons to return to Luoyang.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平六年春，二月，王雒山出宝鼎，献之。
现代文：永平六年春季，二月，有宝鼎在王洛山出土，献给明帝。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Yongping, in February, a Baoding was unearthed in Wangluo Mountain, dedicated to Emperor Ming.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，诏曰： 祥瑞之降，以应有德；方今政化多僻，何以致兹！
现代文：夏季，四月甲子，明帝下诏： 祥瑞降临，是德行的感应。如今政治多有邪僻，怎么能够引来祥瑞！
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Ming issued an edict: "The arrival of Xiang Rui is an inspiration of virtue. Nowadays, politics is often perverse, how can it attract Xiang Rui!"

古文：《易》曰： 鼎象三公， 岂公卿奉职得其理邪！
现代文：《易经》说： 鼎是三公的象征， 莫非是公卿奉职尽责符合了天理吗？
English: "I Ching" says: Ding is a symbol of the Three Princes. Could it be that the nobles are fulfilling their duties in accordance with the principles of heaven?

古文：其赐三公帛五十匹，九卿、二千石半之。
现代文：今赐予三公每人五十匹帛，九卿和二千石官每人二十五匹。
English: Now give each of the three dukes fifty horses, and each of the nine lords and officials of two thousand koku twenty-five horses.

古文：先帝诏书，禁人上事言圣，而间者章奏颇多浮词；自今若有过称虚誉，尚书皆宜抑而不省，示不为谄子蚩也。 
现代文：先帝曾有诏旨，禁止人们在上书时称颂圣明，而近来奏章中虚浮之辞较之。从今以后，如果再有溢美的言词，尚书应一律拒不受理，以示朕不为谄媚者欺骗嘲弄。 
English: The previous emperor had issued an edict prohibiting people from praising the saint when writing, and recently the vain words in the music have been compared. From now on, if there are any words of praise, the book should be rejected, so as to show that I am not a sycophant.

古文：冬，十月，上行幸鲁；十二月，还幸阳城；壬午，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，明帝出行，临幸鲁城。十二月，在归途中临幸阳城县。十二月壬午，返回京城皇宫。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Ming traveled to Linxhu Lu City. In December, on his way back, he went to Linxhu Yangcheng County. In December, at noon, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Beijing.

古文：是岁，南单于適死，单于莫之子苏立，为丘除车林鞮单于；数月，复死，单于適之弟长立，为湖邪尸逐侯鞮单于。
现代文：本年，南匈奴单于适去世，前单于莫的儿子苏继位，此即丘除车林单于。数月后，苏又去世，单于适的弟弟长继位，此即湖邪尸逐侯单于。
English: This year, South Hun Sen died in Shih, and Su, the son of the former Shun Yu Mo, succeeded to the throne, that is, the hill was removed from the car forest in Shih. A few months later, Su died again, and Shun Yu's brother Chang succeeded to the throne, that is, the lake evil corpse followed Shun Yu.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平七年春，正月，癸卯，皇太后阴氏崩。
现代文：永平七年春季，正月癸卯，皇太后阴氏驾崩。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Yongping, in the first month of the year, Empress Dowager Houyin passed away.

古文：二月，庚申，葬光烈皇后。
现代文：二月庚申，光烈皇后阴氏入葬。
English: In February, Koshin, the glorious Empress Yin was buried.

古文：北匈奴犹盛，数寇边，遣使求合市；上冀其交通，不复为寇，许之。
现代文：北匈奴依然实力强盛，屡次侵犯边境，又派使者请求与汉朝进行双边贸易。
English: The Northern Xiongnu remained powerful, repeatedly violated the border, and sent envoys to request bilateral trade with the Han Dynasty.

古文：以东海相宋均为尚书令。
现代文：明帝希望利用通商手段使匈奴不再入侵，便应许了这一要求。任命东海国相宗均为尚书令。
English: Emperor Ming hoped to use trade means to prevent the Huns from invading again, and agreed to this request.

古文：初，均为九江太守，五日一听事，悉省掾、史，闭督邮府内，属县无事，百姓安业。
现代文：先前，宗均曾任九江郡太守。任上，他每五天处理一次政务，将掾、史等官员一律裁撤，不让督邮外出巡查而留在府内，下属各县全都太平无事，百姓安居乐业。
English: Previously, Zongjun had served as the governor of Jiujiang County. During his term of office, he handled government affairs once every five days, abolished all officials such as the magistrate and the historian, and did not allow the postmaster to go out for inspection and stay in the prefecture. All the subordinate counties were peaceful, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：九江旧多虎暴，常募设槛阱，而犹多伤害。
现代文：九江一向多虎害，官府经常招募猎手设栅栏陷阱捕捉，但猛虎仍然造成了很多伤害。
English: Jiujiang has always been plagued by tigers. The government often recruits hunters to set up fences and traps to catch them, but the tigers still cause a lot of damage.

古文：均下记属县曰： 夫江、淮之有猛兽，犹北土之有鸡豚也，今为民害，咎在残吏，而劳勤张捕，非忧恤之本也。
现代文：宗均颁下公文命令所属各县： 长江、淮河一带有猛兽，正如北方有鸡、猪，本是平常之事。如今猛虎为害民间，原因在于官吏残暴，而使人辛苦捕猎，也不符合怜悯体恤百姓的原则。
English: Zongjun issued an official order to the counties: the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River are infested with ferocious beasts, just as chickens and pigs are common in the north. Nowadays, fierce tigers harm the people, because the officials are cruel and make people hunt hard, and it is not in line with the principle of compassion and sympathy for the people.

古文：其务退奸贪，思进忠善，可一去槛阱，除削课制。 
现代文：如今务必要清除贪官污吏，考虑提拔忠诚善良之士，可一举撤去栅栏陷阱，并减免赋锐。 
English: Now it is imperative to remove corrupt officials and consider promoting loyal and good-hearted people. The fence trap can be removed in one fell swoop, and the Fu Rui can be exempted.

古文：其后无复虎患。
现代文：从此以后，九江便不再出现虎害。
English: Since then, there have been no more tiger attacks in Jiujiang.

古文：帝闻均名，故任以枢机。
现代文：明帝听说了宗均的名声，所以让他负责中枢机要。
English: Emperor Ming heard about Zongjun's reputation, so he put him in charge of the central office.

古文：均谓人曰： 国家喜文法、廉吏，以为足止奸也；然文吏习为欺谩，而廉吏清在一己，无益百姓流亡、盗贼为害也。
现代文：宗均对人说： 皇上喜用处理公文法令的文吏和廉洁的清官，认为有他们便足以禁止奸恶发生。然而文吏常常利用文字技巧欺上瞒下，而清官又只能独善一身，不能阻止百姓流亡、盗匪作乱。
English: Zongjun told people: The emperor likes to use clerks who deal with official documents and decrees and clean officials, believing that they are enough to prohibit the occurrence of evil. However, clerks often use writing techniques to deceive and conceal, while officials can only be good, and can not prevent people from fleeing and bandits from making trouble.

古文：均欲叩头争之，时未可改也，久将自苦之，乃可言耳！ 
现代文：我要向皇上叩头力争，虽然一时不能改变现状，但长此以往皇上将自受其苦，到那时我便可以说话了！ 
English: I will try my best to kowtow to the Emperor. Although I cannot change the status quo for the time being, in the long run, the Emperor will suffer from his own suffering. At that time, I can speak!

古文：未及言，会迁司隶校尉。
现代文：宗均还没来得及进谏，恰好转任司隶校尉，离开了尚书台。
English: Before Zongjun could enter the palace, he happened to be transferred to the post of Sili's lieutenant and left Shang Shudai.

古文：后上闻其言，追善之。
现代文：后来，明帝听说了宗均的这番言论，表示赞同。
English: Later, Emperor Ming heard about Zongjun's statement and agreed with it.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平八年春，正月，己卯，司徒范迁薨。
现代文：永平八年春季，正月己卯，司徒范迁去世。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Yongping, in the first month of Jiwu, Sitou Fanqian died.

古文：三月，辛卯，以太尉虞延为司徒，卫尉赵熹行太尉事。
现代文：三月辛卯，将太尉虞延任命为司徒，命卫尉赵熹代理太尉职务。
English: In March, Xinwu appointed the captain Yu Yan as a tutor, and ordered the guard lieutenant Zhao Jun to act as the captain.

古文：越骑司马郑众使北匈奴，单于欲令众拜，众不为屈。
现代文：越骑司马郑众出使北匈奴，北匈奴单于想要让郑众叩拜，郑众没有屈从。
English: The North Huns only wanted to make Zheng pay homage, but Zheng did not give in.

古文：单于围守，闭之不与水火；众拔刀自誓，单于恐而止，乃更发使，随众还京师。
现代文：单于派人包围看守，关闭起来，断绝了水火供应。
English: They just sent people to surround the guards, shut them down, and cut off the water and fire supply.

古文：初，大司农耿国上言： 宜置度辽将军屯五原，以防南匈奴逃亡。 
现代文：郑众拔出佩刀发誓。单于恐惧，这才罢休，于是重新派遣使者，随郑众回到都城洛阳。先前，大司农耿国曾上书说： 应当设置度辽将军屯兵五原郡，以防备南匈奴逃亡。 
English: The Zheng crowd drew their swords and swore. It was only out of fear that they stopped, so they sent an envoy again to follow the Zheng crowd back to the capital Luoyang. Previously, Chief Farmer Geng Guo had written: General Du Liao should set up a garrison in Wuhuan County to prevent the Southern Huns from escaping.

古文：朝廷不从，南匈奴须卜骨都侯等知汉与北虏交使，内怀嫌怨，欲畔，密使人诣北虏，令遣兵迎之。
现代文：朝廷没有采纳他的建议。南匈奴须卜骨都侯等人听到汉朝同北匈奴互通使者的消息，心怀怨恨，打算反叛，于是秘密派人前往北匈奴，要北匈奴派兵接应。
English: The imperial court did not accept his suggestion. When the Southern Huns, such as Subbong Dudu and others, heard the news of the exchange of envoys between the Han Dynasty and the Northern Huns, they harbored resentment and planned to rebel, so they secretly sent someone to the Northern Huns to ask the Northern Huns to send troops to meet them.

古文：郑众出塞，疑有异；伺候，果得须卜使人。
现代文：郑众出塞时，疑心情况有异，便伺察等侯，果然抓到了须卜的信使。
English: When Zheng Zong was out of the country, the situation of suspicion was different, so he waited and waited, and finally caught Subu's messenger.

古文：乃上言： 宜更置大将，以防二虏交通。 
现代文：郑众便上书说： 应当重新在边境设置大将，以防备南北匈奴互相联络。 
English: Zheng Zong then wrote: A general should be re-established at the border to prevent the South and North Huns from contacting each other.

古文：由是始置度辽营，以中郎将吴棠行度辽将军事，将黎阳虎牙营士屯五原曼柏。
现代文：从此，汉朝便开始设置度辽营，命中郎将吴棠代理度辽将军事务，率领黎阳虎牙营的兵士，屯驻在五原郡曼柏县。
English: From then on, the Han Dynasty began to set up the Du Liao Camp, and the hit man Wu Tang was appointed as the agent of the Du Liao General Affairs, leading the soldiers of the Liyang Tiger Camp and stationed in Manbai County, Wuhuan County.

古文：秋，郡国十四大水。
现代文：秋季，十四个郡和封国发生水灾。
English: In autumn, floods occurred in fourteen counties and fiefdoms.

古文：冬，十月，北宫成。
现代文：冬季，十月，北宫落成。
English: In winter, in October, the North Palace was completed.

古文：丙子，募死罪系囚诣度辽营；有罪亡命者，令赎罪各有差。
现代文：十月丙子，募集犯有死罪的囚徒前往度辽营。命令逃亡的罪犯赎罪，依据不同的情况，各分等级。
English: In October, Cixi recruited prisoners who had committed capital crimes to go to Du Liao Camp, and ordered the escaped criminals to atone for their crimes, according to different situations, each with different grades.

古文：楚王英奉黄缣、白纨诣国相曰： 托在籓辅，过恶累积，欢喜大恩，奉送缣帛，以赎愆罪。 
现代文：楚王刘英带着黄色细绢和素色薄绸去见国相，说道： 我身居藩国，罪过积累，我非常高兴，蒙受大恩。献上细绢薄绸，以赎我罪。 
English: King of Chu Liu Ying brought yellow satin and plain silk to see the minister of state and said: I live in a feudal state, I have accumulated sins, I am very happy, I have received great grace. I present fine satin silk to atone for my sins.

古文：国相以闻。诏报曰： 楚王诵黄、老之微言，尚浮屠之仁祠，洁齐三月，与神为誓，何嫌何疑，当有悔吝！
现代文：国相将此事上报朝廷，明帝下诏答复说： 楚王口念黄帝、老子的精微之言，崇尚佛家的仁爱慈悲，曾戒斋三个月，对佛立誓。有什么猜嫌和疑问，应当悔恨？
English: The minister of state reported the matter to the imperial court, and Emperor Ming issued an edict in reply, saying: King Chu recited the subtle words of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, advocated the benevolence and compassion of Buddhism, fasted for three months, and swore an oath to Buddha. What are the suspicions and doubts, and should he repent?

古文：其还赎，以助伊蒲塞、桑门之盛馔。 
现代文：把那些赎罪之物退还，赞助他以美食款待佛门弟子。 
English: Return those atonement items and sponsor him to entertain Buddhist disciples with delicious food.

古文：初，帝闻西域有神，其名曰佛，因遣使之天竺求其道，得其书及沙门以来。
现代文：起初，明帝听说西域有一神祗，名字叫作 佛 ，于是派使者前往天竺国寻求佛教道义。使者在西域找到了佛经，并带着沙门回到中原。
English: At first, Emperor Ming heard that there was a deity called Buddha in the western region, so he sent an envoy to the Celestial Empire to seek Buddhist morality. The envoy found Buddhist scriptures in the western region and returned to the Central Plains with Shamen.

古文：其书大抵以虚无为宗，贵慈悲不杀；以为人死，精神不灭，随复受形；生时所行善恶，皆有报应，故所贵修练精神，以至为佛；善为宏阔胜大之言以劝诱愚俗。
现代文：佛经大抵以一切虚无为本，崇尚慈悲不杀生。认为人死之后，精神不灭，可以再次投胎转世，而人生前所作的善事恶事，全都会有报应。因此，提倡修炼精神，直至成 佛 。佛家擅于使用恢弘博大的言词，以劝化诱导愚昧的凡夫俗子。
English: Buddhist scriptures are mostly based on nothingness, advocating compassion and not killing. They believe that after death, the spirit does not die and can be reincarnated again, and all the good and evil deeds done before life will have retribution. Therefore, they advocate cultivating the spirit until becoming a Buddha. Buddhists are good at using magnificent and broad words to persuade and induce ignorant ordinary people.

古文：精于其道者，号曰沙门。
现代文：精通佛家道义的人，称为 沙门 。
English: A person who is well versed in Buddhist ethics is called a Samana.

古文：于是中国始传其术，图其形像，而王公贵人，独楚王英最先好之。
现代文：于是佛教便开始在中原传播，图画佛门形像。在天子、诸王和显贵当中，唯独楚王刘英最先喜好佛教。
English: As a result, Buddhism began to spread in the Central Plains, and images of Buddhist doors began to appear.Among the heavenly sons, kings and dignitaries, only Chu King Liu Ying was the first to like Buddhism.

古文：壬寅晦，日有食之，既。
现代文：十月壬寅晦，出现日全食。
English: A total solar eclipse will occur on the 30th.

古文：诏群司勉修职事，极言无讳。
现代文：明帝下诏，勉励百官各尽职守，用最直率的态度批评朝政而无所忌讳。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict, exhorting hundreds of officials to fulfill their duties, and criticizing the imperial government with the most forthright attitude.

古文：于是在位者皆上封事，各言得失；帝览章，深自引咎，以所上班示百官。诏曰： 群僚所言，皆朕之过。
现代文：于是官员们全都呈上密封的奏章，各自议论朝政的得失。明帝观看奏章，深自责备，便将这些奏章向百官公布，并下诏说： 群臣指摘之事，都是朕的过错。
English: As a result, the officials all submitted sealed reports, each discussing the merits and demerits of the government. Emperor Ming saw the reports, deeply reproached himself, and then published these reports to the officials, and issued the following edict: The things pointed out by the ministers are all my fault.

古文：民冤不能理，吏黠不能禁；而轻用民力，缮修宫宇，出入无节，喜怒过差。
现代文：人民冤屈不能申雪，贪官污吏不能查禁，却轻率地使用民力，营建宫室，开支与征税无节制，而且喜怒无常。
English: The people's grievances cannot be redressed, the corrupt officials cannot be banned, but they use the people's power carelessly, build palaces, spend and tax without restraint, and are temperamental.

古文：永览前戒，辣然兢惧；徒恐薄德，久而致怠耳！ 
现代文：回顾古人的鉴戒，十分恐惧，只怕朕品德寡薄，日久生怠！ 
English: Looking back at the admonition of the ancients, I am very afraid, I am afraid that my character is weak, and I will be lazy for a long time!

古文：北匈奴虽遣使入贡，而寇钞不息，边城昼闭。
现代文：北匈奴虽然派使者入朝进贡，但侵掠不断，致使边疆城镇白日关闭城门。
English: Although the Northern Xiongnu sent emissaries to the North to pay tribute, they continued to invade and plunder, causing border towns to close their gates during the day.

古文：帝议遣使报其使者，郑众上疏谏曰： 臣闻北单于所以要致汉使者，欲以离南单于之众，坚三十六国之心也；又当扬汉和亲，夸示邻敌，令西域欲归化者局足狐疑，怀土之人绝望中国耳。
现代文：明帝同群臣商议，打算派遣使者回报匈奴来使。郑众上书劝谏道： 我听说，北匈奴单于所以要挟汉朝派出使者，目的是想离散南匈奴单于的部众，坚定西域三十六国对北匈奴的效忠之心。他还将吹嘘已同汉朝和解通好，向邻近敌国夸耀，使西域那些打算归附汉朝的国家畏缩猜疑，使流亡在外怀念故土的人对汉朝绝望。
English: Emperor Ming discussed with his courtiers and planned to send an envoy to return the envoy of the Huns. Zheng sent a letter to advise him: I heard that the Northern Huns only wanted to send an envoy to the Han Dynasty to disperse the Southern Huns and strengthen the loyalty of the 36 countries in the western region to the Northern Huns. He would also boast that he had reconciled with the Han Dynasty and boast to the neighboring enemy countries, so that the countries in the western region that planned to join the Han Dynasty would be afraid and suspicious, and the exiles who were nostalgic for their homeland would despair of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使既到，便偃蹇自信；若复遣之，虏必自谓得谋，其群臣驳议者不敢复言。
现代文：汉朝使者到过北匈奴以后，单于便已十分傲慢自负，如果再派使者，他一定会自以为得计，而北匈奴群臣中反对与汉朝为敌的人也不敢再说话了。
English: After the envoy of the Han Dynasty had been to the Northern Huns, he was already very arrogant and conceited. If he sent another envoy, he would certainly think that he had a way out, and the Northern Huns who opposed the enemy of the Han Dynasty would no longer dare to speak.

古文：如是，南庭动摇，乌桓有离心矣。
现代文：这样，南匈奴王庭便会发生动摇，乌桓也将与我们离心离德。
English: In this way, the court of the Southern Xiongnu will be shaken, and Wuhuan will also break away from us.

古文：南单于久居汉地，具知形势，万分离析，旋为边害。
现代文：南匈奴单于长期居住在中国内地，对我方的情况与地形一一知晓，万一同汉朝分裂，即刻便成为边境的祸患。
English: The Southern Xiongnu alone has lived in the interior of China for a long time, knows the situation and terrain of our side one by one, and in the event that the Han Dynasty splits, it will immediately become a border disaster.

古文：今幸有度辽之众扬威北垂，虽勿报答，不敢为患。 
现代文：如今，幸而有度辽营的大军在北疆扬威镇守，即便我们不派使者回报北匈奴，他们也不敢作乱。 
English: Today, fortunately, the great army of Du Liao's battalion is on guard in Yangwei Town in Northern Xinjiang. Even if we do not send an envoy to return the Northern Xiongnu, they will not dare to make trouble.

古文：帝不从，复遣众往。
现代文：明帝不接受郑众的劝谏，再次派他做使者前往北匈奴。
English: Emperor Ming did not accept Zheng's advice and sent him as an envoy to the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：众因上言： 臣前奉使，不为匈奴拜，单于恚恨。
现代文：于是郑众上书说： 我前次奉命出使北匈奴时，因不肯行叩拜之礼，单于十分愤恨，曾派兵把我围困起来。
English: So Zheng Zong wrote: The last time I was ordered to send an envoy to the Northern Xiongnu, because I refused to perform the kowtow, I was so angry that I sent soldiers to besiege me.

古文：遣兵围臣；今复衔命，必见陵折，臣诚不忍持大汉节对氈裘独拜，如令匈奴遂能服臣，将有损大汉之强。 
现代文：如今我再次领命前往，定会遭到凌辱，我实在不愿自己手持大汉的符节，对着毛毡皮衣独拜。而如果我迫于形势向匈奴屈服，则将有损于汉朝的国威。 
English: Now that I have been ordered to go again, I am sure to be humiliated. I really don't want to hold the great man's symbols in my hand and bow to the fur coat. And if I give in to the Hun because of the situation, it will damage the national prestige of the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝不听。众不得已，既行，在路连上书固争之；诏切责众，追还，系廷尉，会赦，归家。
现代文：明帝不听郑众的劝谏，郑众不得已而动身。出发后，他在路上接连上书力争，坚持自己的主张。于是明帝下诏严厉责备郑众，将他追回，囚禁于廷尉监狱。适逢赦免，他便回到家乡。
English: Emperor Ming did not listen to the advice of Zheng Zong, and Zheng Zong had no choice but to set off. After setting off, he wrote a series of letters on the road, insisting on his point of view. Therefore, Emperor Ming issued a decree to severely reprimand Zheng Zong, and brought him back, imprisoning him in the lieutenant prison. When he was pardoned, he returned to his hometown.

古文：其后帝见匈奴来者，闻众与单于争礼之状，乃复召众为军司马。
现代文：后来，明帝会见北匈奴的来客，听到郑众与单于因礼仪相争的情况，便再次征召郑众，任命为军司马。
English: Later, Emperor Ming met with guests from the Northern Huns, and upon hearing that Zheng Zong and Shan Yu were fighting over etiquette, he once again conscripted Zheng Zong and appointed him as the military secretary.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平九年
现代文：永平九年
English: The ninth year of Yongping

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，诏司隶校尉、部刺史岁上墨绶长吏视事三岁已上、治状尤异者各一人与计偕上，及尤不治者亦以闻。
现代文：夏季，四月甲辰，明帝下诏命令司隶校尉、部刺史：每年各从任职三年以上、考绩最优异的县令以下官员中选拔一人上报，让此人随同呈送年终考绩的官员进京。
English: In the summer, at the first hour of April, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict to promote Shishi to the rank of lieutenant colonel and Bu Shishi to the rank of captain: Every year, one person was selected from the officials below the county magistrate who had served for more than three years and had the most outstanding performance evaluation to report to the emperor, and this person was allowed to accompany the officials who submitted their year-end performance evaluation to Beijing.

古文：是岁，大有年。
现代文：对于考绩最劣者，也要上报朝廷。本年，粮食大丰收。
English: This year was a bumper harvest.

古文：赐皇子恭号曰灵寿王，党号曰重熹王，未有国邑。
现代文：明帝将皇子刘恭赐号为灵寿王，皇子刘党赐号为重熹王，都没有封国。
English: Emperor Ming gave Prince Liu Qiong the title of Ling Shou Wang, and Prince Liu Dang the title of Shouguang Wang, but neither of them were given the title of state.

古文：帝崇尚儒学，自皇太子、诸王侯及大臣子弟、功臣子孙，莫不受经。
现代文：明帝尊崇儒学，上自太子、诸王、侯爵，下至高官的子弟、功臣的子孙，无人不学习儒家经典。
English: Emperor Ming revered Confucianism, and no one, from princes, kings, and marquesses on down to the children of high-ranking officials and the descendants of meritorious soldiers, did not study Confucian classics.

古文：又为外戚樊氏、郭氏、阴氏、马氏诸子立学于南宫，号 四姓小侯 。
现代文：明帝还为外戚樊氏、郭氏、阴氏、马氏的儿子们在南宫设立学校，这些学生号称 四姓小侯 。
English: Emperor Ming also set up a school in Nangu for the sons of his maternal relatives, the Zou, Guo, Yin, and Ma families. These students were known as the Four Young Princes.

古文：置《五经》师，搜选高能以授其业。
现代文：明帝给他们安排讲解儒家《五经》的老师，寻找选拔学问高超的贤才授课。
English: Emperor Ming arranged for a teacher to explain the Confucian "Five Classics" to them, looking for a scholar with superior knowledge to teach them.

古文：自期门、羽林之士，悉令通《孝经》章句。
现代文：即便是期门、羽林等禁卫武官，也都命令通晓《孝经》章句的含义。
English: Even the imperial guards and military attachés, such as Chaimen and Ulin, were ordered to understand the meaning of the "Filial Piety" chapter.

古文：匈奴亦遣子入学。
现代文：匈奴也派出贵族子弟到汉朝学习。
English: The Xiongnu also sent the children of aristocrats to study in the Han Dynasty.

古文：广陵王荆复呼相工谓曰： 我貌类先帝，先帝三十得天下，我今亦三十，可起兵未？ 
现代文：明帝特别加恩，不对事情进行追究。下诏不许他统治封国的官员和百姓，只可继续享用租税收入。
English: Emperor Ming was particularly gracious and did not pursue the matter. The next edict did not allow him to rule over the officials and people of the vassal state, and he could only continue to enjoy the tax revenue.

古文：相者诣吏告之，荆惶恐，自系狱，帝加恩，不考极其事，诏不得臣属吏民，唯食租如故，使相、中尉谨宿卫之。荆又使巫祭祀、祝诅。
现代文：并命令封国国相和中尉对他严密监护。
English: He also ordered the Minister of State and his lieutenant to keep a close watch on him.

古文：诏长水校尉樊鯈等杂治其狱，事竟，奏请诛刑。
现代文：刘荆又让巫师进行祭祷和诅咒。明帝下诏，命令长水校尉樊等人联合审判此案。审判结束后，樊等人上书，请将刘荆处死。
English: Liu Jing also asked the sorcerer to perform prayers and curses. Emperor Ming issued an edict, ordering the chief water marshal Yu and others to jointly try the case. After the trial, Yu and others submitted a letter, asking Liu Jing to be put to death.

古文：帝怒曰； 诸卿以我弟故，欲诛之。即我子，卿等敢尔邪？ 
现代文：明帝生气地说道： 你们因广陵王是我弟弟的缘故，所以要杀他，如果是我的儿子，你们敢这样吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming said angrily, "You want to kill Guangling Wang because he is my brother. If he were my son, would you dare to do this?

古文：鯈对曰： 天下者高帝天下，非陛下之天下也。
现代文：樊回答道： 天下是高帝的天下，不是陛下的天下。
English: Zou replied: The world is Gao Di's world, not His Majesty's world.

古文：《春秋》之义，君亲无将，将而必诛。
现代文：根据《春秋》大义，君王至亲不得有弑逆图谋，有则必杀。
English: According to the principles of "Spring and Autumn," the king's closest relatives are not allowed to plot against him, and if they do, they must be killed.

古文：帝叹息善之。鯈，宏之子也。显宗孝明皇帝下永平十年
现代文：我们因为刘荆是陛下同母之弟，陛下特别留意，恻隐有加，所以才敢请示。如果是陛下的儿子，我们只专断诛杀而已。 明帝叹息着表示赞许。樊是樊宏之子。永平十年
English: Because Liu Jing is the younger brother of the same mother of His Majesty, His Majesty pays special attention to him, and he has a lot of influence, so we dare to ask for instructions. If it is the son of His Majesty, we only arbitrarily kill him. Emperor Ming sighed and expressed his approval. He is the son of Gong Hong. Yongping ten years

古文：春，二月，广陵思王荆自杀，国除。
现代文：春季，二月，广陵王刘荆自杀，封国撤除。
English: In the spring, in February, Guangling King Liu Jing committed suicide, and the state seal was removed.

古文：夏，四月，戊子，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月戊子，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, April Boshi, the world's first amnesty.

古文：闰月，甲午，上幸南阳，召校官弟子作雅乐，奏《鹿鸣》，帝自御埙篪和之，以娱嘉宾。
现代文：闰十月甲午，明帝临幸南阳，召集地方学校的学生演奏庙堂正乐。当演奏《经·鹿鸣》时，明帝亲自吹起陶埙和竹应和，以娱乐嘉宾。
English: On the afternoon of leap October, Emperor Ming came to Nanyang and summoned students from local schools to play the temple music. When the "Song of the Deer" was played, Emperor Ming himself blew up the pottery and bamboo to entertain the guests.

古文：还，幸南顿。
现代文：回京途中，明帝临幸南顿。
English: On his way back to Beijing, Emperor Ming visited Nantong.

古文：冬，十二月，甲午，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十二月甲午，返回京城皇宫。
English: In winter, on the afternoon of December 1st, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

古文：初，陵阳侯丁綝卒，子鸿当袭封，上书称病，让国于弟盛，不报。
现代文：当初，陵阳侯丁去世时，他的儿子丁鸿应当继承封国。但丁鸿上书自称有病，要将封国让给弟弟丁盛，朝廷未予答复。
English: At first, when Lingyang Hou Ding died, his son Ding Hong was supposed to inherit the fief. However, the imperial court did not respond when Ding Hong wrote that he was ill and wanted to cede the fief to his brother Ding Sheng.

古文：既葬，乃挂衰绖于冢庐而逃去。
现代文：丁鸿安葬父亲以后，便将丧服挂在守墓的小屋里逃走了。
English: After Ding Hong buried his father peacefully, he hung his mourning clothes in the tomb guard's hut and fled.

古文：友人九江鲍骏遇鸿于东海，让之曰； 昔伯夷、吴札，乱世权行，故得申其志耳。
现代文：丁鸿的朋友、九江人鲍骏在东海国遇到了丁鸿，责备他道： 从前孤竹君之子伯夷和吴王之子季札推让王位，是乱世中的权宜行为，那样作才能表明他们的志节。
English: Ding Hong's friend, the Jiujiang native Bao Tong, met Ding Hong in the East China Sea country and reproached him, saying: In the past, the son of the Lone Bamboo Monk, Bo Yi, and the son of the King of Wu, Ji Zha, abdicated the throne. It was an expedient act in a chaotic world. Doing so was a way to show their ambitions.

古文：《春秋》之义，不以家事废王事。
现代文：根据《春秋》大义，不可以因家事废弃国事。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," it is not allowed to abandon state affairs because of family affairs.

古文：今子以兄弟私恩而绝父不灭之基，可乎？ 
现代文：如今您由于兄弟手足之情而断送父亲建立的永不毁灭的基业，这样行吗？ 
English: And now, because of your brotherly love, are you going to destroy the everlasting inheritance that your father has established?

古文：鸿感悟垂涕，乃还就国。
现代文：丁鸿醒悟过来，流下眼泪，便回去继承了封国。
English: Ding Hong came to his senses, shed tears, and returned to inherit the fiefdom.

古文：鲍骏因上书荐鸿经学至行，上征鸿为侍中。
现代文：鲍骏于是上书向朝廷举荐丁鸿，称赞他精通经学，行为高尚。明帝便征召丁鸿进京，任命他为侍中。
English: Bao Tong then recommended Ding Hong to the imperial court in a letter, praising him for his proficiency in learning and noble behavior. Emperor Ming then summoned Ding Hong to Beijing and appointed him as an attendant.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十一年
现代文：永平十一年
English: The 11th year of Yongping

古文：春，正月，东平王苍与诸王俱来朝，月馀，还国。
现代文：春季，正月，东平王刘苍和诸位亲王一同进京朝见。一个多月后，返回封国。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Dongping King Liu Cang and all the princes went to Beijing to meet the emperor. After more than a month, he returned to his fief.

古文：帝临送归宫，凄然怀思，乃遣使手诏赐东平国中傅曰： 辞别之后，独坐不乐，因就车归，伏轼而吟，瞻望永怀，实劳我心。
现代文：明帝亲自送行，回到皇宫后，凄然思念，便亲手动笔写诏，派使者送给东平国中傅。诏书写道： 分别之后，朕孤身独坐，心中郁郁不乐，便乘车而归。俯身车前横木而低吟，遥远的瞻望与长久的怀念，真让我心神劳苦。
English: Emperor Ming personally saw them off. When he returned to the Imperial Palace, he was so sad that he wrote the imperial edict by hand and sent an envoy to present it to Dongping Guozhongfu. The imperial edict wrote: After parting, I sat alone, depressed and unhappy, and returned by car. I leaned over the crossbar in front of the car and crooned. The distant view and long-term nostalgia really made my heart work hard.

古文：诵及《采菽》，以增叹息。
现代文：朗诵《诗经·采菽》之章，更增加我的叹息。
English: Reciting the chapters of "The Book of Songs" increased my sighing.

古文：日者问东平王： 处家何等最乐？ 
现代文：日前我曾问东平王： 居家做什么事最快乐？ 
English: A few days ago, I asked Dongping Wang: What are the happiest things to do at home?

古文：王言： 为善最乐。 
现代文：东平王说： 行善最快乐。 
English: King Dongping said, "Doing good is the happiest."

古文：其言甚大，副是要腹矣。
现代文：这句话口气甚大，正与他的腰围肚量相称。
English: It's a strong statement, and it matches his girth.

古文：今送列侯印十九枚，诸王子年五岁已上能趋拜者，皆令带之。 
现代文：如今送去列侯印信十九枚，东平王的儿子们年满五岁并懂得行礼的，让他们全都佩带印信。 
English: Nineteen imperial seals are now being sent, and all princes over the age of five who are able to worship are asked to bring them.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十二年
现代文：永平十二年
English: Year 12 of Yongping Dynasty

古文：春，哀牢王柳貌率其民五万馀户内附，以其地置哀牢、博南二县。
现代文：春季，哀牢王柳貌率领属民五万余户旧附汉朝。朝廷在原地设立哀牢、博南两县，并开始进行开辟博南山通道和渡越兰仓水的工程。
English: In the spring, Wang Liu Maoguang led more than fifty thousand households of the former Han Dynasty. The imperial court set up a prison and two counties in Bonan in the same place, and began the project of opening the Bonan Mountain passage and crossing the Lan Cangshui.

古文：始通博南山，度兰仓水，行者苦之，歌曰： 汉德广，开不宾；度兰仓，为它人。 
现代文：到了建武十年，当光武帝打算动工治理时，浚仪县令乐俊上书说： 人民新近经历了战争，不宜征发徭役。 
English: In the 10th year of the Jianwu era, when Emperor Guangwu planned to start the construction of the Great Wall, Lejun, the magistrate of Jianyi County, wrote: "The people have recently experienced a war, and it is not appropriate to conscript them for military service.

古文：初，平帝时，河、汴决坏，久而不修。
现代文：于是将此事作罢。后来汴渠向东泛滥，区域日益扩展。
English: As a result, the matter was abandoned. Later, the canal flooded to the east, and the area expanded.

古文：建武十年，光武欲修之；浚仪令乐俊上言，民新被兵革，未宜兴役，乃止。
现代文：兖州、豫州的百姓哀怨叹息，认为朝廷总在办其它工程，而不优先解救人民急难。恰好有人向朝廷举荐乐浪人王景，说他有治水才能。本年夏季，四月，明帝下诏征发役夫数十万人，派王景和将作谒者王吴修筑汴渠堤岸。
English: The people of Zhangzhou and Yuzhou lamented that the imperial court was always doing other projects, rather than prioritizing the rescue of the people in distress. It just so happened that someone recommended Wang Jing, a ronin, to the imperial court, saying that he had the ability to control water. This summer, in April, the Ming Emperor issued an edict to recruit hundreds of thousands of laborers and sent Wang Jing and Wang Wu, who would be the author of the edict, to build the dike embankment.

古文：其后汴渠东侵，日月弥广，兗、豫百姓怨叹，以为县官恒兴佗役，不先民急，会有荐乐浪王景能治水者，夏，四月，诏发卒数十万，遣景与将作谒者王吴修汴渠堤，自荥阳东至千乘海口千馀里，十里立一水门，令更相洄注，无复溃漏之患。
现代文：从荥阳向东，直到千乘的入海口，共一千余里，每隔十里修建一个水闸，使水闸之间的水流相互调节，不再有决堤和漏水的忧患。
English: A sluice gate will be built every ten miles for a total of more than a thousand miles from Fenyang in the east to the entrance to the sea of Qizhen, so that the water flow between the sluices will be mutually regulated, and there will no longer be any worries about levee breakage and water leakage.

古文：景虽简省役费，然犹以百亿计焉。
现代文：王景虽然节省工程费用，然而仍消耗了数以百亿计的钱财。
English: Although Wang Jing saved project costs, he still spent tens of billions of money.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，司空伏恭罢；乙未，以大司农牟融为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月乙亥，将司空伏恭免职。七月乙未，将大司农牟融任命为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July of the following year, Sikyong Fookye was relieved of his duties, and in July of the following year, Daisho Nongmyong was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：是时，天下安平，人无徭役，岁比登稔，百姓殷富，粟斛三十，牛羊被野。
现代文：此时，天下太平，无人服事徭役，粮食连年丰收，百姓殷实富裕，谷价每斛三十钱，牛羊遍野。
English: At this time, the world was at peace, no one was serving as an overseer, the grain harvest continued year after year, the people were rich and prosperous, the grain price was 30 yuan per bushel, and cattle and sheep were everywhere.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十三年
现代文：永平十三年
English: The 13th Year of Yongping

古文：夏，四月，汴渠成；河、汴分流，复其旧迹。
现代文：夏季，四月，汴渠治水工程完成。从此黄河与汴水的水流分离，重新回到各自原来的河道。
English: In the summer, in April, the flood control project of the Bohai Canal was completed. From then on, the water flow of the Yellow River and the Bohai River separated and returned to their original channels.

古文：辛乙，帝行幸荥阳，巡行河渠，遂渡河，登太行，幸上党；壬寅，还宫。
现代文：四月辛巳，明帝出行，临幸荥阳，视察水利工程。然后渡过黄河，登上太行山，临幸上党郡。四月壬寅，返回京城皇宫。
English: In April, Emperor Ming traveled to Linyang and inspected the water conservancy project. Then, he crossed the Yellow River, climbed Mount Taihang and visited Shangdang County. In April, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Beijing.

古文：冬，十月，壬辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月壬辰晦，出现日食。
English: In winter, at the end of October, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：楚王英与方士作金龟、玉鹤，刻文字为符瑞。
现代文：楚王刘英和方士制作金龟、玉鹤，刻上文字，用作将为皇帝的天赐凭证。
English: Chu King Liu Ying and the magicians made a golden turtle and a jade crane, engraved with words, to be used as a providential document for the emperor.

古文：男子燕广告英与渔阳王平、颜忠等造作图书，有逆谋；事下案验。
现代文：有个叫燕广的男子，告发刘英与渔阳人王平、颜忠等编造符谶之书，蓄谋造反。
English: A man named Yan Guang denounced Liu Ying and the fishermen Wang Ping and Yan Zhong for fabricating a book of fables and plotting rebellion.

古文：有司奏 英大逆不道，请诛之。 
现代文：朝廷将此事下交有关部门追查核实。主管官员上奏道： 刘英大逆不道，请将他处死。 
English: The imperial court sent the matter to the relevant departments for investigation and verification. The responsible officials sent a report: Liu Ying is a traitor, please put him to death.

古文：帝以亲亲不忍。
现代文：明帝因手足之亲而不忍批准。
English: Emperor Ming couldn't bear to approve it because he was a close relative.

古文：十一月，废英，徙丹杨泾县，赐汤沐邑五百户；男女为侯、主者，食邑如故；许太后勿上玺绶，留住楚宫。
现代文：十一月，废掉刘英王位，将他迁往丹阳郡泾县，赏赐五百户赋税。刘英的儿子女儿当侯、当公主的，依旧享用原有食邑。命刘英的母亲许太后不必上交她的印玺印绶带，留在楚王宫中居住。
English: In November, Liu Ying's throne was abolished, and he was moved to Min County, Danyang County, and 500 households were rewarded with taxes. Liu Ying's son and daughter, when they were princes and princesses, still enjoyed the original food. Liu Ying's mother, Empress Dowager Xu, did not have to hand over her seal and ribbon, and stayed in the King of Chu Palace.

古文：先是有私以英谋告司徒虞延者，延以英籓戚至亲，不然其言。
现代文：先前，曾有人暗中将刘英的逆谋告诉司徒虞延，但虞延认为刘英是明帝手足至亲，不相信密报。
English: Previously, someone had secretly told Sgt. Yu Yan about Liu Ying's counter-plot, but Yu Yan believed that Liu Ying was a close relative of Emperor Ming and did not believe the secret report.

古文：及英事觉，诏书切让延。
现代文：及至刘英逆谋暴露，明帝下诏严厉责备虞延。
English: When Liu Ying's treacherous plot was exposed, Emperor Ming issued an edict severely reprimanding Yu Yan.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十四年
现代文：永平十四年
English: In the 14th year of Yongping

古文：春，三月，甲戌，延自杀。
现代文：春季，三月甲戌，虞延自杀。
English: In the spring, in March, Yu Yan committed suicide.

古文：以太常周泽行司徒事；顷之，复为太常。
现代文：明帝命令太常周泽代理司徒职务。不久，周泽又为太常。
English: Emperor Ming ordered Zhou Ze, the Taijō, to take over the post of sōtō. Soon, Zhou Ze became the Taijō again.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，以巨鹿太守南阳邢穆为司徒。
现代文：夏季，四月丁巳，将钜鹿太守南阳人邢穆任命为司徒。
English: In the summer, in April, Erika Taishu Nanyangjin Anmu was appointed as a tutor.

古文：楚王英至丹杨，自杀。
现代文：楚王刘英抵达丹阳郡后自杀。
English: Chu Wang Liu Ying committed suicide after arriving in Danyang County.

古文：诏以诸侯礼葬于泾。
现代文：明帝下诏，命令以诸侯之礼将他葬在泾县。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict ordering that he be buried in Min County with the courtesy of the princes.

古文：封燕广为折奸侯。
现代文：将燕广封为折奸侯。
English: Yan Guang was sealed as a traitor.

古文：是时，穷治楚狱，遂至累年。
现代文：当时，朝廷极力追究楚王之案，以至连年不止。
English: At that time, the imperial court vigorously investigated the case of King Chu, and it went on for more than a year.

古文：其辞语相连，自京师亲戚、诸侯、州郡豪桀及考案吏，阿附坐死、徙者以千数，而系狱者尚数千人。
现代文：案中的供词互相牵连，从京城皇亲国戚、诸侯、州郡豪杰，直到审案官吏，因附从反逆而被处死、流放的数以千计，而关在狱中的还有几千人。
English: The confessions in the case implicate each other. From the relatives and relatives of the emperor in Beijing, the princes, the heroes of the state and county, to the adjudicating officials, there are thousands of people who have been executed or exiled for adhering to the rebellion, and there are thousands of people in prison.

古文：初，樊鯈弟鲔为其子赏求楚王英女，鯈闻而止之曰： 建武中，吾家并受荣宠，一宗五侯。
现代文：当初，樊的弟弟樊鲔曾为儿子樊赏求娶楚王刘英的女儿为妻。樊听到消息后制止他说： 建武年间，咱们全家同受恩宠，一门之内，曾出了五个侯爵。
English: At first, Yao's younger brother Yao had asked his son Yao to marry the daughter of Chu King Liu Ying as his wife. After hearing the news, Yao stopped him and said: During the Jianwu period, our whole family was favored. There were five marquesses in one family.

古文：时特进一言，女可以配王，男可以尚主；但以贵宠过盛，即为祸患，故不为也，且尔一子，奈何弃之于楚乎！ 
现代文：当时只要当特进的父亲一句话，女可以配亲王，男可以娶公主。但父亲认为尊贵恩宠过度就成为祸患，所以不作这种事。况且你只有一个儿子，为什么把他丢给楚国呢？ 
English: At that time, as long as the father of the special advance had a word, the woman could match the prince and the man could marry the princess. But the father thought that excessive honor and grace would become a disaster, so he did not do such a thing. Besides, you only have one son, why throw him to Chu?

古文：鲔不从。
现代文：樊鲔不听劝告。
English: He doesn't listen to advice.

古文：及楚事觉，鯈已卒，上追念鯈谨恪，故其诸子皆得不坐。
现代文：及至楚王谋反事发，樊已经去世。明帝追念樊为人严谨恭敬，所以他的儿子们都没有连坐。
English: By the time the incident of King Chu plotting a counterattack occurred, Yao had already passed away. In memory of Emperor Ming, Yao was a strict and respectful person, so his sons did not even sit together.

古文：英阴疏天下名士，上得其录，有吴郡太守尹兴名，乃征兴及掾史五百馀人诣廷尉就考。
现代文：刘英曾暗中将天下名人记录在册。明帝得到这个名单，见上面有吴郡太守尹兴的名字，便召尹兴及其属官五百多人到廷尉受审。
English: Liu Ying had secretly recorded the world's celebrities in a register. When Emperor Ming got this list, see the name of Wu County Governor Yin Xing above, he summoned Yin Xing and more than five hundred of his subordinate officials to the palace to stand trial.

古文：诸吏不胜掠治，死者太半；惟门下掾陆续、主簿梁宏、功曹史驷勋，备受五毒，肌肉消烂，终无异辞。
现代文：属官们经受不住苦刑拷打，大部分人死去。唯有门下掾陆续、主簿梁宏、功曹吏驷勋，虽受尽五种毒刑，肌肉溃烂，但到底也不改口供。
English: The subordinate officers could not withstand the torture, and most of them died. Only the subordinate officers, Liang Hong, the principal, and Gong Cao Li, although they suffered five kinds of poisonous punishment and their muscles festered, did not change their confessions in the end.

古文：续母自吴来雒阳，作食以馈续。
现代文：陆续的母亲从吴郡来到洛阳，作了食物送给陆续。
English: One after another, mothers from Wu County came to Luoyang to make food and give it to one after another.

古文：续虽见考，辞色未尝变，而对食悲泣不自胜。
现代文：陆续以往虽遭拷打，言辞神色从不改变，但面对饭菜却痛哭流涕，不能自制。
English: Although he had been tortured successively in the past, his expression never changed, but he cried bitterly in the face of meals, unable to control himself.

古文：治狱使者问其故，续曰： 母来不得见，故悲耳。 
现代文：审案官问是何缘故，陆续说： 母亲来了，而我们不能相见，所以悲伤。 
English: When the adjudicator asked why, they said one after another: My mother has come, but we can't see each other, so I'm sad.

古文：问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：审案官问： 你怎么知道她来了？ 
English: Question: How do you know this?

古文：续曰： 母截肉未尝不方，断葱以寸为度，故知之。 
现代文：陆续说： 我母亲切肉无不方方正正，切葱也总是一寸长短。
English: One after another, they said: My mother always cut the meat perfectly square, and she always cut the onion exactly one inch long.

古文：使者以状闻，上乃赦兴等，禁锢终身。
现代文：我见到这食物，所以知道她来了。 审案官将此情况上报后，明帝便赦免尹兴等人，但限制他们终生不准作官。
English: I saw the food, so I knew she was coming. After the adjudicator reported the situation, Emperor Ming pardoned Yin Xing and others, but restricted them from serving as officials for life.

古文：颜忠、王平辞引隧乡侯耿建、朗陵侯臧信、护泽侯邓鲤、曲成侯刘建。
现代文：颜忠、王平的供词牵连到隧乡侯耿建、朗陵侯臧信、泽侯邓鲤、曲成侯刘建。
English: The confessions of Yan Zhong and Wang Ping implicated Tunxiang Hou Geng Jian, Langling Hou Yuxin, Ze Hou Deng Yao and Qu Cheng Hou Liu Jian.

古文：建等辞未尝与忠、平相见。
现代文：耿建等人声称从未同颜忠和王平见过面。
English: The confessions of Liu Jian and others said that they had never met Yan Zhong and Wang Ping.

古文：是时，上怒甚，吏皆惶恐，诸所连及，率一切陷入，无敢以情恕者。
现代文：当时，明帝十分愤怒，审案官员全都惶恐不安，凡被牵连者，几乎一律判罪定案，无人敢根据实情予以宽恕。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming was very angry, the trial officials were all terrified, and everyone who was implicated was almost always convicted and sentenced, and no one dared to pardon based on the facts.

古文：侍御史寒朗心伤其冤，试以建等物色，独问忠、平，而二人错愕不能对。
现代文：侍御史朗怜悯耿建等人冤枉，便以耿建等人的形貌特征，单独讯问颜忠和王平。颜、王二人仓皇惊愕不能应对。
English: The attendant Shilang took pity on the injustice of Geng Jian and others, and interrogated Yan Zhong and Wang Ping separately on the basis of the physical characteristics of Geng Jian and others. Yan and Wang were stunned and unable to respond.

古文：朗知其诈，乃上言： 建等无奸，专为忠、平所诬；疑天下无辜，类多如此。 
现代文：朗知道其中有诈，便上书说： 耿建等人没有罪过，只是被颜忠和王平诬陷了。我怀疑天下的无辜罪人，遭遇多与此相似。 
English: Knowing that there was fraud, Lang wrote: "Geng Jianlu and others did not commit any crime, but were framed by Yan Zhong and Wang Ping. I suspect that innocent people around the world have suffered similar things.

古文：帝曰： 即如是，忠、平何故引之？ 
现代文：明帝问： 如果是这样，那么颜忠、王平为什么要牵连他们？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: If this is so, then why did Yan Zhong and Wang Ping implicate them?

古文：对曰： 忠、平自知所犯不道，故多有虚引，冀以自明。 
现代文：朗回答道： 颜忠、王平自己知道犯了大逆不道之罪，所以虚招了许多人，企图以此来表白自己。 
English: Lang replied: Yan Zhong and Wang Ping knew that they had committed the crime of high treason, so they falsely recruited many people in an attempt to prove themselves.

古文：帝曰： 即如是，何不早奏？ 
现代文：明帝问： 如果是这样，你为什么不早报告？ 
English: Ming Di asked: If so, why didn't you report it earlier?

古文：对曰： 臣恐海内别有发其奸者。 
现代文：朗回答说： 我担心国内另有人真能揭发出耿建等人的奸谋。 
English: Lang replied, "I'm worried that someone else in the country can really expose the evil plot of Geng Jian and others."

古文：帝怒曰： 吏持两端！ 
现代文：明帝生气地说： 你这审案官，骑墙滑头！ 
English: Ming Di said angrily, "You adjudicator, you wall-climber!

古文：促提下捶之。
现代文：便催人把朗拉下去责打。
English: He then urged someone to pull Lang down and beat him.

古文：左右方引去，朗曰： 愿一言而死。 
现代文：左右侍卫刚要拉走朗，朗说： 我想说一句话再死。 
English: Just as the guards were about to drag him away, Lang said: I want to say one word before I die.

古文：帝曰： 谁与共为章？ 
现代文：明帝问： 谁和你一起写的奏章？ 
English: Ming Di asked: Who wrote the score with you?

古文：对曰： 臣独作之。 
现代文：回答说： 是我一个人写的。 
English: "I wrote it myself," he replied.

古文：上曰： 何以不与三府议？ 
现代文：明帝问： 为什么不和三府商议？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: Why not negotiate with the three prefectures?

古文：对曰： 臣自知当必族灭，不敢多污染人。 
现代文：回答说： 我自己知道一定会有灭族之罪，不敢多连累他人。 
English: He answered: I myself know that there will definitely be the crime of extermination, and I dare not burden others.

古文：上曰： 何故族灭？ 
现代文：明帝问： 为什么是灭族之罪？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: Why the crime of genocide?

古文：对曰： 臣考事一年，不能穷尽奸状，反为罪人讼冤，故知当族灭，然臣所以言者，诚冀陛下一觉悟而已。
现代文：回答说： 我审案一年，不能彻底清查奸谋的实情，反而为罪人辩冤，所以知道该当灭族之罪。然而我所以上奏，实在是盼望陛下能一下子觉悟罢了。
English: He replied, "I have been judging the case for a year, and I am unable to thoroughly investigate the truth of the treachery, but instead defend the wrongdoers, so I know that it should be a crime of extermination. However, what I have played so far is really just hoping that Your Majesty will suddenly come to your senses."

古文：臣见考囚在事者，咸共言妖恶大故，臣子所宜同疾，今出之不如入之，可无后责。
现代文：我见审问囚犯的官员，众口一词地说臣子对叛逆大罪应同仇敌忾，如今判人无罪不如判人有罪，可以以后免受追究。
English: When the courtiers saw that the examination prisoners were on the case, they all said that the devil was very evil, and the courtiers should all hate it, and now the ones who came out were not as good as the ones who came in, and they could not be held accountable.

古文：是以考一连十，考十连百。
现代文：因此，官员审讯一人便牵连十人，审讯十人便牵连百人。
English: Therefore, one test in a row is worth ten, and ten tests in a row is worth a hundred.

古文：又公卿朝会，陛下问以得失，皆长跪言： 旧制，大罪祸及九族；陛下大恩，裁止于身，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：还有，公卿上朝的时候，当陛下询问案情处理是否得当，他们全都直身跪着回答： 依照以往制度，大罪要诛杀九族，而陛下大恩，只处决当事者，天下人太幸运了！ 
English: Furthermore, when the nobles came to the court, when His Majesty inquired whether the handling of the case was proper, they all knelt down and answered: According to the previous system, the great crime is to kill the nine tribes, but Your Majesty's great favor is to execute only the parties involved. The world is so lucky!

古文：及其归舍，口虽不言而仰屋窃叹，莫不知其多冤，无敢悟陛下言者。
现代文：而等他们回到家里，口中虽无怨言，却仰望屋顶暗自叹息。没有人不知道这里多有冤枉，但不敢忤逆陛下而直言。
English: But when they returned home, although they did not complain, they looked up at the roof and secretly sighed. No one knew how much injustice there was, but they dared not speak out against His Majesty.

古文：臣今所陈，诚死无悔！ 
现代文：我今天说出这番话，真是死而不悔！ 
English: I'm really sorry to say this today!

古文：帝意解，诏遣朗出。
现代文：明帝怒气消解，便下令将郎放走。
English: When Emperor Ming's anger subsided, he gave the order to release him.

古文：后二日，车驾自幸洛阳狱录囚徒，理出千馀人。
现代文：两天以后，明帝亲临洛阳监狱甄别囚犯，释放了一千多人。
English: Two days later, the emperor went to Luoyang to interrogate the prisoners and cleared out more than a thousand people.

古文：时天旱，即大雨。
现代文：当时正值天旱，立刻降下了大雨。
English: There was a drought at the time, and heavy rain fell immediately.

古文：马后亦以楚狱多滥，乘间为帝言之，帝恻然感悟，夜起彷徨，由是多所降宥。
现代文：马皇后也认为楚王之案多有滥捕滥杀，便乘机向明帝进言。明帝醒悟过来，恻然而悲，夜间起床徘徊。从此对罪犯多所宽赦。
English: Empress Ma also believed that most of the cases of King Chu involved indiscriminate killing, so she took the opportunity to advise Emperor Ming. Emperor Ming came to his senses, but sadly, he got up at night and wandered around. Since then, he has pardoned many criminals.

古文：任城令汝南袁安迁楚郡太守，到郡不入府，先往案楚王英狱事，理其无明验者，条上出之。
现代文：任城县令汝南人袁安被擢升为楚郡太守。到达楚郡之后，他不进太守府，而先去处理楚王之案，查出缺少确凿证据的囚犯，登记上报而准备释放。
English: After arriving in Chu County, he did not enter the governor's office, but first dealt with the case of King Chu, found out the prisoners who lacked conclusive evidence, registered the report and prepared to release.

古文：府丞、掾史皆叩头争，以为 阿附反虏，法与同罪，不可。 
现代文：郡府的大小官员全都叩头力争，认为 附从反逆，依法同罪，万万不可 。
English: County officials, big and small, all tried to kowtow, believing that "subservience to treason" was the same crime according to the law and must never be done.

古文：安曰： 如有不合，太守自当坐之，不以相及也。 
现代文：袁安说： 如果违背了朝廷，太守自当承担罪责，不因此牵连你们。 
English: Yuan An said: If there is any violation of the law, I take full responsibility and will not involve you.

古文：遂分别具奏。
现代文：于是便与其他官员分别奏报。
English: As a result, they were reported one by one.

古文：帝感悟，即报许，得出者四百馀家。
现代文：此时明帝已经醒悟，便批准了袁安的奏书。有四百多家因此获得了释放。
English: By this time, Emperor Ming had come to his senses and approved Yuan An's appeal. As a result, more than four hundred people were released.

古文：夏，五月，封故广陵王荆子元寿为广陵侯，食六县。
现代文：夏季，五月，将已故广陵王刘荆的儿子刘元寿封为广陵侯，享有六县食邑。
English: In the summer, in May, Liu Yuan Shou, the son of the late Guangling King Liu Jing, was named Guangling Hou, enjoying the best food in six counties.

古文：又封窦融孙嘉为安丰侯。
现代文：又将窦融的孙子窦嘉封为安丰侯。
English: He also made Dou Rong's grandson Dou Jia the Prince of Anfeng.

古文：初作寿陵，制： 令流水而已，无得起坟。
现代文：开始预建皇陵。明帝下令： 修建陵墓，只要使水能够流淌出去而已，不许堆高坟丘。
English: The pre-construction of the imperial mausoleum began. Emperor Ming decreed: the construction of the mausoleum, as long as the water can flow out, is not allowed to pile up high burial mounds.

古文：万年之后，扫地而祭，杅水脯Я而已。
现代文：我去世以后，清扫地面设祭，有一碗水和干肉干粮即可。
English: After my death, sweep the ground and hold a ceremony. A bowl of water and dried meat and grain is enough.

古文：过百日，唯四时设奠。
现代文：一百天以后，只在每年四季设祭。
English: After the hundred days, only the four seasons of the year are set aside for festivals.

古文：置吏卒数人，供给洒扫。
现代文：安排官兵数人，负责洒扫之事。
English: Arrange several officers and soldiers to be responsible for the sweep.

古文：敢有所兴作者。以擅议宗庙法从事。 
现代文：若有人胆敢重修扩建陵墓，将以擅自篡改非议宗庙法论罪。 
English: If anyone dares to rebuild or expand the mausoleum, they will be guilty of tampering with the law of the temple.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十五年
现代文：永平十五年
English: Yongping 15 years old

古文：春，二月，庚子，上东巡。
现代文：春季，二月庚子，明帝去东方巡视。
English: In spring, Geng Zi in February, Emperor Ming went to the East for inspection.

古文：癸亥，耕于下邳。
现代文：二月癸亥，在下邳举行耕籍之礼，明帝亲耕。
English: In February, at the time of the Year of the Boar, the ceremony of cultivating the land was held in the Lower Yangtze, and Emperor Ming personally cultivated the land.

古文：三月，至鲁，幸孔子宅，亲御讲堂，命皇太子、诸王说《经》；又幸东平、大梁。
现代文：三月，到达鲁城，临幸孔子故居，亲自登上讲堂，命皇太子和亲王们阐说儒家经典。然后临幸东平、大梁。
English: In March, he arrived in Lucheng, visited the former residence of Confucius, went to the lecture hall in person, and ordered the crown prince and princes to explain the Confucian classics. Then he visited Dongping and Daliang.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，还宫。
现代文：夏季，四月庚子，返回京城皇宫。
English: In the summer, April Geng Zi returns to the Imperial Palace in Beijing.

古文：封皇子恭为巨鹿王，党为乐成王，衍为下邳王，畅为汝南王，昞为常山王，长为济阴王；帝亲定其封域，裁令半楚、淮阳。
现代文：将皇子刘恭封为钜鹿王，皇子刘党封为乐成王，皇子刘衍封为下邳王，皇子刘畅封为汝南王，皇子刘封为常山王，皇子刘长封为济阴王。明帝亲自划定封国疆域，使各封国的面积只有楚国、淮阳国的一半大小。
English: Emperor Ming personally delineated the territory of the fiefs, so that the area of each fief was only half the size of the states of Chu and Huaiyang.

古文：马后曰： 诸子数县，于制不已俭乎？ 
现代文：马皇后说： 皇子们只分得了几个县，同旧制相比，不是太少了吗？ 
English: Empress Ma said, "The princes were only allocated a few counties, compared to the old system, isn't that too few?

古文：帝曰： 我子岂宜与先帝子等，岁给二千万足矣！ 
现代文：明帝说： 我的儿子怎应与先帝的儿子相等？每年有两千万钱的收入就足够了！ 
English: Emperor Ming said, "How can my son be equal to the son of the previous emperor? An annual income of twenty million yuan is enough!"

古文：乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：四月乙巳，大赦天下。
English: April is here, and it's time for a general amnesty.

古文：谒者仆射耿秉数上言请击匈奴，上以显亲侯窦固尝从其世父融在河西，明习边事，乃使秉、固与太仆祭肜、虎贲中郎将马廖、下博侯刘张、好畤侯耿忠等共议之。
现代文：谒者仆射耿秉屡次上书请求攻打北匈奴。皇上因显亲侯窦固曾在河西跟随伯父窦融，熟悉边疆事务，便让耿秉、窦固和太仆祭肜、虎贲中郎将马廖、下博侯刘张、好侯耿忠等人共同会商。
English: The emperor, who was a close relative of Dou Guo, had followed his uncle Dou Rong to Hexi and was familiar with border affairs, so he asked Geng Bing, Dou Guo, and the great servant and middle brother of Tigress to consult with Maliao, Liu Zhang, the lord of Lower Bo, and Geng Zhong, the good lord.

古文：耿秉曰： 昔者匈奴援引弓之类，并左衽之属，故不可得而制。
现代文：耿秉说： 从前匈奴有游猎部落的援助和其他蛮族的依附，所以不能将它制服。
English: Geng Bing said: In the past, the Xiongnu had the assistance of hunting tribes and the attachment of other barbarians, so it could not be subdued.

古文：孝武既得河西四郡及居延、朔方，虏失其肥饶畜兵之地，羌、胡分离；唯有西域，俄复内属；故呼韩邪单于请事款塞，其势易乘也。
现代文：在孝武皇帝得到武威、酒泉、张掖、敦煌等河西四郡及居延、朔方以后，匈奴便失去富饶的养兵之地，断绝了羌、胡关系，势力范围只剩下西域，而西域不久也依附了汉朝。所以，呼韩邪单于到边塞请求归属，乃是大势所趋。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu gained Wuwei, Jiuquan, Zhangye, Dunhuang and other four counties in the west of the river, as well as Juyan and Shuo, the Xiongnu lost the rich place for raising soldiers, severed the relations between the Han and Hu, and the sphere of influence remained only in the western region, which was soon also attached to the Han Dynasty. Therefore, calling the Han Dynasty to the border fortress to request belonging is the general trend.

古文：今有南单于，形势相似；然西域尚未内属，北虏未有衅作。
现代文：如今的南匈奴单于，情形与呼韩邪相似。但目前西域尚未依附汉朝，而北匈奴也没有挑衅作乱。
English: Today's Southern Xiongnu alone, the situation is similar to calling Korea evil. But at present, the western region has not yet adhered to the Han Dynasty, and the Northern Xiongnu has not provoked unrest.

古文：臣愚以为当先击白山，得伊吾，破车师，通使乌孙诸国以断其右臂；伊吾亦有匈奴南呼衍一部。破此，复为折其左角，然后匈奴可击也。 
现代文：我认为应当首先进攻白山，夺取伊吾，打败车师，派使者联合乌孙各国以切断匈奴的右臂。在伊吾还有一支匈奴南呼衍的军队，如果将他们打败，便又折断了匈奴的左角，此后就可以对匈奴本土发动进攻了。 
English: I think we should first attack Baishan, seize Igu, defeat the Chariot Division, and send an envoy to unite the Ussun countries to cut off the Hun's right arm. In Igu, there is also an army of the Hun Nanhuyan. If they are defeated, they will break the left corner of the Hun, and then they can launch an attack on the Hun mainland.

古文：上善其言。
现代文：明帝对他的建议表示赞许。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：议者或以为 今兵出白山，匈奴必并兵相助，又当分其东以离其众。 
现代文：会商的大臣中有人认为： 如今进攻白山，匈奴必定集合部队救援，我们还应当在东方分散匈奴兵力。 明帝同意。
English: One of the ministers at the conference thought, "If we attack Baishan Mountain now, the Huns will certainly gather their forces to rescue us, and we should also disperse the Huns' forces in the east." Emperor Ming agreed.

古文：上从之。十二月，以秉为驸马都尉，固为奉车都尉；以骑都尉秦彭为秉副，耿忠为固副，皆置从事、司马，出屯凉州。
现代文：十二月，任命耿秉为驸马都尉，窦固为奉车都尉，骑都尉秦彭为耿秉的副手，耿忠为窦固的副手，全都设置从事、司马等属官，出京屯驻凉州。
English: In December, Geng Bing was appointed as the commander of the cavalry, Dou Gu as the commander of the chariot, the cavalry commander Qin Peng as Geng Bing's deputy, and Geng Zhong as Dou Gu's deputy. All of them were appointed as subordinate officers such as the commander of the cavalry, Sima, and were stationed in Beijing and Liangzhou.

古文：秉，国之子；忠，弇之子；廖，援之子也。
现代文：耿秉是耿国之子，耿忠是耿之子，马廖是马援之子。
English: Geng Bing is the son of Geng Guo, Geng Zhong is the son of Geng Mao, and Ma Liao is the son of Ma Yuan.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十六年
现代文：永平十六年
English: in the 16th year of Yongping

古文：春，二月，遣肜与度辽将军吴棠将河东、西河羌、胡及南单于兵万一千骑出高阙塞，窦固、耿忠率酒泉、敦煌、张掖甲卒及卢水羌、胡万二千骑出酒泉塞，耿秉、秦彭率武威、陇西、天水募士及羌、胡万骑出张掖居延塞，骑都尉来苖、护乌桓校尉文穆将太原、雁门、代郡、上谷、渔阳、右北平、定襄郡兵及乌桓、鲜卑万一千骑出平城塞，伐北匈奴。
现代文：春季，二月，派祭肜与度辽将军吴棠率领河东、河西的羌人胡人部队和南匈奴单于的部队，共一万一千骑兵，出高阙塞；派窦固、耿忠率领酒泉、敦煌、张掖三郡郡兵和卢水的羌人胡人部队，共一万二千骑兵，出酒泉塞；派耿秉、秦彭率领由武威、陇西、天水等三郡募士和羌人胡人部队，共一万骑兵，出张掖居延塞；派骑都尉来苖、护乌桓校尉文穆率领太原、雁门、代郡、上谷、渔阳、右北平、定襄等七郡郡兵和乌桓、鲜卑部队，共一万一千骑兵，出平城塞，一同讨伐北匈奴。
English: In the spring, in February, Wu Tang, general of the Song Dynasty and Du Liao, led the troops of the Xiongnu in the east and west of the river and the troops of the Southern Xiongnu alone, with a total of eleven thousand cavalry, and went to Gaoxi; Dou Gu, Geng Zhong, led the troops of the counties of Jiuquan, Dunhuang and Zhangye, and the troops of the Xiongnu in Luzhou, with a total of twelve thousand cavalry, and went to Jiuquan; Geng Bing and Qin Peng, led the troops of the three counties of Wuwei, Shaanxi and Tianshui

古文：窦固、耿忠至天山，击呼衍王，斩首千馀级；追至蒲类海，取伊吾卢地，置宜禾都尉，留吏士屯田伊吾卢城。
现代文：窦固和耿忠抵达天山，进攻北匈奴呼衍王，斩杀一千余人。又追击到蒲类海，夺取伊吾卢地区，设置了宜禾都尉，在伊吾卢城留下将士开荒屯垦。
English: Dou Gu and Geng Zhong arrived in Tianshan, attacked the Northern Xiongnu Huan Wang, and killed more than a thousand people. They also pursued to the Pudong Sea, captured the Iguru region, set up Yihe Duifeng, and left soldiers in the Iguru city.

古文：耿秉、秦彭击匈林王，绝幕六百馀里，至三木楼山而还。
现代文：耿秉和秦彭进攻北匈奴匈林王，横越沙漠六百里，到达三木楼山后班师。
English: Geng Bing and Qin Peng attacked the Northern Xiongnu, the King of Hun and Lin, and crossed the desert for six hundred miles to reach the rear division of the Three Wooded Mountains.

古文：来苖、文穆至匈河水上，虏皆奔走，无所获。
现代文：来苖和文穆抵达匈河水畔，北匈奴部众全都溃散逃跑，没有斩获。
English: Lai Ying and Wen Mu arrived at the banks of the Hung River. The Northern Xiongnu troops all scattered and fled, without any gains.

古文：祭肜与南匈奴左贤王信不相得，出高阙塞九百馀里，得小山，信妄言以为涿邪山，不见虏而还。
现代文：祭肜与南匈奴左贤王信不合，他们出高阙塞九百余里，占领一座小山，信便谎称此山是涿邪山，结果他们没有找到敌人就回师了。
English: The Southern Xiongnu Zuoxian Wangxin disagreed with the sacrificial eunuch. They traveled more than nine hundred miles to occupy a hill. The letter then falsely claimed that this hill was the evil mountain. As a result, they did not find the enemy and returned to the division.

古文：肜与吴棠坐逗留畏懦，下狱，免。
现代文：祭肜和吴棠被指控犯有率军逗留、畏缩不前之罪，逮捕入狱，免去官职。
English: Sacrifices and Wu Tang were accused of leading the army to stay, the crime of not moving forward, arrested, imprisoned, and removed from office.

古文：肜自恨无功，出狱数日，欧血死。
现代文：祭肜自恨没有建立功勋，出狱几天后，吐血而死。
English: Sacrificing himself out of self-hatred, he did not establish any merits. A few days after he was released from prison, he vomited blood and died.

古文：临终，谓其子曰： 吾蒙国厚恩，奉使不称，身死诚惭恨，义不可以无功受赏。
现代文：临终时，他对儿子说： 我蒙受国家厚恩，没有完成使命，身死而心怀愧恨。根据道义，不可以无功而接受赏赐。
English: At the end of his life, he said to his son: I have been blessed by the state, I did not complete my mission, I am ashamed of my life and death. According to morality, it is not acceptable to receive rewards without merit.

古文：死后，若悉簿上所得物，身自诣兵屯，效死前行，以副吾心。 
现代文：我死后，你要将我所得的赏赐之物全部登记上缴，自己到兵营投军，在阵前效死，以称我心。 
English: When I am dead, then you shall bring all my rewards into the book and give them to me. You shall go to the battle and give your life for my soul.

古文：既卒，其子逢上疏，具陈遗言。
现代文：祭肜死后，他的儿子祭逢上书朝廷，一一陈述父亲的遗言。
English: After his father's death, his son wrote to the imperial court, recounting his father's last words.

古文：帝雅重肜，方更任用，闻之，大惊，嗟叹良久。
现代文：明帝一向器重祭肜，正要重新任用，听到他的遗言后，大为震惊，叹息了许久。
English: Emperor Ming had always placed great importance on the sacrificial rites, and was about to be reappointed. After hearing his last words, he was greatly shocked and sighed for a long time.

古文：乌桓、鲜卑每朝贺京师，常过肜冢拜谒，仰天号泣。
现代文：后来，乌桓、鲜卑部落每次派使者到京城朝贺，总要经过祭肜的坟墓祭拜，仰天大哭。
English: Later, every time the Wuhuan and Xianbei tribes sent emissaries to the capital to offer morning greetings, they always had to go through the tomb of the sacrificial eagle to worship and weep loudly.

古文：辽东吏民为立祠，四时奉祭焉。
现代文：辽东郡的官吏和人民为祭肜建立了祠庙，四季祭祀。
English: The officials and people of Liaodong County have established a temple for the festival, and the four seasons are celebrated.

古文：窦固独有功，加位特进。
现代文：在这次战役中，唯独窦固一人有功，擢升特进。
English: In this campaign, Dou Gu was the only one to be promoted.

古文：固使假司马班超与从事郭恂俱使西域。
现代文：窦固派副司马班超和从事郭恂一同出使西域。
English: Dou Guo's deputy, Ma Banchao, was sent to the western region together with Guo Gan.

古文：超行到善阝善，善阝善王广奉超礼敬甚备，后忽更疏懈。
现代文：班超到达鄯善国时，鄯善王广用十分尊敬周到的礼节接待他，但后来忽然变得疏远懈怠了。
English: When Banchao arrived in Shanshan, Shanshan Wangguang received him with great respect and courtesy, but then suddenly became distant and slack.

古文：超谓其官属曰： 宁觉广礼意薄乎？ 
现代文：班超对他的部下说： 你们可曾觉出广的态度冷淡了吗？ 
English: The head of the class said to his subordinates: Don't you think that Gong Shan Wang Guang has become very cold to us?

古文：官属曰： 胡人不能常久，无它故也。 
现代文：部下说： 胡人行事无常性，并没有别的原因。 
English: Subordinates said: Hu people act capriciously, and there is no other reason.

古文：超曰： 此必有北虏使来，狐疑未知所从故也。
现代文：班超说： 这一定是因为有北匈奴的使者前来，而鄯善王心里犹豫，不知所从的缘故。
English: Ban Chao said, "This must be because an envoy from the Northern Xiongnu came to visit, and the benevolent king hesitated and did not know where to go.

古文：明者睹未萌，况已著邪！ 
现代文：明眼人能够在事情未发生前看出端倪，何况事情已显著暴露！ 
English: Bright-eyed people can see things before they happen, not to mention the fact that things have been significantly exposed!

古文：乃召侍胡，诈之曰： 匈奴使来数日，今安在乎？ 
现代文：于是他召来胡人侍者，假装已知实情，说： 匈奴使者来了几天，如今在什么地方？ 
English: So he summoned the Hun servant, pretended to know the truth, and said: The Hun messenger has been here for a few days, where is he now?

古文：侍胡惶恐曰： 到已三日，去此三十里。 
现代文：胡人侍者慌忙答道： 已经来了三天，离此地三十里。 
English: The hutong waiter hurriedly replied, "I've been here for three days, and it's thirty miles from here.

古文：超乃闭侍胡，悉会其吏士三十六人，与共饮，酒酣，因激怒之曰： 卿曹与我俱在绝域，今虏使到才数日，而王广礼敬即废。如令善阝善收吾属送匈奴，骸骨长为豺狼食矣。
现代文：于是班超就把胡人侍者关起来，召集全体属员，共三十六人，和他们一同饮酒。饮到酣畅之时，班超借酒激怒众人说： 你们和我同在绝远荒域，如今北匈奴使者才来了几天，而鄯善王就已不讲礼节了，若是使者命令鄯善把我们抓起来送给匈奴，那么我们的骨头就要永远喂给豺狼了。我们应该怎么办？ 
English: So Ban Chao locked up the Hu people's waiters, gathered all his subordinates, a total of thirty-six people, and drank with them. When the drinking was smooth, Ban Chao used the wine to infuriate the people and said: You and I are together in a very remote wilderness, now the North Hun envoy has only been here for a few days, and King Gong Son is no longer polite. If the envoy orders Gong Son to arrest us and send us to the Huns, then our bones will be fed to the jackals forever. What should we do?

古文：为之奈何？ 官属皆曰： 今在危亡之地，死生从司马！ 
现代文：部下一致回答： 如今处在危亡之地，我们跟随司马同生共死！ 
English: His subordinates unanimously answered: Now we are in a critical situation, we will follow Sima and live and die together!

古文：超曰： 不入虎穴，不得虎子。
现代文：班超说： 不入虎穴，不得虎子。
English: "If you don't go into the tiger's den, you can't catch the little tiger," Banchao said.

古文：当今之计，独有因夜以火攻虏，使彼不知我多少，必大震怖，可殄尽也。
现代文：如今可行的办法，只有乘夜用火进攻匈奴人，使对方不知我们到底有多少人马，必定大为震恐，这样便可将他们一网打尽。
English: The best thing to do now is to take advantage of the darkness of the night and attack the Huns with fire. They don't know how many of us there are, so they'll be terrified, and we'll be able to destroy them all.

古文：灭此虏，则善阝善破胆，功成事立矣。 众曰： 当与从事议之。 
现代文：除掉了北匈奴使者，那么鄯善人就会胆战心惊，我们便成功了。 众人说： 应当和从事商议此事。 
English: If we get rid of the envoy of the Northern Xiongnu, then the good people will be afraid, and we will succeed.The people said: We should discuss this with the government.

古文：超怒曰： 吉凶决于今日！从事文俗吏，闻此必恐而谋泄，死无所名，非壮士也。 众曰： 善！ 
现代文：班超生气地说： 命运的吉凶就在今天决定，而从事不过是平庸的文吏，听到我们的打算定要害怕，计谋便会泄露，到那时候，我们死得没有名堂，就不是英雄了。 众人说： 好！ 
English: Pan Chao said angrily, "The fate of the world is being decided today, and we are just mediocre clerks. If they hear our plans, they will be afraid, and our schemes will be exposed. At that time, we will die without a name, and we will not be heroes." Everyone said, "Good!"

古文：初夜，超遂将吏士往奔虏营。
现代文：一入夜，班超便带领部下奔向北匈奴使者的营地。
English: As soon as night fell, Banchao led his men to the camp of the Northern Xiongnu emissary.

古文：会天大风，超令十人持鼓藏虏舍后，约曰： 见火然，皆当鸣鼓大呼。 
现代文：当时正刮着大风，班超命令十人拿鼓，躲到匈奴人的帐房后面，相约道： 看见火起，就要一齐擂鼓呐喊。 
English: At this time, a strong wind was blowing. The superintendent called ten people to take the drums and hide behind the Hun ambassador's residence. They agreed to say: When you see the fire, you will all beat the drums and shout loudly.

古文：馀人悉持兵弩，夹门而伏，超乃顺风纵火。前后鼓噪，虏众惊乱。
现代文：其余的人全都手持刀剑弓弩，埋伏在帐门两侧。于是班超顺风放火，大火一起，帐房前后鼓声齐鸣，杀声震耳。
English: The rest of the people, all armed with swords, bows and arrows, lay in ambush on both sides of the gate. So, Bancao Shunfeng set fire to it, and the fire spread. Drums sounded in unison in front of and behind the gate, and the murderous sound was deafening.

古文：超手格杀三人，吏兵斩其使及从士三十馀级，馀众百许人悉烧死。
现代文：匈奴人惊慌失措，一时大乱。班超亲手格杀三人，下属官兵斩杀北匈奴使者及其随从共三十余人，其余约一百人全部被火烧死。
English: Panchao personally killed three people, subordinate officers and soldiers killed more than 30 North Huns envoys and their followers, and the remaining 100 people were all burned to death.

古文：明日乃还，告郭恂，恂大惊，既而色动，超知其意，举手曰： 掾虽不行，班超何心独擅之乎！ 恂乃悦。
现代文：班超等人次日返回，将事情的经过告诉了郭恂。
English: The superintendent and others returned the next day and told Guo Yao what had happened.

古文：超于是召善阝善王广，以虏使首示之，一国震怖。
现代文：郭恂大为震惊，接着神色一变。班超明白了他的意思，举手声称： 从事虽然没有前去参与行动，可班超怎有心一人居功！ 
English: Guo Yao was greatly shocked, and then his face changed. Ban Chao understood his meaning and raised his hand to claim: Although he did not go forward to participate in the action, how could Ban Chao have the heart to take the credit alone!

古文：超告以汉威德， 自今以后，勿复与北虏通。 
现代文：郭恂这才大喜。于是班超叫来鄯善王广，给他看匈奴使者的首级，鄯善全国震恐。班超将汉朝的国威和恩德告诉鄯善王，并说： 从今以后，不要再同北匈奴来往。 
English: Guo Gan was overjoyed. Therefore, Ban Chao called Gong Shan Wang Guang and showed him the severed head of the Hun envoy. Gong Shan was terrified. Ban Chao told Gong Shan Wang about the national prestige and virtue of the Han Dynasty and said, "From now on, don't have any dealings with the Northern Huns."

古文：广叩头： 愿属汉，无二心。 
现代文：广叩头声称： 我愿臣属汉朝，没有二心。 
English: "I am willing to be a vassal of the Han Dynasty, I have no second thoughts.

古文：遂纳子为质。
现代文：于是将王子送到汉朝充当人质。
English: So he sent the prince to the Han Dynasty as a hostage.

古文：还白窦固，固大喜，具上超功效，并求更选使使西域。
现代文：班超归来后，向窦固讲述了出使经过，窦固十分高兴，将班超的功劳一一上报，并请求重新选派使者出使西域。
English: After Bancao's return, he told Dou Gu about the process of his mission. Dou Gu was very pleased, reported the merits of Bancao one by one, and requested that the envoy to the West be re-elected.

古文：帝曰： 吏如班超，何故不遣，而更选乎！
现代文：明帝说： 有班超这样的官员，为什么不派遣，而要另选他人呢？
English: Ming Di said: If there is such an official as Banchao, why not send him, but choose someone else?

古文：今以超为军司马，令遂前功。 
现代文：现任命班超为军司马，让他完成先前的功业。 
English: Now appoint the squad leader as the military secretary and let him complete the unfinished work.

古文：固复使超使于窴，欲益其兵，超愿但将本所从三十六人，曰： 于窴国大而远，今将数百人，无益于强；如有不虞，多益为累耳。 
现代文：窦固又让班超出使于阗国，想为他增加随行兵马，但班超只愿带领原来跟从的三十六人。他说： 于阗是个大国，道路遥远，如今率领几百人前往，无益于显示强大。而如有不测之事发生，人多反而成为累赘。 
English: Dou Gu also asked Ban Chao to go to Yunnan to increase the number of soldiers accompanying him, but Ban Chao was only willing to lead the thirty-six people who had originally followed him. He said: Yunnan is a big country, the road is far away, and now leading hundreds of people to travel is not beneficial to show strength. And if something unexpected happens, more people will become a burden.

古文：是时于窴王广德雄张南道，而匈奴遣使监护其国。
现代文：当时，于阗王广德称雄于西域南道，但该国仍受匈奴使者的监护。
English: At that time, King Guangde of Yunnan was the most powerful ruler in the south of the Western Regions, but the country was still under the tutelage of the Hun envoys.

古文：超既至于窴，广德礼意甚疏。
现代文：班超到达于阗后，广德待他礼仪态度十分疏淡。
English: After the superintendent arrived in Handan, Guangde treated him with a very lackadaisical attitude.

古文：且其俗信巫，巫言： 神怒，何故欲向汉？
现代文：于阗又有信巫之俗，而巫师声称： 神已发怒，问我们为何要倾向汉朝？
English: There is also a custom of believing in witches in Yunnan, and the sorcerer claims: God has become angry, ask why we should lean towards the Han Dynasty?

古文：汉使有呙马，急求取以祠我！ 
现代文：汉朝的使者有一匹黑唇黄马，快去找来给我做祭品！ 
English: The emissary of the Han Dynasty has a black-lipped yellow horse. Go find it and make an offering to me!

古文：广德乃遣国相私来比就超请马。
现代文：于是广德派宰相私来比向班超索求赠马。
English: As a result, Guangde dispatched the Prime Minister I Lai Bi to ask Ban Chao for a gift horse.

古文：超密知其状，报许之，而令巫自来取马。
现代文：班超暗中获知底细，便答应此事，但要巫师亲自前来取马。
English: When Ban Chao secretly learned of this, he agreed to give him the horse and asked the sorcerer to lead the horse himself.

古文：有顷，巫至，超即斩其首；收私来比，鞭笞数百。
现代文：不久，巫师来了，班超便立刻将他斩首，并逮捕了私来比，痛打数百皮鞭。
English: Soon after, the sorcerer arrived, and Banchao immediately beheaded him, arrested me, and beat me with hundreds of whips.

古文：以巫首送广德；因责让之。
现代文：班超将巫师的首级送给广德，借机对他进行谴责。
English: Banchao gave the sorcerer's head to Guangde, taking the opportunity to reprimand him.

古文：广德素闻超在善阝善诛灭虏使，大惶恐，即杀匈奴使者而降。
现代文：广德早已听说过班超在鄯善斩杀北匈始使者的事迹，大为惊恐，便随即杀死匈奴使者投降。
English: Guang De had already heard of Ban Chao's killing of the first envoy of North Hungary in Hunan. He was greatly alarmed, so he immediately killed the Hun envoy and surrendered.

古文：超重赐其王以下，因镇抚焉。
现代文：班超重赏于阗王及其大臣，就此镇服安抚于阗。
English: In order to appease Yu Jun's vassals, Ban Chao rewarded them with many gifts.

古文：于是诸国皆遣子入侍，西域与汉绝六十五载，至是乃复通焉。
现代文：于是西域各国全都派出王子到汉朝做人质。西域与汉朝的关系曾中断了六十五年，至此才恢复交往。
English: As a result, all the countries of the Western Regions sent princes to the Han Dynasty to serve as hostages. Relations between the Western Regions and the Han Dynasty had been interrupted for sixty-five years before they resumed.

古文：超，彪之子也。
现代文：班超是班彪之子。
English: Ban Chao is the son of Ban Biao.

古文：淮阳王延，性骄奢，而遇下严烈。
现代文：淮阳王刘延生性骄横而奢侈，对待下属严酷无情。
English: Huaiyang King Liu Yanzheng is arrogant and extravagant, and treats his subordinates harshly and mercilessly.

古文：有上书告 延与姬兄谢弇及姊婿韩光招奸猾，作图谶，祠祭祝诅。 
现代文：有人向朝廷上书控告： 刘延同姬妾之兄谢及姐夫韩光招揽奸猾之人，编造图谶，进行祭祷诅咒。 
English: Someone wrote to the imperial court to complain: Liu Yan, together with his concubine's brother Xie and his brother-in-law Han Guang, recruited treacherous people, fabricated pictures, and performed prayers and curses.

古文：事下案验。
现代文：此案下交有关官员追查核实。
English: The case was handed over to relevant officials for investigation and verification.

古文：五月，癸丑，弇、光及司徒邢穆皆坐死，所连及死、徙者甚众。
现代文：五月癸丑，谢、韩光和司徒邢穆都因罪被判处死刑，受此案牵连而被处死或流放者众多。
English: At the end of May, Xie, Han Guang and Szu Qimou were all sentenced to death for their crimes. Many people were implicated in this case and were executed or exiled.

古文：戊午晦，日有食之。
现代文：五月戊午晦，出现日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：六月，丙寅，以大司农西河王敏为司徒。
现代文：六月丙寅，将大司农西河人王敏任命为司徒。
English: In June, Cui Yin appointed Wang Min, the head of the Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs and a native of the West River, as a member of the Council.

古文：有司奏请诛淮阳王延，上以延罪薄于楚王英，秋，七月，徙延为阜陵王，食二县。
现代文：有关官员奏请将淮阳王刘延处死。而明帝认为刘延之罪轻于楚王刘英，秋季，七月，将刘延改封为阜陵王，以两个县作为他的食邑。
English: The relevant officials requested that Liu Yan, the king of Huaiyang, be put to death. However, the Ming emperor thought that Liu Yan's crime was lighter than that of Liu Ying, the king of Chu. In the autumn, in July, Liu Yan was changed to the king of Fuling, with two counties as his capital.

古文：是岁，北匈奴大入云中，云中太守廉范拒之；吏以众少，欲移书傍郡求救，范不许。
现代文：本年，北匈奴大举进攻云中郡。云中郡太守廉范进行抵抗。下属官员因本郡兵少，想要送信给邻郡请求救援，廉范不许。
English: This year, the Northern Huns launched a large-scale attack on Yunzhong County. The governor of Yunzhong County, Liang Fan, resisted. Because of the small number of soldiers in the county, the subordinate officials wanted to send a request for rescue to the neighboring county, but Liang Fan would not allow it.

古文：会日暮，范令军士各交缚两炬，三头爇火，营中星列。
现代文：这时天已黄昏，廉范命令军士各将两支火把交叉捆绑成十字形，点燃三端，在军营中排开，状如繁星。
English: At this time, it was already dusk, and Lian Fan ordered the sergeants to each cross-tie two torches into a cross shape, light the three ends, and line them up in the barracks in the shape of stars.

古文：虏谓汉兵救至，大惊，待旦将退。
现代文：匈奴人以为汉朝援军已到，大为震惊，打算等到天亮时便撤走。
English: The Huns thought that the Han Dynasty reinforcements had arrived, were shocked, and planned to withdraw at dawn.

古文：范令军中蓐食，晨，往赴之，斩首数百级，虏自相辚藉，死者千馀人，由此不敢复向云中。
现代文：廉范命令部队在夜宿之地进餐。清晨，汉军出击，斩杀数百人。而匈奴军队自相践踏而死的有一千余人。北匈奴从此不敢再侵扰云中郡。
English: In the morning, the Han army attacked and killed hundreds of people, while the Hun army trampled and killed more than a thousand people. From then on, the Northern Huns no longer dared to invade Yunzhong County.

古文：范，丹之孙也。
现代文：廉范是廉丹之孙。
English: Lian Fan is the grandson of Lian Dan.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十七年
现代文：永平十七年
English: 17th year of Yongping Dynasty

古文：春，正月，上当谒原陵，夜，梦先帝、太后如平生欢，既寤，悲不能寐；即案历，明旦日吉，遂率百官上陵。
现代文：春季，正月，明帝正准备去拜祭原陵，夜间梦见先帝和太后，如生前一样欢乐团聚。醒来后，心中悲伤不能入眠，便查看历书，发现第二天就是吉日，于是带领百官出宫祭陵。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Ming was preparing to visit the Imperial mausoleum. During the night, he dreamed that the former emperor and empress dowager were happily reunited as they had been in their lifetime. When he woke up, he was too sad to sleep, so he checked his almanac and found that the next day would be auspicious, so he led hundreds of officials out of the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：其日，降甘露于陵树，帝令百官采取以荐。
现代文：祭陵之日，天降甘露，洒在原陵的树上。明帝命令百官收集甘露作为祭品。
English: On this day, the nectar fell on the grove of the cemetery, and Emperor Ming ordered the officials to take the nectar to the original mausoleum.

古文：会毕，帝从席前伏御床，视太后镜奁中物，感动悲涕，令易脂泽装具；左右皆泣，莫能仰视。
现代文：仪式结束后，明帝从席垫前向御床俯身，观看太后镜匣中的梳妆用品，悲伤痛哭，命人更换化装品和化装用具。左右随从之人全都流下眼泪，不能抬头仰视。
English: After the ceremony, Emperor Ming bent down from the cushion in front of the throne bed, looked at the beauty supplies in the empress dowager's mirror box, wept with grief, and ordered someone to replace the makeup and makeup tools. The people around him all shed tears and could not look up.

古文：北海敬王睦薨。
现代文：北海王刘睦去世。
English: The king of the North Sea, Liu Mucong, has died.

古文：睦少好学，光武及上皆爱之，尝遣中大夫诣京师朝贺，召而谓之曰： 朝廷设问寡人，大夫将何辞以对？ 
现代文：刘睦自幼喜爱读书，光武帝和明帝对他都很宠爱。他曾派中大夫进京朝贺，召这位使者前来，对他说： 假如朝廷问到我，你将用什么话回答？ 
English: Liu Mu liked to read since he was a child, and Emperor Guangwu and Emperor Ming were very fond of him. He once sent a middle-ranking doctor to Beijing for morning greetings, summoned this messenger, and said to him: "If the imperial court asks me, what words will you use to answer?"

古文：使者曰： 大王忠孝慈仁，敬贤乐士，臣敢不以实对！ 
现代文：使者说： 大王忠孝仁慈，尊敬贤才而乐与士子结交，我敢不据实回答！ 
English: The messenger said: The great king is loyal, filial and merciful, respects the wise and enjoys making friends with the scholars. I dare not answer truthfully!

古文：睦曰： 吁，子危我哉！
现代文：刘睦说： 唉！你可要害我了！
English: Liu Mutsu said: Alas! You are going to harm me!

古文：此乃孤幼时进趣之行也。
现代文：这只是我年轻时的进取行为。
English: It was just my youthful aggressiveness.

古文：大夫其对以孤袭爵以来，志意衰惰，声色是娱，犬马是好，乃为相爱耳。 
现代文：你就说我自从袭爵以来，意志衰退而懒惰，以淫声女色为娱乐，以犬马狩猎为爱好。
English: You will say that since my accession to the peerage I have been weak-willed and lazy, that I am amused by lewd women, and that my hobby is hunting with dogs and horses.

古文：其智虑畏慎如此。
现代文：你要这样说才是爱护我。 
English: If you say that, then you love me.

古文：二月，乙巳，司徒王敏薨。
现代文：刘睦就是这样聪明多虑和小心谨慎。二月乙巳，司徒王敏去世。
English: Liu Mutu was clever, thoughtful and cautious. In February, Wang Min passed away.

古文：三月，癸丑，以汝南太守鲍昱为司徒。
现代文：三月癸丑，将汝南太守鲍昱任命为司徒。
English: In March, he appointed Bao Tong, the eunuch governor of Yunnan Province, as his disciple.

古文：昱，永之子也。
现代文：鲍昱是鲍永之子。
English: Bao Tong is the son of Bao Yong.

古文：益州刺史梁国硃辅宣示汉德，威怀远夷，自汶山以西，前世所不至，正朔所未加，白狼、槃木等百馀国。皆举种称臣奉贡。
现代文：益州刺史梁国人朱辅宣扬汉朝的德政，使朝廷威望远播到遥远的蛮夷之邦。从汶山以西，前代汉人足迹所不到、朝廷力量所未及的白狼、木等一百余国，全都举国称臣进贡。
English: Zhu Fu, a native of Zhishiliang in Yizhou, propagated the German policy of the Han Dynasty, so that the authority of the imperial court spread far and wide to the distant barbarian states. From the west of the Wenshan Mountains, more than a hundred countries such as the White Wolf and the Wood, where the previous generation of Han people could not find footprints and the power of the imperial court could not reach, all the country paid tribute.

古文：白狼王唐取作诗三章，歌颂汉德，辅使犍为郡掾由恭译而献之。
现代文：白狼王唐曾作诗三首，歌颂汉朝的恩德。朱辅命犍为郡掾由恭译成汉文，献给朝廷。
English: The White Wolf King Tang once wrote three poems, praising the benevolence of the Han Dynasty. Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem Zhu Yu's poem

古文：初，龟兹王建为匈奴所立，倚恃虏威，据有北道，攻杀疏勒王，立其臣兜题为疏勒王。
现代文：当初，龟兹王建是匈奴所立，他倚仗匈奴的威势，控制西域北道，进攻并杀死了疏勒王，将自己的臣子兜题立为新王。
English: At first, Kuez Wang Jian was set up by the Xiongnu. He relied on the might of the Xiongnu to control the western region and the northern road, attacked and killed the king of Shule, and set up his own vassal Toutiao as the new king.

古文：班超从间道至疏勒，去兜题所居槃橐城九十里，逆遣吏田虑先往降之，敕虑曰： 兜题本非疏勒种，国人必不用命；若不即降，便可执之。 
现代文：班超等人由偏僻小道抵达疏勒，在距离兜题所居住的城九十里处扎营，派属官田虑先去，劝兜题投降。班超吩咐田虑道： 兜题本来不是疏勒族人，人民一定不听他的命令。如果他不立即投降，便可将他逮捕。 
English: Banchao and others arrived in Sule from a remote path and camped ninety miles from the city where Tabuchi lived. They sent the official Tian Xian to go first and persuade Tabuchi to surrender. Banchao ordered Tian Xian: Tabuchi is not originally from Sule, the people will not listen to his orders. If he does not surrender immediately, he can be arrested.

古文：虑既到，兜题见虑轻弱，殊无降意。
现代文：田虑一行到达城以后，兜题见他们势单力薄，丝毫没有投降之意。
English: Tian Xian arrived in Lucheng, saw that his power was weak, and did not want to give in at all.

古文：虑因其无备，遂前劫缚兜题，左右出其不意，皆惊惧奔走。
现代文：田虑乘人不备，便上前劫持了兜题，将他捆绑起来。兜题的左右随从不料会出此事，全都又慌又怕地逃跑了。
English: Tian Xian took advantage of the unpreparedness of the people, and went forward to kidnap Houtai and tie him up. Houtai's left and right followers did not expect this to happen, and they all fled in panic and fear.

古文：虑驰报超，超即赴之，悉召疏勒将吏，说以龟兹无道之状，因立其故王兄子忠为王，国人大悦。
现代文：田虑急忙驰马向班超报告。班超立即赶赴城，召集全体疏勒文武官员，数说龟兹王的罪行，于是将前疏勒王哥哥的儿子忠立为疏勒王，人民十分欢喜。
English: Tian Xian Feima informed Ban Chao. Ban Chao rushed to Lushan, summoned all Shule generals and officers, told them the situation of the tortoise and the hare, and supported the son of their late king's elder brother, named Zhong, to be the king of Shule. The people of Shule were very pleased.

古文：超问忠及官属： 当杀兜题邪，生遣之邪？ 
现代文：班超问忠及其属官： 应当杀死兜题呢，还是活着放他走呢？ 
English: The superintendent asked Tadazane and his subordinate officers: Should we kill Hattori, or let him go alive?

古文：咸曰： 当杀之。 
现代文：众人都说： 应当杀死兜题。 
English: Everyone said: "We should kill the problem."

古文：超曰； 杀之无益于事，当令龟兹知汉威德。 
现代文：班超说： 杀他无益于大事，应当让龟兹知道汉朝的恩威。 
English: Banchao said, "Killing him is of no benefit to the great cause. The tortoise should be made aware of the benevolence of the Han Dynasty."

古文：遂解遣之。
现代文：于是放走兜题。
English: So let it go.

古文：夏，五月，戊子，公卿百官以帝威德怀远，祥物显应，并集朝堂奉觞上寿。
现代文：夏季，五月戊子，公卿百官认为，圣上的恩德和威望遍及远方，有祥瑞应合，于是一同聚集朝堂，举酒向明帝上寿。
English: In the summer of May, hundreds of court nobles believed that the saint's grace and prestige spread far and wide, so they gathered together in the imperial hall to toast Emperor Ming's birthday.

古文：制曰： 天生神物，以应王者；远人慕化，实由有德；朕以虚薄，何以享斯！
现代文：明帝下诏说： 上天降下神物，是应合贤君的出现；边远民族仰慕归化，实由于贤君的德政。以朕的孱弱浅薄，有何资格担当？
English: Emperor Ming decreed: The gods descended from heaven in response to the emergence of the wise men; the outlying peoples admire naturalization, but it is actually due to the virtuous government of the wise men. With my weakness and shallowness, what qualifications do I have?

古文：唯高祖、光武圣德所被，不敢有辞，其敬举觞，太常择吉日策告宗庙。 
现代文：只因蒙受高祖皇帝和光武皇帝的圣恩大德才能如此。我不敢推辞，谨与众人一起举酒。命太常选定良辰吉日，策书祭告宗庙。 
English: I am only able to do this because of the great grace that I have received from Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Guangwu. I dare not refuse, and I would like to raise a toast with everyone. I always choose a good time and day to announce the book collection festival to the ancestral temple.

古文：仍推恩赐民爵及粟有差。
现代文：于是推广皇恩，赐给人民爵位和谷物，各有等级差别。
English: Therefore, the emperor's grace was promoted, and people were given titles and grain, each of which had a different rank.

古文：冬，十一月，遣奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉、骑都尉刘张出敦煌昆仑塞，击西域，秉、张皆去符，传以属固，合兵万四千骑，击破白山虏于蒲类海上，遂进击车师。
现代文：冬季，十一月，派奉车都尉窦固、驸马都尉耿秉、骑都尉刘张都出敦煌郡昆仓塞，进攻西域。命耿秉、刘张都交出调兵符传，归属窦固。汉军集合部队共一万四千人，在蒲类海边打败了白山的北匈奴部队，于是进军攻打车师。
English: In the winter, in November, Feng Chariot Captain Dou Gu, Long Horse Captain Geng Bing, and Cavalry Captain Liu Zhang were all sent from Kuncangse, Dunhuang County, to attack the western region. The lives of Geng Bing and Liu Zhang were transferred to Dou Gu. The Han Army assembled a total of 14,000 troops, defeated the Northern Hun troops of Baishan on the coast of Putuo, and then marched into the attack against the Chariot Division.

古文：车师前王，即后王之子也，其廷相去五百馀里。
现代文：车师前王是车师后王的儿子，两个王庭相距五百余里。
English: The former king of coachmen is the son of the queen of coachmen, and the two royal courts are more than five hundred miles apart.

古文：固以后王道远，山谷深，士卒寒苦，欲攻前王；秉以为先赴后王，并力根本，则前王自服。
现代文：窦固认为后王之地路远，山谷深险，士兵将受到寒冷的折磨，因而打算进攻前王。但耿秉认为应当先去打后王，集中力量除掉老根，那么前王将不战自降。
English: Dou Gu thought that Houwang's land was far away, the valley was dangerous, and the soldiers would be tortured by the cold, so he planned to attack the former king. However, Geng Bing thought that he should first fight Houwang and concentrate on removing the old roots, then the former king would surrender without a fight.

古文：固计未决，秉奋身而起曰： 请行前。 
现代文：窦固思虑未定，耿秉奋然起身道： 请让我去打先锋！ 
English: Dou Gu pondered and was undecided. Geng Bing got up enthusiastically and said, "Please let me play the spearhead!"

古文：乃上马引兵北入，众军不得已，并进，斩首数千级。
现代文：于是跨上战马，率领所属部队向北挺入。其他部队不得已而一同进军，斩杀数千敌人。
English: As a result, he mounted his war horse and led his troops northward. Other troops were forced to march together, killing thousands of enemies.

古文：后王安得震怖，走出门迎秉，脱帽，抱马足降，秉将以诣固；其前王亦归命，遂定车师而还。
现代文：车师后王安得震惊恐慌，便走到城门外面迎接耿秉，摘去王冠，抱住马足投降。耿秉便带着他去拜见窦固。车师前王也随之投降。车师便全部平定，大军回国。
English: The driver's wife Wang And was shocked and panicked, so she went outside the city gate to meet Geng Bing, took off her crown, hugged the horse's foot and surrendered. Geng Bing then took him to meet Dou Gu. The driver's former husband also surrendered. The drivers were all pacified, and the army returned to the country.

古文：于是固奏复置西域都护及戊、己校尉。
现代文：于是窦固上书建议重新设置西域都护及戊、己校尉。
English: As a result, Dou Gu suggested in a petition that the West Region Metropolitan Protector and E and G be re-instated as captains.

古文：以陈睦为都护；司马耿恭为戊校尉，屯后王部金蒲城；谒者关宠为己校尉，屯前王部柳中城，屯各置数百人。
现代文：明帝将陈睦任命为西域都护，将司马耿恭任命为戊校尉，屯驻后车师金蒲城；将谒者关宠任命为己校尉，屯驻前车师柳中城，各设置驻军数百人。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Chen Mu as the Western Capital Protector, appointed Sima Geng Qiong as the E-Lieutenant, stationed in the rear coachman Jinpu City; appointed Zou Zhaiguan Ji as his own lieutenant, stationed in the front coachman Liuzhong City, each setting up hundreds of garrisons.

古文：恭，况之孙也。
现代文：耿恭是耿之孙。
English: Geng Gong is Geng's grandson.

古文：显宗孝明皇帝下永平十八年春，二月，诏窦固等罢兵还京师。
现代文：永平十八年春季，二月，明帝下诏，命令窦固等解散部队，返回京城洛阳。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of Yongping, in February, Emperor Ming issued an edict, ordering Dou Gu and others to disband their troops and return to the capital Luoyang.

古文：北单于遣左鹿蠡王率二万骑击车师，耿恭遣司马将兵三百人救之，皆为所没，匈奴遂破杀车师后王安得而攻金蒲城。
现代文：北匈奴单于派左鹿蠡王率领两万骑兵进攻车师。戊校尉耿恭派司马领兵三百人前去救援，全军覆没。于是匈奴打败车师后王安得，将他杀死，继而攻打金蒲城。
English: The Northern Huns sent Zuo Degu Xuan Wang to attack the chariot division alone, leading 20,000 cavalrymen. Colonel Wu sent Sima Tong, leading 300 soldiers, to the rescue, and the entire army was wiped out. So the Huns defeated the chariot division Queen Wang And, killed him, and then attacked Jinpu City.

古文：恭以毒药傅矢，语匈奴曰： 汉家箭神，其中疮者必有异。 
现代文：耿恭把毒药涂在箭上，对匈奴人说： 这是汉朝神箭，中箭者必出怪事。 
English: Geng Gong smeared poison on the arrow and said to the Hun, "This is the sacred arrow of the Han Dynasty. Strange things will happen to those who are hit by the arrow."

古文：虏中矢者，视创皆沸，大惊，会天暴风雨，随雨击之，杀伤甚众；匈奴震怖，相谓曰： 汉兵神，真可畏也！ 
现代文：中箭的匈奴人一看伤口，全都烫如沸水，大为惊慌。当时正好出现了狂风暴雨，汉军乘雨出击，杀伤众多。匈奴人十分震恐，互相说道： 汉军有神力，真可怕啊！ 
English: The Huns, who were in the middle of the arrows, panicked at the sight of the wounds, which were all as hot as boiling water. At that time, there was a violent storm, and the Chinese army attacked in the rain, killing and wounding many. The Huns were very shocked and said to each other: The Chinese army has divine power, it's terrible!

古文：遂解去。
现代文：于是解围撤退。
English: As a result, the siege was lifted and they retreated.

古文：夏，六月，己未，有星孛于太微。
现代文：夏季，六月己未，太微星处出现异星。
English: In the summer, before June is over, a strange star appears in the sky.

古文：耿恭以疏勒城傍有涧水可固，引兵据之。
现代文：耿恭因疏勒城边有溪流可以固守，便率军占据该城。
English: Geng Gong led his army to occupy the city because there was a stream on the edge of Shule that he could hold on to.

古文：秋，七月，匈奴复来攻，拥绝涧水；恭于城中穿井十五丈，不得水，吏士渴乏，至笮马粪汁而饮之。
现代文：秋季，七月，匈奴再次前来进攻，堵绝了溪流。耿恭在城中掘井十五丈，仍不出水。官兵焦渴困乏，甚至挤榨马粪汁来饮用。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Xiongnu came to attack again and cut off the stream. Geng Gong dug a 15-meter well in the city, but there was still no water. The officers and soldiers were so thirsty and exhausted that they even squeezed horse dung juice to drink.

古文：恭身自率士挽笼，有顷，水泉奔出，众皆称万岁。
现代文：耿恭亲自带领士兵挖井运土，不久，泉水涌出，众人齐呼万岁。
English: Geng Gong personally led the soldiers to dig a well and carry away the soil. Soon, the spring water gushed out, and everyone shouted "Long live!"

古文：乃令吏士扬水以示虏，虏出不意，以为神明，遂引去。
现代文：耿恭便命官兵在城上泼水给匈奴人看。匈奴人感到意外，以为有神明在帮助汉军，便撤走了。
English: Geng Kung then ordered the officers and soldiers to splash water on the castle to show the Huns. The Huns were taken by surprise, thinking that there were gods helping the Han army, and they withdrew.

古文：八月，壬子，帝崩于东宫前殿，年四十八。
现代文：八月壬子，明帝在东宫前殿驾崩，年四十八岁。
English: Emperor Ming died in front of the East Palace in August, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：遗诏： 无起寝庙，藏主于光烈皇后更衣别室。 
现代文：遣诏说： 不要为我兴建寝殿祭庙，可将牌位放在阴太后陵寝的便殿中。 
English: The envoy said, "Don't build a mausoleum for me, but place the plaque in the latrine where the Empress Dowager lay."

古文：帝遵奉建武制度，无所变更，后妃之家不得封侯与政。
现代文：明帝遵守奉行光武帝创建的制度，无所改变更动。皇后妃子之家都不得封侯参政。
English: Emperor Ming adhered to the system established by Emperor Guangwu and did not make any changes. Empress Dowager's family members were not allowed to participate in politics.

古文：馆陶公主为子求郎，不许，而赐钱千万，谓群臣曰： 郎官上应列宿，出宰百里，苟非其人，则民受其殃，是以难之。 
现代文：馆陶公主曾为儿子请求郎官之职，明帝不许，只赏了一千万钱。他对群臣说： 郎官与天上的星宿相应，派到地方是一县之长，如果任人不当，那么人民将受其害，所以我拒绝这一请求。 
English: Princess Guantao once asked for the position of vassal for her son, but Emperor Ming did not allow it, and only offered ten million yuan. He said to the ministers: The vassal corresponds to the stars in the sky, and is sent to the region by the head of a county. If the appointment is improper, then the people will be harmed, so I refuse this request.

古文：公车以反支日不受章奏，帝闻而怪曰： 民废农桑，远来诣阙，而复拘以禁忌，岂为政之意乎！ 
现代文：掌管皇宫大门的官署公车，每逢 反支日 都不接受奏章。明帝听到这一情况后责怪道： 人民丢掉自己的农耕桑蚕之业，远行到宫门拜谒投诉，却又受到这种禁忌的限制，这难道是为政的本意吗！ 
English: When Emperor Ming heard of this situation, he reproached: The people have thrown away their farming of mulberry silkworms and travel far and wide to the palace gates to worship and complain, yet they are restricted by this taboo. Is this the intention of politics?

古文：于是遂蠲其制。
现代文：于是取消了这项制度。
English: Therefore, this unreasonable system was abolished.

古文：尚书阎章二妹为贵人，章精力晓旧典，久次当迁重职，帝为后宫亲属，竟不用。
现代文：尚书阎章有两个妹妹是贵人，他本人研究并且精通过去的典章和制度，早就应当提升要职，但明帝因他是后宫妃子的亲属，竟不擢用。
English: Shangshu Yanzhang's two younger sisters were noblewomen. He should have been promoted to a high-ranking position long ago, since he had studied and mastered the rules and regulations. However, Emperor Ming did not promote him because he was a relative of a concubine of the imperial court.

古文：是以吏得其人，民乐其业，远近畏服，户口滋殖焉。
现代文：由于明帝施政得当，所以官吏称职胜任，人民安居乐业，远近蛮夷敬畏臣服，国家户口繁衍增殖。
English: Due to the Ming Dynasty's proper governance, the officials were competent, the people lived in peace and contentment, the barbarians were feared and obeyed far and near, and the national hukou proliferated.

古文：太子即位，年十八。
现代文：太子即帝位，年十八岁。
English: The crown prince, or emperor, is 18 years old.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：将马皇后尊称为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：明帝初崩，马氏兄弟争欲入宫。
现代文：明帝刚驾崩时，马皇后家的兄弟争着要进宫。
English: When Emperor Ming died, the brothers of Queen Ma's family fought to enter the palace.

古文：北宫卫士令杨仁被甲持戟，严勒门卫，人莫敢轻进者。
现代文：北宫卫士令杨仁身穿甲胄，手持长戟，严密部署卫士在宫门把守，没有人敢随便入内。
English: The guards of the Northern Palace ordered Yang Ren to wear armor and hold a long scepter. The guards were strictly deployed to guard the palace gate, and no one dared to enter the palace.

古文：诸马乃共谮仁于章帝，言其峻刻。
现代文：马氏兄弟便一同向章帝诬告杨仁，说他苛刻。
English: The Ma brothers together falsely accused Yang Ren to Emperor Zhang, saying that he was harsh.

古文：帝知其忠，愈善之，拜为什邡令。
现代文：章帝知道杨仁的忠诚，愈发厚待他，将他任命为什邡县令。
English: Emperor Zhang, knowing Yang Ren's loyalty, treated him more and more generously and appointed him as the governor of Shifang County.

古文：壬戌，葬孝明皇帝于显节陵。
现代文：八月壬戌，将明帝安葬在显节陵。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Xiaoming was buried in the Tomb of Emperor Xian Jie.

古文：冬，十月，丁未，赦天下。
现代文：冬季，十月丁未，大赦天下。
English: In winter, in October, on the eve of the New Year, there is a general amnesty.

古文：诏以行太尉事节乡侯熹为太傅，司空融为太尉，并录尚书事。
现代文：章帝下诏，将代理太尉职务的节乡侯赵熹任命为太傅，将司空牟融任命为太尉，一同主管尚书事务。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict, appointing Jiexiang Hou Zhao Wei, acting as captain, as taifu, and Siku Murong as taifu, both of whom will be in charge of Shangshu affairs.

古文：十一月，戊戌，以蜀郡太守第五伦为司空。
现代文：十一月戊戌，将蜀郡太守第五伦任命为司空。
English: In November, Emperor Wu of Wu appointed the 5th governor of Shu County, Wu Lun, as his deputy.

古文：伦在郡公清，所举吏多得其人，故帝自远郡用之。
现代文：第五伦在蜀郡时，为官公正清廉，所举荐的官吏多能称职胜任，所以章帝将他从边远之郡调到朝廷任用。
English: When Vairocana was in Shu County, he was a fair and honest official, and most of the recommended officials were competent, so Emperor Zhang transferred him from a remote county to the imperial court.

古文：焉耆、龟兹攻没都护陈睦，北匈奴围关宠于柳中城。
现代文：焉耆和龟兹两国进攻西域都护陈睦，陈睦全军覆没。北匈奴的军队则在柳中城包围了己校尉关宠。
English: Yan Xun and Qiu Zi attacked the western capital to protect Chen Muc, and Chen Muc's entire army was wiped out. The Northern Xiongnu's army encircled their own captain Guan Muc in Liuzhong.

古文：会中国有大丧，救兵不至，车师复叛，与匈奴共攻耿恭。
现代文：当时明帝驾崩，汉朝出了大丧事，没有派出救兵。于是车师再度反叛，同匈奴一道进攻耿恭。
English: At that time, the Ming Emperor had passed away, the Han Dynasty had a great funeral, and no rescue troops were sent. Therefore, the coachman rebelled again and attacked Genghis Khan together with the Xiongnu.

古文：恭率厉士众御之，数月，食尽穷困，乃煮铠弩，食其筋革。
现代文：耿恭率领勉励官兵进行抵抗。几个月后，汉军粮食耗尽，便用水煮铠甲弓弩，吃上面的兽筋皮革。
English: A few months later, when the Chinese army ran out of food, they boiled the armor with water and ate the sinew leather.

古文：恭与士卒推诚同死生。
现代文：耿恭和士卒推诚相见，同生共死，所以众人全无二心。
English: Geng Qiong and Shizhu Shuzhen see each other, live and die together, so everyone has no second thoughts.

古文：故皆无二心，而稍稍死亡。
现代文：但死者日渐增多，只剩下了数十人。
English: But the number of dead is increasing day by day, and only a few dozen people remain.

古文：馀数十人。单于知恭已困，欲必降之，遣使招恭曰： 若降者，当封为白屋王。妻以女子。 
现代文：北匈奴单于知道耿恭已身陷绝境，定要让他投降，便派使者去招抚道： 你如果投降，单于就封你做白屋王，给你女子为妻。 
English: The Northern Huns knew that Geng Gong was in a desperate situation and wanted him to surrender, so they sent an envoy to entice him, saying, "If you surrender, I will make you the king of Baiya and give you a woman as a wife."

古文：恭诱其使上城，手击杀之，炙诸城上。
现代文：耿恭引诱使者登城，亲手将他杀死，在城头用火炙烤。
English: Geng Gong lured the envoy to the city, killed him with his own hands, and roasted him over a fire at the city gate.

古文：单于大怒，更益兵围恭，不能下。
现代文：单于大为愤怒，更增派援兵围困耿恭，但仍不能破城。
English: In addition to being very angry, he even sent reinforcements to besiege Geng Gong, but they still could not break through the city.

古文：关宠上书求救。
现代文：关宠上书请求救兵，章帝下诏，命令公卿会商。
English: Guan Zhao wrote a letter requesting rescue, Emperor Zhang issued an edict, and ordered the court nobles to hold a conference.

古文：诏公卿会议，司空伦以为不宜救，司徒鲍昱曰： 今使人于危难之地，急而弃之，外则纵蛮夷之暴，内则伤死难之臣，诚令权时，后无边事可也。匈奴如复犯塞为寇，陛下将何以使将！
现代文：司空第五伦认为不宜援救。司徒鲍昱说： 如今派人前往危险艰难之地，发生了紧急情况，便将他们抛弃，这种作法是对外纵容蛮夷的暴行，对内伤害效死的忠臣。果真要衡量时势而采取权宜之计，以后边界太平无事则可，若是匈奴再度侵犯边塞作乱，陛下将如何使用将领！
English: Siku Vairocana did not think it was appropriate to rescue. Szeto Pao said: Today, he sent people to a dangerous and difficult place, an emergency occurred, and he abandoned them. This practice is condoning barbaric violence to the outside, and hurting loyalists to death to the inside. If you really want to measure the situation and take a stopgap measure, then the border will be peaceful, but if the Xiongnu invade the border fortress again and cause trouble, how will your majesty use generals!

古文：又二部兵人裁各数十，匈奴围之，历旬不下，是其寡弱力尽之效也。
现代文：此外，耿恭、关宠两校尉仅各有数十人，而匈奴围攻他们，历久不能攻克，这是匈奴兵弱力竭的证明。
English: In addition, the two captains, Geng Gong and Guan Zhao, only had dozens of men each, and the Huns besieged them and could not conquer them for a long time, which was proof of the Huns' exhaustion.

古文：可令敦煌、酒泉太守各将精骑二千，多其幡帜，倍道兼行以赴其急；匈奴疲极之兵，必不敢当，四十日间足还入塞。 
现代文：我建议，可命令敦煌、酒泉两郡太守各率领精锐骑兵二千人，多带旗帜，以加倍的速度日夜兼行，去解救急难。北匈奴的军队疲惫已极，一定不敢抵挡。在四十天之内，足以返回塞内。 
English: I suggest that the governors of the two counties of Dunhuang and Jiuquan be ordered to lead 2,000 elite cavalrymen each, with more flags, to double the speed of day and night to solve the emergency. The army of the Northern Xiongnu is extremely tired and will not dare to resist. Within forty days, it is enough to return to Senai.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：章帝表示同意。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：乃遣征西将军耿秉屯酒泉，行太守事，遣酒泉太守段彭与谒者王蒙、皇甫援发张掖、酒泉、敦煌三郡及善阝善兵合七千馀人以救之。
现代文：于是派征西将军耿秉屯驻酒泉郡，代理太守职务；派酒泉太守段彭与谒者王蒙、皇甫援征发张掖、酒泉、敦煌三郡郡兵及鄯善的军队，共七千余人，前往救援。
English: Therefore, he sent Geng Bing, the general of the Western Expedition, to Jiuquan County to act as the acting governor. He sent Jiuquan Governor Duan Peng, together with Wang Mengrui and Wang Fu, as well as the troops of Zhang Xuan, Jiuquan, Dunhuang and other counties, a total of more than seven thousand people, to the rescue.

古文：甲辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月甲辰晦，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：太后兄弟虎贲中郎廖及黄门郎防、光，终明帝世未尝改官。
现代文：马太后的兄弟、虎贲中郎将马廖和黄门郎马防、马光三人，在明帝当政时一直没有升迁。
English: The three brothers of the Empress Dowager Matai, the middle brother of Tigress, the general Maliao, the yellow gatekeeper Ma Bo, and Ma Guang, were never promoted when the Ming Dynasty was in power.

古文：帝以廖为卫尉，防为中郎将，光为越骑校尉。
现代文：章帝将马廖任命为卫尉，马防任命为中郎将，马光任命为越骑校尉。
English: Emperor Zhang appointed Ma Liao as a guard lieutenant, Ma Bao as a middle officer, and Ma Guang as a cavalry lieutenant.

古文：廖等倾身交结，冠盖之士争赴趣之。
现代文：马廖等人热衷于结交宾朋，官吏士人争相趋附马家。
English: Maliau and others put aside their identities to make friends, and some leading figures vie to attach themselves to them.

古文：第五伦上疏曰： 臣闻《书》曰： 臣无作威作福，其害于而家，凶于而国。 
现代文：第五伦上书说： 我听说《尚书》中写道： 臣子不得作威作福，否则加祸于家，危害于国。 
English: The fifth letter said, "I have heard that it is written in the Shangshu, "A courtier must not be arrogant, otherwise it will bring misfortune to his family and harm to the country."

古文：近世光烈皇后虽友爱天至，而抑损阴氏，不假以权势。
现代文：近代光烈阴皇后虽然天性友爱，却压抑约束阴家之人，不为他们求官求权。
English: In modern times, the queen of light and darkness, although she is naturally friendly, suppresses and restricts the people of the yin family, and does not seek office or power for them.

古文：其后梁、窦之家，互有非法，明帝即位，竟多诛之。
现代文：后来的梁家、窦家，都有人犯法，明帝即位以后，竟多加诛杀。
English: Later, the Liang family and the Dou family all broke the law, and after the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, there were even more murders.

古文：自是雒中无复权戚，书记请托，一皆断绝。
现代文：从此洛阳城中不再有专权的外戚，写信请托之事，一概消除。
English: From now on, there will no longer be any relatives in Luoyang City with absolute power, and all requests for letters of entrustment will be eliminated.

古文：又谕诸外戚曰： 苦身待士，不如为国。
现代文：明帝还告诫外戚说： 辛苦结交士子，不如全心报效国家。
English: Emperor Ming also admonished his relatives, saying, "It is better to work hard to make friends with scholars than to serve the country wholeheartedly."

古文：戴盆望天，事不两施。 
现代文：戴盆而望天，两事不能全。 
English: Wearing a pot and looking up at the sky are two different things.

古文：今之议者，复以马氏为言。
现代文：如今人们的议论，又集中在马家。
English: Nowadays, people's discussions are again concentrated in the horse family.

古文：窃闻卫尉廖以布三千匹，城门校尉防以钱三百万，私赡三辅衣冠，知与不知，莫不毕给。
现代文：我听说卫尉马廖用三千匹布，城门校尉马防用三百万钱，私下供给长安一带的士人，无论认识与否，无不给予馈赠。
English: Privately, I heard that the guard lieutenant Ma Liao used three thousand cloth horses, and the city gate captain Ma Bo used three million money to privately supply officials near the Beijing Division. Regardless of who knows or does not know, there is no one who does not give.

古文：又联腊日亦遗其在雒中者钱各五千。
现代文：还听说在腊祭之日，又送给洛阳地区的士人每人五千钱。
English: I also heard that on the day of the wax festival, five thousand yuan per person was given to the scholars in the Luoyang area.

古文：越骑校尉光，腊用羊三百头，米四百斛，肉五千斤。
现代文：越骑校尉马光，曾在腊祭时用掉羊三百头，米四百斛，肉五千斤。
English: Ma Guang, a Vietcong cavalry lieutenant, once used three hundred sheep, four hundred bushels of rice, and five thousand catties of meat at a wax festival.

古文：臣愚以为不应经义。惶恐，不敢不以闻。
现代文：我认为这些行为与儒家经典大义不合，心中惶恐不安，不敢不让陛下知晓。
English: I believe that these actions are inconsistent with the Confucian classics, and I am afraid to let His Majesty know.

古文：陛下情欲厚之，亦宜所以安之。
现代文：陛下的本意是要厚待他们，但也应使他们平安。
English: If His Majesty wants to be kind to them out of his personal feelings, he should also try to keep them in their positions.

古文：臣今言此，诚欲上忠陛下，下全后家也。 
现代文：我今天说这番话，确实是盼望上能效忠陛下，下能保全太后一家。 
English: I am saying this today because I truly hope to be able to be loyal to His Majesty on the one hand, and to be able to protect the Empress Dowager's family on the other.

古文：是岁，京师及兗、豫、徐州大旱。
现代文：本年，京城及兖州、豫州、徐州出现大旱。
English: This year, Beijing and Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, and Xuzhou experienced a severe drought.

