古文：孟子曰： 五霸者，三王之罪人也；今之诸侯，五霸之罪人也；今之大夫，今之诸侯之罪人也。
现代文：孟子说： 所谓的五霸，是三个圣王的罪人。现在的诸侯，亦是五霸的罪人。现在的大夫，是现在诸侯的罪人。
English: Mencius said: The so-called five overlords are the sinners of the three holy kings. The present princes are also the sinners of the five overlords. The present doctors are the sinners of the present princes.

古文：天子适诸侯曰巡狩，诸侯朝于天子曰述职。
现代文：天子出来到各诸侯国，称为巡狩。诸侯去朝见天子，称为述职。
English: When the Son of Heaven went out to the various provinces, it was called the inspection tour. When the provinces went to see the Son of Heaven, it was called the duty-reporting tour.

古文：春省耕而补不足，秋省敛而助不给。
现代文：春天视察春耕补助困难的人，秋季视察收藏情况而帮助不够的人。
English: In the spring, inspect those who have difficulties in spring farming subsidies, and in the autumn, inspect the collection situation and help those who are not enough.

古文：入其疆，土地辟，田野治，养老尊贤，俊杰在位，则有庆，庆以地。
现代文：进入到诸侯封地，如果土地开垦，农事井井有条，老人得到赡养，贤人受到尊敬，杰出人才任官职，就有奖赏；赏给土地。
English: Entering the fiefdoms of the lords, if the land is reclaimed, the farming is well organized, the elderly are supported, the wise are respected, and outstanding talents hold official positions, there is a reward; reward the land.

古文：入其疆，土地荒芜，遗老失贤，掊克在位，则有让。
现代文：进入某诸侯的疆界，如果土地荒芜，老人被遗弃，贤人散在野，搜刮民财者任官职，就给予责罚。
English: Entering the boundaries of a certain vassal, if the land is barren, the elderly are abandoned, the wise are scattered in the field, and those who scrounge people's wealth hold official positions, they will be punished.

古文：一不朝，则贬其爵；再不朝，则削其地；三不朝，则六师移之。
现代文：一次不朝觐，就贬损其爵位，两次不朝觐就削减其土地，三次不朝觐就派六师的兵力去征讨他。
English: If he did not perform the Hajj once, his title would be diminished, if he did not perform the Hajj twice, his land would be reduced, and if he did not perform the Hajj three times, six divisions of soldiers would be sent to conquer him.

古文：是故天子讨而不伐，诸侯伐而不讨。
现代文：所以天子只声讨而不亲自征伐，诸侯只奉命征伐而不声讨。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven only spoke out and did not personally conquer, and the princes were only ordered to conquer and did not speak out.

古文：五霸者，搂诸侯以伐诸侯者也，故曰：五霸者，三王之罪人也。
现代文：所谓的五霸，是拉拢一部分诸侯去征伐另一部分诸侯。所以说，五霸者，是三个圣王的罪人。
English: The so-called Five Overlords coaxed some lords to conquer other lords. Therefore, the Five Overlords are the sinners of the three holy kings.

古文：五霸，桓公为盛。葵丘之会诸侯，束牲、载书而不歃血。
现代文：五霸中齐桓公最势力最大，在葵丘盟会诸侯，捆束牲畜，文字为盟书而不用牲畜血。
English: Among the five great warlords, Lord Qi Huan was the most powerful. In the Kwai Chung League of Princes, he tied up livestock and wrote a letter of alliance without using the blood of livestock.

古文：初命曰： 诛不孝，无易树子，无以妾为妻。 
现代文：第一次盟会，就共同宣称： 诛杀不孝，不轻易改变太子，不以妾为正妻。 
English: At the first alliance meeting, they jointly declared: "Do not kill, do not be filial, do not easily change the prince, and do not take a concubine as a lawful wife."

古文：再命曰： 尊贤育才，以彰有德。 
现代文：第二次盟会就共同宣称： 尊敬贤能，培育贤才，表彰有道德的人。 
English: For the second alliance, they jointly declared: to respect talent, nurture talent, and commend people with ethics.

古文：三命曰： 敬老慈幼，无忘宾旅。 
现代文：第三次盟会就共同宣称： 尊敬老人，慈爱儿童，不轻慢宾客旅人。 
English: The third alliance will jointly declare: Respect the elderly, love children, and do not despise guests and travelers.

古文：四命曰： 士无世官，官事无摄，取士必得，无专杀大夫。 
现代文：第四次盟会就共同宣称： 读书人的官职不世袭，公职不兼摄，选拔读书人要合格，不要专横杀戳大夫官员。 
English: The fourth meeting of the alliance jointly declared: the official post of the reader is not hereditary, the public post is not concurrent, the selection of the reader must be qualified, and do not arbitrarily kill the doctor official.

古文：五命曰： 无曲防，无遏籴，无有封而不告。 
现代文：第五次盟会就共同宣称： 不随意修筑堤防，不制止互购粮食，不能有封爵而不报告。 
English: At the fifth meeting of the alliance, they jointly declared: do not arbitrarily build dykes, do not stop the mutual purchase of grain, and cannot have a knighthood without reporting it.

古文：曰： 凡我同盟之人，既盟之后，言归于好。 
现代文：还宣誓： 凡是一起参加盟誓的，既然签了盟约之后，恢复平常的和平友好。 
English: They also swore: All those who have taken the oath together, since they have signed the covenant, will resume normal peace and friendship.

古文：今之诸侯，皆犯此五禁，故曰：今之诸侯，五霸之罪人也。
现代文：如今的诸侯都违反了这五条盟誓。所以说，如今的诸侯，都是五霸的罪人。
English: Today's lords have all violated these five oaths. Therefore, today's lords are all sinners of the Five Bulls.

古文：长君之恶其罪小，逢君之恶其罪大。
现代文：助长国君的恶行，其罪还小；迎合国君的恶行，罪就大了。
English: It is a minor sin to encourage the evil deeds of the sovereign; it is a major sin to pander to the evil deeds of the sovereign.

古文：今之大夫，皆逢君之恶，故曰：今之大夫，今之诸侯之罪人也。 
现代文：如今的大夫，都是在迎合国君的恶行，所以说，如今的大夫，都是如今诸侯的罪人。 
English: Today's doctors are all pandering to the evil deeds of the sovereign, so today's doctors are the sinners of today's princes.

