古文：十有七年春，晋人、卫人、陈人、郑人伐宋。
现代文：十七年春季，晋国、卫国、陈国、郑国一起攻打宋国。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Jin, Wei, Chen and Zheng attacked Song together.

古文：夏四月癸亥，葬我小君声姜。
现代文：夏季四月癸亥日，安葬声姜。
English: In summer, on April Fool's Day, the sound of ginger being buried is heard.

古文：齐侯伐我西鄙。
现代文：齐侯攻打我国西面边境。
English: Qi Hou attacked the western border of our country.

古文：六月癸未，公及齐侯盟于穀。
现代文：六月癸未日，鲁文公与齐侯在穀地结盟。
English: On the last day of June, Lu Wen Gong and Qi Hou formed an alliance in the valley.

古文：诸侯会于扈。
现代文：各诸侯在扈地会见。
English: All the lords meet at Shunde.

古文：秋，公至自穀。
现代文：秋季，文公从穀地回到鲁国。
English: In autumn, Wengong returned to Lu from the grain fields.

古文：冬，公子遂如齐。
现代文：冬季，公子遂到齐国。
English: In winter, he finally arrived in Qi Province.

古文：十七年春，晋荀林父、卫孔达、陈公孙宁、郑石楚伐宋。讨曰： 何故弑君！ 
现代文：十七年春季，晋国荀林父、卫国孔达、陈国公孙宁、郑国石楚联军攻打宋国，质问说： 为什么杀死你们国君？ 
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the combined armies of the father of Jin, Yulin, the father of Wei, Kunda, Chen, Sunning, and Zheng attacked Song and asked: Why did you kill your king?

古文：犹立文公而还，卿不书，失其所也。
现代文：还是立了宋文公而回国。《春秋》没有记载卿的姓名，这是由于他们改变初衷。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the names of the nobles, because they changed their original intention.

古文：夏四月癸亥，葬声姜。
现代文：夏季，四月初四日，安葬声姜。
English: In the summer, on the fourth day of the fourth month of April, the funeral was held.

古文：有齐难，是以缓。
现代文：由于有齐国攻战造成的困难，因此推迟。
English: Due to the difficulties caused by the attack of Qi, it was postponed.

古文：齐侯伐我北鄙。襄仲请盟。
现代文：齐懿公攻打我国北部边境，襄仲请求结盟。
English: Qi Gong attacked the northern border of our country, and Xiang Zhong requested an alliance.

古文：六月，盟于穀。
现代文：六月，在穀地结盟。
English: In June, they formed an alliance in the grainfields.

古文：晋侯蒐于黄父，遂复合诸侯于扈，平宋也。
现代文：晋灵公在黄父阅兵，就因此再次在扈地会合诸侯，这是为了和宋国讲和。
English: Jin Linggong held a military parade in Huangpu, so the princes met again in Handan, in order to make peace with Song.

古文：公不与会，齐难故也。
现代文：鲁文公没有参加会合，这是由于发生了齐国征战造成的困难的缘故。
English: Lu Wen Gong did not attend the meeting, which was due to the difficulties caused by the war in Qi.

古文：书曰 诸侯 ，无功也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 诸侯 而不记名字，这是讥讽他们并没有取得成效。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that the princes did not remember their names, which is a mockery of them and did not achieve results.

古文：于是，晋侯不见郑伯，以为贰于楚也。
现代文：当时，晋灵公拒绝会见郑穆公，以为他背晋而亲楚。
English: At that time, Jin Linggong refused to meet with Zheng Mugong, thinking that he was a traitor.

古文：郑子家使执讯而与之书，以告赵宣子，曰： 寡君即位三年，召蔡侯而与之事君。
现代文：郑国的子家派通信使者去晋国，并且给他一封信，告诉赵宣子，说：我郑国国君即位三年，召了蔡侯和他一起事奉贵国君主。
English: Zheng Guo's son's family sent a messenger to Jin and gave him a letter, telling Zhao Xuanzi: "I, Zheng Guo Guo, who has been on the throne for three years, have called Cai Hou to serve the monarch of your country with him.

古文：九月，蔡侯入于敝邑以行。
现代文：九月，蔡侯来到敝邑前去贵国。
English: In September, Cai Hou came to Handan to visit your country.

古文：敝邑以侯宣多之难，寡君是以不得与蔡侯偕。
现代文：敝邑由于侯宣多造成的祸难，我君因此而不能和蔡侯一同前来。
English: Due to the calamity caused by Hou Xuanduo in Handan, I could not come with Cai Hou.

古文：十一月，克减侯宣多而随蔡侯以朝于执事。
现代文：十一月，消灭了侯宣多，就随同蔡侯而向执事朝觐。
English: In November, after eliminating Hou Xuanduo, he and Cai Hou made a pilgrimage to the deacon.

古文：十二年六月，归生佐寡君之嫡夷，以请陈侯于楚而朝诸君。
现代文：十二年六月，归生辅佐我君的长子夷，到楚国请求陈侯一同朝见贵国君主。
English: In June of the twelfth year, the eldest son, Yi, who was born to assist my lord, went to Chu to ask Chen Hou to meet the monarch of your country.

古文：十四年七月，寡君又朝，以蒇陈事。
现代文：十四年七月，我君又向贵国君主朝见，以完成关于陈国的事情。
English: In July of the fourteenth year, I went to see your sovereign again in order to complete the matter concerning Chen Guo.

古文：十五年五月，陈侯自敝邑往朝于君。
现代文：十五年五月，陈侯从我国前去朝见贵国君主。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, Chen Hou went from our country to the court to meet the monarch of your country.

古文：往年正月，烛之武往朝夷也。
现代文：去年正月，烛之武前去贵国，这是为了使夷前往朝见贵国君主。
English: In the first month of last year, Candlemas went to your country, in order to bring the Emperor to meet your monarch.

古文：八月，寡君又往朝。
现代文：八月，我君又前去朝见。
English: In August, I went to see him again in the morning.

古文：以陈、蔡之密迩于楚而不敢贰焉，则敝邑之故也。
现代文：因陈、蔡两国紧紧挨着楚国而不敢对晋有二心，那是由于我们的缘故。
English: Because Chen and Cai's two countries are close to Chu, they dare not be ambivalent about Jin. That is because of us.

古文：虽敝邑之事君，何以不免？
现代文：为什么唯独我们这样事奉贵国君主，反而不能免于祸患呢？
English: Why is it that we alone, who thus serve your sovereign, are not spared the calamity?

古文：在位之中，一朝于襄，而再见于君。
现代文：我郑君在位期间，一次朝见贵国先君襄公，两次朝见现在的君主。
English: During my Zhengjun's reign, I once met with your country's first monarch, Prince Xiang, and twice met with the current monarch.

古文：夷与孤之二三臣相及于绛，虽我小国，则蔑以过之矣。
现代文：夷和我的几个臣下紧接着到绛城来。我郑国虽然是个小国，却没有谁能比我国对贵国更有诚意了。
English: He and several of my vassals immediately came to Lushan. Although my country, Zheng, is a small country, there is no one who can be more sincere than our country to your country.

古文：今大国曰： 尔未逞吾志。 
现代文：如今大国说： 你没有能让我称心如意。 
English: Now the great powers are saying: You have not been able to satisfy me.

古文：敝邑有亡，无以加焉。
现代文：敝邑只有等待灭亡，也不能再增加一点什么了。
English: The county can only wait for its demise, and cannot add anything to it.

古文：古人有言曰： 畏首畏尾，身其馀几。 
现代文：古人有话说： 怕头怕尾，剩下来的身子还有多少？ 
English: The ancients had a saying: Be afraid of the head, be afraid of the tail, how much of the body is left?

古文：又曰： 鹿死不择音。 
现代文：又说： 鹿在临死前，顾不上选择庇护的地方。 
English: He added: "It is not a deer's place of choice to seek shelter before it dies.

古文：小国之事大国也，德则其人也,不德则其鹿也，铤而走险，急何能择。
现代文：小国事奉大国，如果大国以德相待，小国就会以人道相事奉；如果不是以德相待，那就会像鹿一样，狂奔走险，急迫的时候，哪里还能选择地方？
English: Small countries serve big countries. If big countries treat each other with virtue, small countries will serve each other with humanity. If they do not treat each other with virtue, they will be like deer, running wildly and dangerously. When it is urgent, where can you choose a place?

古文：命之罔极，亦知亡矣。将悉敝赋以待于鯈，唯执事命之。
现代文：贵国的命令没有止境，我们也知道面临灭亡了，只好准备派出敝邑全部的士兵在鯈地等待。该怎么办，就听凭您的命令吧！
English: Your orders are limitless, and we know that we are facing destruction, so we have no choice but to prepare to send all of the soldiers in Handan to wait in Handan. What should we do, let's follow your orders!

古文：文公二年六月壬申，朝于齐。
现代文：我郑文公二年六月二十日，曾到齐国朝见。
English: On June 20th, the second year of the reign of King Zhengwen, I went to meet the Qin Dynasty.

古文：四年二月壬戌，为齐侵蔡，亦获成于楚。
现代文：四年二月某一天，为齐国进攻蔡国，也和楚国取得讲和。
English: On a certain day in February of the fourth year, Zhai attacked Cai for Qi, and also made peace with Chu.

古文：居大国之间而从于强令，岂其罪也。
现代文：处于齐、楚两个大国之间而屈从于强国的命令，这难道是我们的罪过吗？
English: Is it our fault that we are caught between the two great powers and have to bow to the orders of the stronger one?

古文：大国若弗图，无所逃命。 
现代文：大国如果不加谅解，我们是没有地方可以逃避你们的命令了。
English: If the great powers do not show understanding, there will be no place for us to escape your orders.

古文：晋巩朔行成于郑，赵穿、公婿池为质焉。
现代文：晋国的巩朔到郑国讲和修好，赵穿，公婿池作为人质。
English: Gongshuo of Jin went to Zheng to talk peace and make amends. Zhao was put to death, and his son-in-law, Chi, was taken hostage.

古文：秋，周甘歜败戎于邥垂，乘其饮酒也。
现代文：秋季，周朝的甘歜在邥垂打败戎人，一战取胜是由于趁着戎人正在喝酒而用兵。
English: In the autumn, the Zhou Dynasty's Ganlu defeated the Eunuchs in Shidare. The victory in the first battle was due to the fact that the Eunuchs were drinking and taking advantage of the soldiers.

古文：冬十月，郑大子夷、石楚为质于晋。
现代文：冬季，十一月，郑国的太子夷、大夫石楚到晋国作为人质。
English: In winter, in November, Zheng's Prince Yi and Doctor Shichu went to Jin as hostages.

古文：襄仲如齐，拜穀之盟。
现代文：襄仲到齐国去，拜谢穀地的结盟。
English: Xiangzhong went to Qi Province to pay tribute to the alliance of the valleys.

古文：复曰： 臣闻齐人将食鲁之麦。
现代文：回来说： 下臣听说齐国人将要吃鲁国的麦子。
English: He came back saying: My vassal has heard that the people of Qi will eat the wheat of Lu.

古文：以臣观之，将不能。
现代文：据下臣看来，恐怕做不到。
English: According to the vassal, I'm afraid it can't be done.

古文：齐君之语偷。
现代文：齐国国君的话极不严肃。
English: Qi Guoqun's words were not serious at all.

古文：臧文仲有言曰： 民主偷必死。  
现代文：臧文仲曾说过： 百姓的主人说话不严肃，必然很快就会死。  
English: Zou Wenzhong once said: If the master of the people does not speak seriously, he is sure to die soon.

