古文：华严和尚唐休璟门僧仪光禅师玄览法将
现代文：华严和尚唐休璟门僧仪光禅师玄览法将
English: Huayan Monk, Tang Xiuyuan Monk, Yi Guang Zen Master, Xuanshan Master

古文：华严和尚
现代文：华严和尚
English: Hua Yan Monk

古文：华严和尚学于神秀。
现代文：华严和尚就学于神秀。
English: Hua Yan Monk studied under Shen Xiu.

古文：禅宗谓之北祖，常在洛都天宫寺，弟子三百余人。
现代文：禅宗称神秀为北派的创始人，他常常住在洛阳天宫寺，有弟子三百余人。
English: The Zen sect calls Shinshu the founder of the Northern School. He often lived in Luoyang's Tiangong Temple and had more than three hundred disciples.

古文：每日堂食，和尚严整，瓶钵必须齐集。
现代文：每天在食堂集体开饭时，和尚总是非常严整，瓶与钵齐备。
English: Every day, when the collective meal is served in the canteen, the monk is always very neat, with bottles and bowls at the ready.

古文：有弟子，夏腊道业，高出流辈，而性颇褊躁。
现代文：有个弟子，道业高于同辈，而性情偏狭急躁。
English: There was a disciple whose virtue was higher than that of his peers, but whose disposition was narrow and impatient.

古文：时因卧疾，不随众赴会。
现代文：当时因为有病卧在床上，所以不能与大家一起聚会。
English: At that time, I couldn't gather with everyone because I was sick in bed.

古文：一沙弥瓶钵未足，来诣此僧，顶礼云： 欲上堂，无钵如何？暂借，明日当自置之。 
现代文：一个沙弥的瓶钵不全，来到此僧跟前，顶礼道： 我没有钵，如何是好，只好向您暂借，明天我就去置办。 
English: A shamisen player came to the monk with an incomplete shakuhachi and said, "I don't have a shakuhachi, so I'll have to borrow one from you. I'll go buy one tomorrow."

古文：僧不与曰： 吾钵已受持数十年，借汝必恐损之。 
现代文：此僧不借给他，说： 我的钵子已经用几十年了，借给你害怕打坏了。 
English: The monk refused to lend it to him, saying, "I've been using my pliers for decades, and I'm afraid they'll break if I lend them to you."

古文：沙弥恳告曰： 上堂食顷而归，岂便毁损。 
现代文：沙弥恳求道： 上饭堂吃饭用不多久就回来，哪能就毁坏了。 
English: Shami pleaded, "I went to the dining hall to eat, but I came back not long after and everything was destroyed.

古文：至于再三，僧乃借之曰： 吾爱钵如命，必若有损，同杀我也。 
现代文：这样恳求了好几遍，此僧便借给了他，但对他说： 我爱钵如命，如若真的有所损坏，就跟杀了我一样啊！ 
English: After several such entreaties, the monk lent him the yakitori, but said to him: "I love the yakitori with all my heart. If it really is damaged, it's the same as killing me!"

古文：沙弥得钵，捧持兢惧。
现代文：沙弥借到了钵子，战战兢兢地捧在手里。
English: The shamisen player borrowed a pair of dice and held them fearfully in his hands.

古文：食毕将归，僧已催之。
现代文：吃完饭正要往回走，那个僧人已经在催促他了。
English: After eating, he was about to walk back, but the monk was already urging him.

古文：沙弥持钵下堂，不意砖破蹴倒，遂碎之。
现代文：沙弥拿着钵子从食堂台阶上往下走，不料被破砖拌倒，钵子便被摔碎了。
English: The shamisen player was walking down the steps of the canteen with the dice in his hand, when he was knocked down by a broken brick, shattering the dice in the process.

古文：少顷，僧又催之。既惧，遂至僧所，作礼承过，且千百拜。
现代文：不一会儿，僧人又催促他，他感到恐惧，便到僧人那里，向他行礼承认罪过，而且千拜万拜。
English: After a while, the monk urged him again, and he felt afraid, so he went to the monk, bowed to him, confessed his sins, and bowed a thousand times.

古文：僧大叫曰： 汝杀我也。 
现代文：僧人大叫道： 你杀了我了！ 
English: The monk shouted: You killed me!

古文：怒骂至甚，因之病亟，一夕而卒。
现代文：接着是大发雷霆地叫骂。因为这件事，他的病情极度恶化，过了一宿就死了。
English: This was followed by a tirade of abuse, as a result of which his condition deteriorated dramatically and he died overnight.

古文：尔后经时，和尚于嵩山岳寺与弟子百余人，方讲华严经，沙弥亦在听会。
现代文：这以后，经过了一段时间，华严和尚在嵩山岳寺给一百多个弟子讲《华严经》，那个沙弥也在听讲。
English: After this, after a period of time, Hua Yan Monk preached the "Hua Yan Sutra" to more than a hundred disciples at Songshan Mountain Temple, and the priest was also listening.

古文：忽闻寺外山谷，若风雨声。和尚遂招此沙弥，令于己背后立。
现代文：忽然听到寺外山谷中传来类似刮风下雨的声音，和尚便召唤这个沙弥，让他站到自己的背后。
English: Suddenly, hearing a sound like wind and rain in the valley outside the temple, the monk summoned the priest and made him stand behind him.

古文：须臾，见一大蛇，长八九丈，大四五围，直入寺来。怒目张口。
现代文：不一会儿，见一条大蛇，八九丈长，四五围粗，直接来到寺里，瞪着愤怒的眼睛，张开血盆大口。
English: After a while, I saw a big snake, eighty-nine feet long, thick all around, coming directly to the temple, staring with angry eyes, and opening its blood-filled mouth.

古文：左右皆欲奔走，和尚戒之不令动。
现代文：周围的人都要逃奔，和尚禁止他们，不许乱动。
English: The people around them all want to run away, but the monk forbids them to move.

古文：蛇渐至讲堂，升阶睥睨，若有所求。和尚以锡杖止之，云： 住。 
现代文：大蛇慢慢爬到讲堂，爬上台阶后左右环顾，好象要寻找什么。和尚用锡杖挡住它，说道： 停下！ 
English: The snake slowly crawled to the lecture hall, climbed the steps and looked around as if searching for something. The monk blocked it with a tin cane and said, "Stop!

古文：蛇欲至坐，俯首闭目。
现代文：蛇正要爬到座位上去，这时便低下头闭上眼睛。
English: The snake was about to climb onto the seat when it lowered its head and closed its eyes.

古文：和尚诫之，以锡杖扣其首曰： 既明所业，今当回向三宝。 
现代文：和尚要训诫它，用锡杖敲着它的头说： 既然明白所业，如今就该回向三宝。 
English: The monk should admonish it, tapping its head with a tin cane and saying, "Now that you understand what you have done, you should return to the Three Jewels."

古文：令诸僧为之齐声念佛，与受三归五戒，此蛇宛转而出。
现代文：他让众僧为它齐声念佛，又给它受了三归五戒，这条蛇便弯弯曲曲地出去了。
English: He asked all the monks to chant the Buddha's name for him in unison, and gave him the five precepts, and the snake slithered out.

古文：时亡僧弟子已有登会者，和尚召谓曰： 此蛇汝之师也。
现代文：当时那位亡僧的弟子也有前来听讲的，和尚召呼到面前，对他说道： 这条蛇就是你师父。
English: At that time, the disciple of the dead monk also came to listen to the lecture. The monk called him to the front and said to him: This snake is your master.

古文：修行累年，合证果之位，为临终之时，惜一钵破，怒此沙弥，遂作一蟒蛇。
现代文：他修行了多年，该当证果的时候了，因为临终的时候痛惜一只钵子坏了，就对这个沙弥大发怒气，于是成了一条蟒蛇。
English: He had practised for many years, and it was time for the test result. On his deathbed, he regretted that one of his dice had broken, and he became very angry with the priest, and became a boa constrictor.

古文：适此来者，欲杀此沙弥。
现代文：到这里来的目的，是想杀死这个沙弥。
English: The purpose of coming here was to kill the priest.

古文：更若杀之，当堕大地狱，无出期也。
现代文：如果真把沙弥杀了，他就该堕入大地狱，永无出来的时候了。
English: If he really killed the priest, he should fall into the great hell and never come out of it.

古文：赖吾止之，与受禁戒，今当舍此身矣，汝往寻之。 
现代文：亏我制止了，给他受了禁戒，如今他能脱去蟒蛇的身形了。你去找找他。 
English: Unfortunately, I stopped him, gave him a ban, and now he can get rid of the python's body. You go find him.

古文：弟子受命而出。
现代文：弟子接受命令出去了。
English: The disciple accepted the order and went out.

古文：蛇行所过，草木开靡，如车路焉。
现代文：蛇所走过的地方，草本都倒在一边，趟开一条道就像车子走过的路一样。
English: Where the snake had walked, the herbs had fallen to one side, and the road was like the road the car had taken.

古文：行四十五里，至深谷间，此蛇自以其首叩石而死矣。
现代文：蛇行了四十五里，到了深深的山谷里，便自己往石头上撞脑袋，直到撞死。
English: After snaking for forty-five miles, he reached a deep valley, where he hit his head on a rock until he died.

古文：归白和尚曰： 此蛇今已受生，在裴郎中宅作女。
现代文：弟子们回来告诉了和尚，和尚说： 此蛇现在已经投生，投生到裴郎中家作他女儿。
English: The disciples came back and told the monk, and the monk said, "This snake has now been reincarnated, and has been reborn into Pei Lang Zhong's family as his daughter."

古文：亦甚聪慧，年十八当亡。
现代文：这个女儿也十分聪慧，十八岁就该死亡。
English: This daughter is also very intelligent and should die at the age of eighteen.

古文：即却为男，然后出家修道。
现代文：然后又转而投生为男的，长大之后出家修道。
English: Then he was reincarnated as a man, and became a monk when he grew up.

古文：裴郎中即我门徒，汝可入城，为吾省问之。
现代文：裴郎中是我的门徒，你可以进城去，替我探望他。
English: Pei Langzhong is my disciple, you can go to the city and visit him for me.

古文：其女今已欲生，而甚艰难，汝可救之。 
现代文：他女儿现在正往下生，但是很难产，你可以救救她。 
English: His daughter is about to give birth, but she's having a hard time. You can save her.

古文：时裴宽为兵部郎中，即和尚门人也。
现代文：这时裴宽为兵部郎中，是和尚的门生。
English: At this time, Pei Kuan was a disciple of the monk and a member of the military.

古文：弟子受命入城，遥指裴家，遇裴请假在宅，遂令报云： 华严和尚传语。 
现代文：弟子受命入城后，远远地就看见了裴家，正赶上裴宽请假在家，弟子便让人报告说： 华严和尚捎话来了！ 
English: After the disciple was ordered to enter the city, he saw the Pei family in the distance. As he was about to catch up with Pei Kuan, who was at home on leave, the disciple had someone report: Hua Yan, the monk, has arrived!

古文：郎中出见，神色甚忧。
现代文：郎中出门与弟子相见。
English: The retainer went out to meet his disciple.

古文：僧问其故，云妻欲产，已六七日，灯烛相守，甚危困矣。僧曰： 我能救之。 
现代文：他神色非常忧虑，弟子问他什么缘故，他说妻子要生产，已经六七天了，天天晚上点着灯守着她，看样子非常危险。弟子说： 我能救。 
English: He looked very worried. The disciple asked him why. He said that his wife was about to give birth, and it had been six or seven days. Every night he lit a lamp to watch over her. It looked very dangerous. The disciple said, "I can save her."

古文：遂令于堂门之外，净设床席。
现代文：于是令人在卧室门外，摆上洁净的床席。
English: As a result, a clean bedstead was placed outside the bedroom door.

古文：僧入焚香击磬，呼和尚者三，其夫人安然而产一女。
现代文：弟子进去焚香敲磬，连呼三声 和尚 ，裴宽的夫人即安然地生下一个女孩。
English: The disciple went in, lit incense and struck a gong, and called out three times in unison, "Monk," and Pei Kuan's wife gave birth to a girl.

古文：后果年十八岁而卒。
现代文：这个女孩后来果然十八岁就死了。
English: The girl did indeed die at the age of eighteen.

古文：唐休璟门僧
现代文：唐休璟门僧
English: Tang Xiuyuan Monk

古文：唐中宗时，唐公休璟为相。
现代文：唐中宗在位时，唐休璟为宰相。
English: When Tang Zhongzong was on the throne, Tang Xiuyong was the prime minister.

古文：尝有一僧，发言多中，好为厌胜之术。
现代文：他有个僧人，说什么事情多数能言中，擅长于降服鬼魔贼盗的方术。
English: He has a monk who can say most things, and is good at conquering demons and thieves.

古文：休璟甚敬之。
现代文：休璟对他很敬重。
English: Hume held him in high regard.

古文：一日，僧来谓休璟曰： 相国将有大祸，且不远数月，然可以禳去。 
现代文：一天，僧人来对休璟说： 相国将要遭受大灾祸，而且就在不远的数月之内。然而可以驱除。 
English: One day, a monk came to Huseynov and said: "Our country is about to suffer a great disaster, and it will happen in the next few months. However, it can be driven away.

古文：休璟惧甚，即拜之。
现代文：休璟非常恐慌，于是求他相救。
English: Hume panicked and called for help.

古文：僧曰： 某无他术，但奉一计耳，愿听之。 
现代文：僧人说： 我没有别的办法，只能献你一条计策而已，请你按计而行。 
English: The monk said, "I have no other choice but to offer you a strategy. Please follow the plan."

古文：休璟曰： 幸吾师教焉。 
现代文：休璟忙道： 全仗师父教诲！ 
English: Hulun Busy Road: Pay attention to Master's teachings!

古文：僧曰： 且天下郡守，非相国命之乎？ 
现代文：僧人说： 如今天下的郡守，不都是相国任命的吗？  是的。 
English: The monk said, "Aren't all the current county governors appointed by their home countries? Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 僧曰： 相国当于卑冗官中，访一孤寒家贫有才干者，使为曹州刺史。
现代文： 相国应当在那些小官里面，访求一个无依无靠、家境贫寒、又有才干的人，让他作曹州刺史。
English: The partner country should look for a helpless, poor and talented person among those minor officials, and let him make Caozhou's history.

古文：其深感相国恩，而可以指踪也。
现代文：他一定深感相国的恩德，于是就可以指示他办什么事情。
English: He must have a deep sense of the benevolence of his country, so he can instruct him what to do.

古文：既得之，愿以报某。 
现代文：等你找到这个人后，请来告诉我。 
English: When you find this person, please come and tell me.

古文：休璟且喜且谢，遂访于亲友。张君者，家甚贫，为京卑官。
现代文：休璟又高兴又表示感谢，于是遍访各位亲友，终于打听到一个姓张的，家境十分贫寒，现正在京城充任小官吏。
English: Hume was both pleased and grateful, so he visited relatives and friends and finally found out about a man named Zhang, whose family background was very poor, and who was now working as a minor official in Beijing.

古文：即日拜赞善大夫，又旬日，用为曹州刺史。
现代文：当天就拜他为赞善大夫。又过了十天。便任命他为曹州刺史。
English: On the same day, he was revered as Dr. Zanzan. Ten days later, he was appointed as Caozhou chief historian.

古文：既而召僧谓曰： 已从师之计，得张某矣。
现代文：然后召见门僧对他说： 我已遵从师父之计，找到一个姓张的了。
English: Then he summoned his disciple and said to him, "I have followed Master's plan and found a disciple named Zhang.

古文：然则可教乎？ 
现代文：下一步该怎么办，你可以教给我吗？ 
English: Can you tell me what to do next?

古文：僧曰： 张君赴郡之时，当令求二犬，高数尺而神俊者。 
现代文：门僧说： 张君到曹州郡赴任的时候，应当叫他弄到两只狗，要有几尺高而且是矫健凶猛的。 
English: The monk said, "When Zhang Jun goes to Caozhou County to take up his post, he should be told to get two dogs, which should be several feet tall and strong and fierce.

古文：休璟唯之。
现代文：休璟点头应允。
English: Hume nodded in agreement.

古文：已而张君荷唐公特达之恩，然莫喻其旨，及将赴郡，告辞于休璟，既而谢之曰： 某名迹幽昧，才识疏浅。
现代文：事后，张君蒙受相国特意提拔之恩，却又不明白他的用意，等到要去赴任的时候，便向休璟辞行，同时致谢道： 我的名声和身分低微，不为人知，才识又十分粗浅。
English: After the event, Zhang Jun received a special promotion from his home country, but he did not understand his intention. When he was about to take office, he resigned to Hushun, and at the same time expressed his gratitude: My reputation and status are low, I am not known, and my talent is very shallow.

古文：相国拔此沈滞，牧守大郡，由担石之储，获二千石之禄。
现代文：相国把我从默默无闻中提拔起来，让我为大郡之守，由石米之俸而得二千石之禄。
English: My partner country lifted me out of obscurity and made me the governor of a large county, earning a stipend of two thousand koku from a salary of one koku.

古文：自涸辙而泛东溟，出穷谷而陟层霄，德固厚矣，然而感恩之外，窃所忧惕者，未知相国之旨何哉？ 
现代文：这等于涸辙之鱼游进了东海，出穷谷而登云霄，相国的恩德实在太深厚了。然而感恩之外，我所忧虑与担心的是，不知相国这么做的意图是什么。 
English: This is equivalent to a fish from a dry rut swimming into the East China Sea, emerging from the trough and rising to the sky. The kindness of our country is really too profound. However, in addition to gratitude, I am worried and worried that I do not know what the intention of our country is.

古文：休璟曰： 用君之才耳，非他也。
现代文：休璟道： 为了发挥你的才干而已，别无他意。
English: Hume: It's just to make use of your talent, there's no other intention.

古文：然常闻贵郡多善犬，愿得神俊非常者二焉。 张君曰： 谨奉教。 
现代文：然而常常听说贵郡有许多良犬，我想要弄到两只骄健凶猛不同于平常的。 张君说： 一定遵嘱照办！ 
English: However, I have often heard that there are many good dogs in Guizhou County, and I want to get two proud and fierce dogs that are different from the usual ones.Zhang Jun said: Be sure to do as instructed!

古文：既至郡，数日，乃悉召郡吏，告之曰： 吾受丞相唐公深恩，拔于不次，得守大郡。
现代文：他到曹州郡后，过了几天，便召集全郡的差吏，对他们说： 我受唐丞相深厚的恩德，从不知名的位置提拔了上来，作了大郡的太守。
English: After he arrived in Caozhou County, a few days later, he called together the officials of the entire county and said to them: I was promoted from an unknown position by the deep benevolence of Emperor Tang, and became the governor of the county.

古文：今唐公求二良犬，可致之乎？ 
现代文：如今唐相国跟我要两只良犬，能弄到吗？ 
English: Now Tang Sang Guo and I want two good dogs. Can we get them?

古文：有一吏前曰： 某家育一犬，质状异常，愿献之。 
现代文：有个差吏说： 我家里养了一只狗，品种、长相跟普通狗不同，愿意献出来。 
English: A policeman said: I have a dog at home. It is a different breed and looks different from ordinary dogs. I am willing to donate it.

古文：张大喜，即献焉。
现代文：张君非常高兴，他便把狗献出来了。
English: Zhang Jun was so happy that he gave the dog away.

古文：既至，其犬高数尺而肥，其臆广尺余，神俊异常，而又驯扰。
现代文：狗被送到后，只见它有几尺高而且很肥壮，胸脯有一尺多宽，神俊非凡，而且很有训练。
English: After the dog was delivered, it was several feet tall and very fat, with a chest more than a foot wide, extremely handsome, and very well trained.

古文：张君曰： 相国所求者二也，如何？ 
现代文：张君说： 相国跟我要的是两只，那一只怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun said: My partner and I want two cows, what about the other one?

古文：吏白曰： 郡内唯有此，他皆常也。
现代文：差吏告诉他说： 郡城里面只有这一只，其他的都是普通狗。
English: The officer told him: "This is the only one in the county, the others are ordinary dogs.

古文：然郡南十里某村某民家，其亦有一焉。
现代文：但在郡城南面十里处有个村庄的一户人家，也有这么一只。
English: But in a village ten miles south of the county seat, there is a family of people who also have one.

古文：民极惜之，非君侯亲往，不可取之。 
现代文：那家人特别爱惜那只狗，除非老爷亲自去，否则是要不来的。 
English: The family was particularly fond of the dog, and would not allow the master to come unless he came in person.

古文：张君即命驾，赍厚值而访之，果得焉。
现代文：张君立即命令备车，带着很多东西去访问那户人家，终于弄到了那只狗。
English: Zhang Jun immediately ordered the car to be prepared, took a lot of things to visit the family, and finally got the dog.

古文：其状与吏所献者无异，而神彩过之。
现代文：这只狗的形状与差使所献的那只没有两样，但神采超过那只。
English: The shape of the dog was the same as the one the messenger had offered, but it was more powerful.

古文：张君甚喜，即召亲吏，以二犬献休璟。
现代文：张君非常满意，立即派一位亲近差使把两只狗献给了休璟。
English: Zhang Jun was very satisfied and immediately sent a close aide to dedicate the two dogs to Huxuan.

古文：休璟大悦，且奇其状，以为未常见。
现代文：休璟十分高兴，并且惊奇于这两只狗的形状，认为是轻易看不到的，于是召来门僧观看。
English: Hume was very pleased, and was surprised at the shape of the two dogs, which he thought were not easy to see, so he called a monk to watch.

古文：遂召僧视之，僧曰： 善育之，脱相君之祸者，二犬耳。 
现代文：门僧说： 要好好地养着它们，能够解救相国灾祸的，只有这两只狗。 
English: The monk said, "It is necessary to raise them well, and only these two dogs can save the country from disaster."

古文：后旬日，其僧又至，谓休璟曰： 事在今夕，愿相君严为之备。 
现代文：过了十天，门僧又来了，对休璟说： 事情就在今夜，请相国严加防范。 
English: Ten days later, the monk came again and said to Hucho, "The matter is tonight, please be on your guard.

古文：休璟即留僧宿。
现代文：休璟便留下门僧住宿。
English: Hucho then left the monk to stay.

古文：是夜，休璟坐于堂之前轩，命左右十余人，执弧矢立于榻之隅。其僧与休璟共处一榻。
现代文：这天夜晚，休璟坐在卧室前面的窗下，命令十余名亲兵拿着弓箭侍立在卧榻四周，门僧与休璟在一张床上。
English: That night, Huseyn sat under the window in front of his bedroom and ordered more than ten soldiers to stand around his bed with bows and arrows. The monk and Huseyn were in the same bed.

古文：至夜分，僧笑曰： 相君之祸免矣，可以就寝。 休璟大喜，且谢之，遂撤左右，与僧寝焉。
现代文：到了半夜，门僧笑着说： 相国的灾祸已经免除了，可以上床睡觉了。 休璟大喜，并向门僧致谢，于是撤走了亲兵，与门僧上床就寝。
English: At midnight, the gate monk said with a smile, "The calamity of the other country has been averted, and I can go to bed." Hucho was overjoyed and thanked the gate monk, so he withdrew his soldiers and went to bed with the gate monk.

古文：迨晓，僧呼休璟曰： 可起矣。 
现代文：到天亮时，门僧招呼休璟道： 可以起床了！ 
English: By dawn, the monk hailed Hushan Road: You can get up!

古文：休璟即起，谓僧曰： 祸诚免矣，然二犬安所用乎？ 
现代文：休璟立即起了床，跟门僧说： 灾祸确实是免除了，然而那两只狗有什么用处呢？ 
English: Hume immediately rose from his bed and said to the monk: "The calamity is indeed averted, but of what use are the two dogs?

古文：僧曰： 俱往观焉。 
现代文：门僧说： 我们一起看看去。 
English: The monk said, "Let's go see it together."

古文：乃与休璟偕寻其迹，至后园中，见一人仆地而卒矣，视其颈有血，盖为物噬者。
现代文：说完便与休璟共同去察看踪迹。走到后园里，见一个人趴在地上死了，发现他的脖子上有血，可能是被什么东西咬的。
English: Having said that, he and Hume went to inspect the tracks together. When they got to the back garden, they saw a man lying dead on the ground and found blood on his neck, which may have been bitten by something.

古文：又见二犬在大木下，仰视之，见一人袒而匿其上。
现代文：又见那两只狗正在一棵大树底下，仰着头往上看，只见一人明晃晃地躲在树上。
English: He also saw that the two dogs were hiding under a big tree, and when he looked up with his head up, he saw one of them clearly hiding in the tree.

古文：休璟惊且诘曰： 汝为谁？ 
现代文：休璟惊奇地盘问道： 你是谁？ 
English: Surprised, Hume asked, "Who are you?"

古文：其人泣而指死者曰： 某与彼，俱贼也。昨夕偕来，且将致害相国。盖遇此二犬，环而且吠，彼遂为噬而死。某惧，因匿身于此，伺其他去，将逃焉。迨晓终不去，今即甘死于是矣。 
现代文：那人哭泣着指指地上那个死了的说： 我与他都是贼，昨晚上一起到这里来，想要杀害相国，碰上这两只狗，围着我们直叫唤，结果他被咬死了，我怕也被咬死，所以躲到了这里，本想等它们走了就逃跑，直到天亮它们也没走，现在只好死在这里了。 
English: The man wept and pointed to the dead one on the ground and said: I and he are both thieves, we came here last night together, we wanted to kill each other, we met these two dogs, they shouted all around us, as a result he was bitten to death, I was afraid of being bitten to death, so I hid here, I wanted to wait for them to leave and run away, until dawn they did not leave, now I have to die here.

古文：休璟即召左右，令缚之。
现代文：休璟立即唤来亲兵把他绑了。
English: Hume immediately called in his soldiers and had him tied up.

古文：曰： 此罪固当死，然非其心也，盖受制于人耳。
现代文：门僧劝道： 他的罪过自然应当处死，但这并非出自他的心愿，肯定是受别人指使而干的，请把他放了吧。 
English: The monk advised, "Naturally, his crime deserves to be punished by death, but this did not come from his heart, it must have been done at the behest of others. Please let him go."

古文：愿释之。 休璟命解缚，其贼拜泣而去。
现代文：休璟命人解开了绳索，那个贼叩头致谢，哭哭啼啼地走了。
English: Hume's men untied the ropes, and the thief, bowing his head in thanks, went away sobbing.

古文：休璟谢其僧曰： 赖吾师，不然，死于二人之手。 
现代文：休璟感谢门僧说： 幸亏师父相救，不然，我就死在这两个人的手下了。 
English: Hume thanked his protégé and said, "Fortunately, my master came to my rescue, otherwise, I would have died at the hands of these two men."

古文：僧曰： 此盖相国之福也，岂所能为哉？ 
现代文：门僧说： 这全是相国的福份呀，哪是我所能够救得了呢。 
English: The monk said, "This is all due to the blessings of my country. What can I do to save it?"

古文：休璟有表弟卢轸，在荆门，有术士告之： 君将有灾戾，当求一善禳厌者为，庶可矣。 
现代文：休璟有个表弟叫卢轸，住在荆门，有位术士告诉他： 你要有灾难，应当求一位擅长禳厌之术的人给你驱除，可能会有救的。 
English: Huxi had a cousin named Lu Yao, who lived in Jingmen. A sorcerer told him: "If you have a calamity, you should ask a person who is good at the art of repelling weariness to drive it away for you. You may be able to save yourself."

古文：轸素知其僧，因致书于休璟，请求之。
现代文：卢轸早就知道表哥家里有这么个僧人，便给休璟写信，请他求求这个僧人。
English: Lu Yao had known for a long time that there was such a monk in his cousin's family, so he wrote to Xue Yao, asking him to intercede with this monk.

古文：僧即以书付休璟曰： 事在其中耳。 
现代文：门僧便把一封信交给休璟，对他说： 你所求的事，就在这里面。 
English: The gate monk then handed a letter to Hsueh-yeon and said to him, "What you asked for is in here.

古文：及书达荆州，而轸已卒。
现代文：等这封信送到荆州时，卢轸已经死了。
English: By the time this letter was delivered to Jingzhou, Lu Yao had already died.

古文：其家开视其书，徒见一幅之纸，并无有文字焉。
现代文：他家里的人打开这封信看时，只见有一张白纸，纸上并没有文字。
English: When his family opened the letter, all they saw was a blank piece of paper with no writing on it.

古文：休璟益奇之。
现代文：休璟更加以为门僧是位奇人。
English: Hume was even more convinced that the monk was a genius.

古文：后数年，其僧遁去，竟不知其所适。
现代文：过了几年，这位僧人隐遁而去，不知他究竟去了什么地方。
English: A few years later, the monk disappeared, and it is not known where he went.

古文：仪光禅师
现代文：仪光禅师
English: by the Zen master Jikoh

古文：长安青龙寺仪光禅师，本唐室之族也。
现代文：长安青龙寺的仪光禅师，本是唐朝皇室的成员。
English: Yi Guang, the Zen master of Chang'an's Qinglong Temple, was originally a member of the Tang Dynasty royal family.

古文：父瑯琊王，与越王起兵，伐天后，不克而死。
现代文：其父瑯琊王与越王起兵，讨伐则天皇后，未能成功而死亡。
English: His father, King Min and King Yue, raised an army to fight against the Empress, but were unsuccessful and died.

古文：天后诛其族无遗。
现代文：则天皇后诛灭其全家，不允许遗漏一个。
English: The Empress Dowager then annihilated his entire family, not allowing a single member to be left behind.

古文：惟禅师方在襁褓，乳母抱而逃之。
现代文：唯独禅师当时正在襁褓之中，奶妈抱着他跑掉了。
English: However, the Zen master was in his cradle at the time, and his wet nurse ran away with him in her arms.

古文：其后数岁，天后闻瑯琊王有子在人间，购之愈急。
现代文：事后几年，则天皇后听说琅琊王有个儿子还活在人间，悬赏捉拿，十分紧急。
English: A few years later, the empress heard that the king had a son who was still alive. A reward was offered for his capture, which was very urgent.

古文：乳母将至岐州界中，鬻女工以自给。
现代文：奶妈把他带到岐州境内，靠卖女工维持生活。
English: His wet nurse brought him to the territory of Qizhou to earn a living by selling female workers.

古文：时禅师年已八岁矣，聪慧出类，状貌不凡。
现代文：当时禅师已经八岁了，天资聪明，出类拔萃，相貌也非常出众。
English: At that time, the Zen master was already eight years old, gifted with intelligence, outstanding, and his appearance was also very outstanding.

古文：乳母恐以貌取而败，大忧之。
现代文：奶妈深恐因为相貌特出而败露。
English: The wet nurse is deeply afraid of being exposed because of her outstanding appearance.

古文：乃求钱为造衣服，又置钱二百于腰下，于桑野中，具告以其本末。
现代文：非常担忧，便弄钱给他做了套新衣服，又在他腰下放二百个钱，带他到荒郊野外去，把事情的真实经过都告诉了他。
English: Greatly alarmed, she got money, made him a new suit of clothes, put two hundred rupees under his belt, took him out into the wilderness, and told him everything that had really happened.

古文：泣而谓曰： 吾养汝已八年矣，亡命无所不至。
现代文：奶妈一面抽泣一面对他说： 我已养活你八年了，为了逃命无所不至。
English: While sobbing, the wet nurse said to him: "I have been feeding you for eight years, and I would do anything to escape.

古文：今汝已长，而天后之敕访不止，恐事泄之后，汝与吾俱死。
现代文：如今你已长大，而则天皇后又不住地下令打听你的下落，我怕事情泄露后，你与我都得死。
English: Now that you have grown up, the Empress Dowager keeps ordering me to inquire about your whereabouts. I'm afraid that if the matter were to leak out, you and I would both die.

古文：今汝聪颖过人，可以自立，吾亦从此逝矣。 
现代文：如今你聪明过人，可以自立了，我也要从此销声匿迹了。 
English: Now that you're smart enough to be on your own, I'm going to disappear.

古文：乳母因与流涕而决，禅师亦号恸不自胜，方知其所出。乳母既去，师莫知其所之。
现代文：奶妈便与他流着眼泪告别了，禅师也嚎啕大哭悲痛不已。刚刚知道自己的出身，奶妈就离去了，禅师不知道自己该往何处去。
English: His wet nurse bade him farewell with tears, and the Zen master wept bitterly. As soon as he knew where he came from, his wet nurse left, and the Zen master didn't know where to go.

古文：乃行至逆旅，与诸儿戏。
现代文：他信步而行。到了一家客店，便与小孩们一起玩了起来。
English: He walked confidently, and when he arrived at an inn, he played with the children.

古文：有郡守夫人者，之夫任处，方息于逆旅，见禅师与诸儿戏，状貌异于人，因怜之。
现代文：有位郡守的夫人要到丈夫任职的地方去，正在这家客店休息，看到禅师与几个小孩玩，见他相貌不同于常人，便很喜欢他。
English: The wife of a county magistrate, who was on her way to her husband's place of work, was resting at the inn when she saw the Zen master playing with a few children. Seeing that his appearance was different from that of ordinary people, she liked him very much.

古文：召而谓曰： 郎家何在？
现代文：夫人招呼他到面前，对他说： 你家住在什么地方？
English: His wife called him to her and said, "Where do you live?"

古文：而独行在此耶？ 
现代文：怎么一个人走到这里来了呢？ 
English: How did he get here all by himself?

古文：师伪答曰： 庄临于此，有时而戏。 
现代文：禅师撒谎答道： 我们村庄离这里很近，时常来这里玩。 
English: The Zen master lied and replied, "Our village is very close to here, and we often come here to play.

古文：夫人食之，又赐钱五百。
现代文：夫人给他东西吃又送给他五百个钱。
English: His wife gave him something to eat and gave him five hundred rupees.

古文：师虽幼而有识，恐人取其钱，乃尽解衣，置之于腰下。
现代文：禅师虽然年幼却很有见识，害怕别人拿他的钱，便把衣服解开，都放在腰下了。
English: The young but wise Zen master, fearing that someone would take his money, took off his clothes and put them on his waist.

古文：时日已晚，乃寻小径，将投村野。
现代文：天已经晚了，他就沿着小路往前走，想找个村庄投宿。
English: It was already late in the day, so he walked along the path, trying to find a village to stay in.

古文：遇一老僧独行，而呼师曰： 小子，汝今一身，家已破灭，将何所适？ 
现代文：走着走着，遇见一位老僧一个人赶路。老僧招呼禅师道： 小子，你现在只身一人，家已经破灭了，要到什么地方去？ 
English: As he walked, he met an old monk who was hurrying alone. The old monk called out to the Zen master, "Kid, you're all alone now, your home has been destroyed. Where are you going?"

古文：禅师惊愕伫立，老僧又曰： 出家闲旷，且无忧畏，小子汝欲之乎？ 
现代文：禅师吃惊地停下，老僧又说： 出家为僧悠闲自在，无忧无虑又无所畏惧。小子，你想出家吗？ 
English: The Zen master stopped in surprise, and the old monk continued, "Being a monk means being at ease, carefree and fearless. Kid, do you want to become a monk?

古文：师曰： 是所愿也。 
现代文：禅师说： 这正是我的心愿。 
English: The Zen master said, "This is exactly what I want."

古文：老僧因携其手，至桑阴下，令礼十方诸佛已，因削其发。
现代文：老僧便拉着他的手，到了一棵桑树下面，令他向十方诸佛行完了礼，剃光了他头发。
English: The old monk then took him by the hand and led him to the foot of a mulberry tree, where he made him complete his prostration to the Buddhas of the ten directions and shaved off his hair.

古文：又解衣装，出袈裟，令服之。大小称其体，因教其披著之法。
现代文：老僧又解开自己的衣服包，取出一领袈裟让他穿上，见大小正好合体，于是又教给他穿着的方法。
English: The old monk also opened his clothes bag, took out a collar and told him to put it on. He saw that the size was just right, so he also taught him how to wear it.

古文：禅师既披法服，执持收掩，有如旧僧焉。
现代文：只见禅师执持收掩、熟练自如，有如老僧人一般。
English: Only to see the Zen master holding back, skillfully at ease, like an old monk in general.

古文：老僧喜曰： 此习性使之然。 
现代文：老僧十分欢喜，说： 这是你的习性使你能够这样的。 
English: The old monk was overjoyed and said, "It is your nature that has made you able to do this.

古文：其僧将行，因指东北曰： 去此数里有伽蓝，汝直诣彼，谒寺主云，我使尔为其弟子也。 
现代文：老僧要走，便指着东北方向说： 离此数里有座寺院，你可直接到那里去谒见寺主，就说我让你给他当弟子的。 
English: When the old monk wanted to leave, he pointed to the northeast direction and said, "There is a temple not far from here. You can go there directly to meet the head of the temple and tell him that I want you to be his disciple."

古文：言毕，老僧已亡矣。
现代文：说完，老僧已经不见了。
English: And with that, the old monk was gone.

古文：方知是圣像也。
现代文：这才知道老僧原来是佛圣的化形。
English: It was only then that I realized that the old monk was actually a reincarnation of the Buddha.

古文：师如言趣寺，寺主骇其所以，因留之。
现代文：禅师照他说的到了寺院，寺主听了他来历十分惊讶，于是收留了他。
English: The Zen master arrived at the temple as he had said, and the head of the temple was very surprised to hear about his background, so he took him in.

古文：向十年，禅师已洞晓经律，定于禅寂。
现代文：不足十年，禅师便已通晓了佛教的经律，能够定于禅寂。
English: In less than ten years, the Zen master had become familiar with the Buddhist sutras and was able to set the time for meditation.

古文：遇唐室中兴，求瑯琊王后，师方谓寺僧言之，寺僧大骇。
现代文：李唐皇室中兴后，到处寻求瑯琊的后代，禅师这才将自己的身世告诉了同寺的僧人，僧人们听了大为震惊。
English: After the restoration of the imperial family in the Tang Dynasty, the descendants of the emperors were sought everywhere. It was only then that the Zen master told the monks of the same temple about his background. The monks were very shocked.

古文：因出诣岐州李使君，师从父也，见之悲喜。
现代文：禅师离开寺院到了岐州李使君处，把他当作伯父叔父李太守见到他又悲又喜。
English: The Zen master left the temple and went to the Qizhou Li Zichun's place. He was both sad and happy to see him as his uncle, Li Taizhou.

古文：闵舍之于家，欲以状闻，师固请不可。
现代文：便让他住在自己家里，太守要把他的情况奏闻皇上，禅师坚决不同意。
English: So he was allowed to live in his own home. The daimyō wanted to report his situation to the emperor, but the Zen master firmly disagreed.

古文：使君有女，年与禅师侔，见禅师悦之，愿致款曲，师不许。
现代文：太守有个女儿，年龄与禅师相同，见到禅师后非常喜欢他，愿意向他表白心情，禅师没有答应。
English: The abbot had a daughter, the same age as the Zen master, who liked the Zen master very much and was willing to express her feelings to him. The Zen master did not agree.

古文：月余，会使君夫人出，女盛服多将使者来逼之。
现代文：一个多月后，赶上使君夫人外出，女儿便盛妆打扮，打发许多人来逼迫禅师就范。
English: More than a month later, when Mrs. Sojun was out, her daughter dressed up and sent many people to force the Zen master to conform.

古文：师固拒万端，终不肯。
现代文：禅师万般推辞，始终不肯。
English: The Zen master always refused to do so.

古文：师绐曰，身不洁净，沐浴待命。
现代文：后来他谎称身上不干净，等沐浴完了再从命。
English: Later, he lied that his body was not clean, and waited until he had finished bathing before committing suicide.

古文：女许诺，方令沐汤。
现代文：女儿同意了他谎言，就让他去沐浴。
English: His daughter agreed with his lie and let him take a bath.

古文：师候女出，因之噤门。
现代文：禅师等女儿出去之后，便在屋里把门插死了。
English: After waiting for his daughter to go out, the Zen master bolted the door to the room.

古文：女还排户，不果入。
现代文：女儿回来推门，结果没有推开，进不去。
English: My daughter came back and pushed the door, but it didn't open and I couldn't get in.

古文：自牖窥之，师方持削发刀，顾而言曰： 以有此根，故为欲逼，今既除此，何逼之为。 
现代文：从窗户上窥视时。见禅师手里拿着削发刀，回头看着她说： 只为有此祸根，招来欲火相逼，如今除掉这个祸根，还逼我作啥。 
English: When I peered through the window, I saw the Zen master holding a hair clipper in his hand, looking back at her and saying, "Just because there is this evil root, it brings about a burning desire, now remove this evil root, and force me to do what."

古文：女惧，止之不可。
现代文：女儿见此十分恐惧，又制止不了他。
English: Her daughter was horrified and could do nothing to stop him.

古文：遂断其根，弃于地，而师亦气绝。
现代文：禅师于是断其根，弃之于地，而禅师也休克过去了。
English: The Zen master then uprooted and abandoned it to the ground, and the Zen master was also shocked.

古文：户既闭，不可开，女惶惑不知所出。
现代文：门已关得紧紧的，打不开，女儿惶惑不知所措。
English: The door was tightly closed and could not be opened, leaving her daughter confused and at a loss.

古文：俄而府君夫人到，女言其情。
现代文：一会儿，太守夫人回来了，女儿对她讲述了详情。
English: After a while, the Empress Dowager returned, and her daughter told her the details.

古文：使君令破户，师已复苏。
现代文：太守命人捣碎了房门，禅师已经苏醒过来。
English: The doorman broke down the door and the Zen master had woken up.

古文：命良医至，以火烧地既赤，苦酒沃之，坐师于燃地，傅以膏，数月疾愈。
现代文：太守又命人请来了良医。医生用火把地烧红了，浇上了苦酒，把禅师坐在燃烧着的地上，然后给他敷上了药膏。
English: The daimyō also ordered a good doctor to be brought in. The doctor burned the ground red with a torch, poured bitter wine on it, sat the Zen master on the burning ground, and then applied ointment to him.

古文：使君奏禅师是瑯琊王子。
现代文：几个月之后痊愈了，使君便奏禀皇上禅师是瑯琊王的儿子。
English: A few months later, after he had recovered, the envoy played the role of the Emperor's son.

古文：有敕，命驿置至京，引见慰问，赏赐优给，复以为王。
现代文：皇上敕命将禅师通过驿站送到京都，到了京都即被引见慰问，赏赐给他优厚的待遇，又让他当了王爷。
English: The emperor ordered that the Zen master be sent to Kyoto by train, and when he arrived in Kyoto, he was presented to the emperor, who gave him generous treatment and made him a prince.

古文：禅师曰： 父母非命，鄙身残毁，今还俗为王，不愿也。 
现代文：禅师说： 父母死于非命，自己的身体已经残毁，如今还俗为王，不合自己的心愿。 
English: The Zen master said: My parents died a violent death, my body has been destroyed, and now I am a vulgar king, which is not what I wanted.

古文：中宗降敕，令禅师广领徒众，寻山置兰若，恣听之。
现代文：中宗皇帝于是降旨，数令禅师广收门徒，选择名山建造寺庙，所有这些事宜都要听从禅师的意愿。
English: Emperor Zhongzong then issued an edict, ordering the Zen master to recruit a large number of disciples, choose a famous mountain to build a temple, and all these matters should be subject to the wishes of the Zen master.

古文：禅师性好终南山，因居于兴法寺。
现代文：禅师生性喜爱终南山，于是住进了兴法寺。
English: The Zen master loved Nanshan, so he lived in the Xingfa Temple.

古文：又于诸谷口，造禅庵兰若凡数处，或入山数十里。从者僧俗常数千人，迎候瞻侍，甚于卿相。
现代文：又在各个谷口建造尼庵寺庙许多处，有的则建造在几十里的深山里，跟从禅师的僧人与俗众常常多达几千人，其迎候瞻侍之盛况，超过公卿将相。
English: In addition, many nunneries and temples were built in various valleys, some of which were built dozens of miles deep in the mountains. The monks and lay people who followed the Zen master often numbered several thousand, and the pomp with which they greeted the attendants exceeded that of court nobles and generals.

古文：禅师既证道果，常先言将来事，是以人益归之。
现代文：禅师既已证果得道，常常预言未来的事情，人们因此更乐于归顺于他。
English: Since the Zen master has attained enlightenment, he often predicts future events, and people are therefore more willing to submit to him.

古文：开元二十三年六月二十三日，无疾而终。
现代文：开元二十三年六月二十三日，禅师无病而死。
English: On the 23rd day of the 6th month of the 23rd year of the Heian period, the Zen master died without any illness.

古文：先告弟子以修身护戒之事，言甚切至。
现代文：死前他告诫弟子们关于刻苦修身与维护戒规的事宜，言辞十分恳切。
English: Before his death, he admonished his disciples very earnestly about the matter of diligently cultivating the body and maintaining the precepts.

古文：因卧，头指北方，足指南方，以手承头，右肋在下，遂亡。
现代文：说完之后便躺倒了，头向北方，脚向南方，以手托着脑袋，身体右侧朝下，躺好之后就死了。
English: Having said this, he lay down, with his head to the north and his feet to the south, with his head in his hands and his right side facing downwards. Once he was lying down, he died.

古文：遗命葬于少陵原之南面，凿原为室而封之。
现代文：他留下遗嘱，让把他安葬在少陵原的南面。要在少陵原上挖成墓穴，将遗体封闭在里面。
English: He left a will to be buried on the south side of the Shoryo Plain. He wanted his body to be buried in a grave dug on the Shoryo Plain.

古文：柩将发，异香芬馥，状貌一如生焉。
现代文：送葬的那天，灵柩要出发时，他的遗体散发出浓郁的芳香，相貌与活着的时候一模一样。
English: On the day of the funeral, when the coffin was about to leave, his body emitted a strong aroma, looking exactly the same as when he was alive.

古文：车出城门，忽有白鹤数百，鸣舞于空中，五色彩云，徘徊覆车，而行数十里。
现代文：灵车出城门后，突然有几百只白鹤，在空中起舞悲鸣，五颜六色的彩云飘来飘去地遮扶着灵车，这样走了几十里。
English: After the hearse left the city gate, suddenly there were hundreds of white cranes dancing and wailing in the air. Colorful clouds floated to and fro to cover the hearse, thus covering dozens of miles.

古文：所封之处，遂建天宝寺，弟子辈留而守之。
现代文：就在封存禅师遗体的墓地旁边，建造了一座天宝寺，弟子们住在那里守护着他。
English: Right next to the cemetery where the Zen master's remains were sealed, a Temple of Heaven was built, where his disciples lived and watched over him.

古文：玄览
现代文：玄览
English: An overview of the situation

古文：唐大历末，禅师玄览住荆州陟屺寺。
现代文：唐朝大历末年，禅师玄览住在荆州的陟屺寺。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, the Zen master Xuanzang lived in a monastery in Jingzhou.

古文：道高有风韵，人不可得而亲。
现代文：道业高又有风韵，人们很难跟他亲近。
English: He has a high degree of virtue and charm, and it is difficult for people to get close to him.

古文：张璪常画古松于斋壁，符载赞之。
现代文：为了赞扬他的道业和人品，在他住处的墙上，有张垍画的古松，符载撰写的赞文，还有卫象题写的诗。
English: In order to praise his virtue and character, on the wall of his residence, there are ancient pines painted by Zhang Xuan, praises written by Fu Hong, and poems inscribed by Wei Xiang.

古文：卫象诗之，亦一时三绝也。
现代文：这三样东西也算是一时的三绝。
English: These three things are also the three extremes of time.

古文：悉加垩焉。
现代文：玄览却把他们统统涂掉了。
English: But Xuanshan painted them all out.

古文：人问其故，曰： 无事疥吾壁也。 
现代文：别人问他为什么要涂掉，他说： 他们这是无缘无故使我墙上生疥疮。 
English: When asked why he painted it off, he said: "They put acne on my walls for no reason.

古文：僧那即其甥，为寺之患，发瓦探鷇，坏墙熏鼠。
现代文：僧那是他的外甥，是寺庙里的一个祸患，不是揭开房瓦掏家雀，就是刨墙挖洞熏老鼠。
English: The monk was his nephew. He was a scourge in the temple. He would either open the roof tiles to get rid of house sparrows, or cut holes in the walls to get rid of mice.

古文：览未尝责之。
现代文：但是玄览却从不责备他。
English: But Xuanzang never reproached him.

古文：有弟子义诠，布衣一食。
现代文：有个弟子叫义诠，穿的是布制衣衫，一天只吃一顿饭，严守教规，刻苦修练。
English: There is a disciple called Yiyan, who wears a cloth shirt, eats only one meal a day, strictly abides by the rules, and practices hard.

古文：览亦不称之。
现代文：玄览对他从不称赞。
English: Xuanshan never praised him.

古文：或有怪之，乃题诗于竹上曰： 欲知吾道廓，不与物情违。
现代文：有人责怪他，他便在竹竿上题诗道： 欲知吾道廓，不与物情违。
English: When someone reproached him, he inscribed a poem on a bamboo pole, saying, "If you want to know my character, don't go against the grain."

古文：大海从鱼跃，长空任鸟飞。 
现代文：大海纵鱼跃，长空任鸟飞。 
English: The sea is full of fish, and the sky is full of birds.

古文：忽一夕，有一梵僧，排户而进曰： 和尚速作道场。 
现代文：一天晚上突然来了个梵僧，推门进屋道： 和尚，速速去作道场！ 
English: One evening, a Buddhist monk suddenly came and pushed the door into the hallway: "Monk, go to the dojo at once!"

古文：览言：有为之事，吾未常作。 
现代文：玄览说： 凡属有所作为的事情，我是轻易不做的。 
English: Xuanshan said: I don't easily do anything that can make a difference.

古文：僧熟视而出，反手阖户，门扃如旧。览笑谓左右曰： 吾将归矣。 
现代文：这位僧人打量他一番就出去了，他反手带上了房门，但门内的插关却跟原来插的一样。玄览对身边的人说： 我要回去了。 
English: The monk took one look at him and went out. He took the door with his backhand, but the deadbolt inside the door was the same as the one he had originally put in. Xuanzang said to the people around him: I want to go back.

古文：遂遽浴讫，隐几而化。
现代文：于是急忙洗浴完毕，倚着几案死了。
English: So he hurriedly finished his bath, leaned back and died.

古文：法将
现代文：法将
English: General of the Law

古文：长安有讲涅槃经僧曰法将，聪明多识，声名籍甚。
现代文：长安有个讲《涅槃经》的僧人叫法将，天资聪明，学识广博，名声很大。
English: There is a monk in Chang'an who teaches the "Nirvana Sutra" and is called "Fa Zheng" (法将). He is talented, intelligent, well-educated, and has a great reputation.

古文：所在日讲，僧徒归之如市。
现代文：他每天讲经的时候，僧徒们纷纷前来听讲，就像赶集那样人多。
English: When he gave a sermon every day, the monks came in droves to listen to him. It was like a fair.

古文：法将僧到襄阳。
现代文：法将到了襄阳。
English: The Dharma Master has arrived in Yangyang.

古文：襄阳有客僧，不持僧法，饮酒食肉，体貌至肥，所与交。不择人。
现代文：襄阳有一个客僧，不守佛教的戒规，又喝酒又吃肉，身体很肥胖，与人交际也不选择对象，什么人都跟他来往。
English: There is a visiting monk in Yangyang. He does not observe the Buddhist precepts, he drinks alcohol and eats meat, his body is very fat, and he does not choose whom to associate with. Everyone associates with him.

古文：僧徒鄙之。
现代文：僧徒们都很鄙视他。
English: The monks despised him.

古文：见法将至，众僧迎而重之，居处精华，尽心接待。
现代文：法将到来时，众僧隆重欢迎，安排给他最好的住处，热诚地接待他。
English: When he arrived, the monks gave him a grand welcome, arranged the best place for him to stay, and received him warmly.

古文：客僧忽持斗酒及一蒸狘来造法将。
现代文：有一天，客僧拿着一斗酒与一只蒸熟的小猪，突然闯到法将面前。
English: One day, a guest monk carrying a barrel of wine and a steamed piglet suddenly burst into the presence of the abbot.

古文：法将方与道俗正开义理，共志心听之。
现代文：法将正在给僧人及几个没有出家的教徒讲解佛教义理，大家在专心致志地听讲。
English: The Dharma Master is explaining the principles of Buddhism to the monks and a few lay people, and everyone is listening intently.

古文：客僧迳持酒肴，谓法将曰： 讲说劳苦，且止说经，与我共此酒肉。 
现代文：客僧明晃晃的举着酒与菜肴，对法将说： 讲说得太劳累了，暂且停止说经。与我来共同饮酒吃肉。 
English: The guest monk, holding up the wine and dishes, said to the Dharma master, "I am too tired to recite the sutras. Please stop reciting the sutras for the time being. Come drink wine and eat meat with me."

古文：法将惊惧，但为推让。
现代文：法将又惊又怕，一个劲儿地往外推。
English: Shocked and afraid, Dharma Master pushed it out with all his might.

古文：客僧因坐门下，以手擘狘襄而餐之，举酒满引而饮之。
现代文：客僧便坐在门外台阶下面，用手撕开小猪吃了起来，举起满满的酒杯就喝。
English: The guest monk then sat at the foot of the steps outside the gate, tore open the piglet with his hands, ate it, lifted the full wine glass and drank it.

古文：斯须，酒肉皆尽，因登其床且寝。
现代文：不大一会儿，酒与肉全部吃进去了。然后爬上他的床就睡着了。
English: In a few moments the wine and meat were all eaten, and he climbed into his bed and fell asleep.

古文：既夕，讲经僧方诵涅经，醉僧起曰： 善哉妙诵，然我亦尝诵之。 
现代文：到了晚上，法将正在念诵《涅槃经》，喝醉了的客僧起床说： 善哉善哉！实在是美妙的念诵！然而当年我也曾这么念诵过。 
English: In the evening, when the Dharma Master was chanting the Nirvana Sutra, the drunken guest monk got up and said, "Wow, wow, wow! What a wonderful chanting! However, I also chanted it that year."

古文：因取少草，布西墙下，露坐草中，因讲涅槃经，言词明白，落落可听。
现代文：他拿一把干草，铺在西面墙根下，露天坐在干草上，也讲说起《涅槃经》来，言词流畅明白，听得清清楚楚。
English: He took a handful of hay, spread it under the base of the west wall, sat on the hay in the open air, and also spoke about the "Nirvana Sutra," his words were smooth and clear, and he could hear it clearly.

古文：讲僧因辍诵听之，每至义理深微，常不能解处，闻醉僧诵过经，心自开解。
现代文：法将于是停止了念诵，用心听他讲说，每到义理深奥微妙、自己过去不能理解的地方，听了他的讲说之后，心中顿然领悟。
English: After stopping the recitation of the Dharma, he listened to him attentively. Whenever he came to a place where he could not understand the profound and subtle principles, he suddenly understood after listening to him.

古文：比天方曙，遂终涅槃经四十卷。
现代文：到天刚亮的时候，客僧讲诵完了《涅槃经》四十卷。
English: By dawn, the guest monk had recited all forty volumes of the Nirvana Sutra.

古文：法将生平所疑，一朝散释都尽。
现代文：法将平时感到疑难的地方，一下子都解释清楚了。
English: Where the law would normally feel dubious, it was all explained clearly at once.

古文：法将方庆希有，布座礼之，比及举头，醉僧已灭。
现代文：法将正要让座行礼，祝贺他稀世少有的本领，但等他抬起头来时，客僧已经无影无踪了。
English: The Dharma Master was about to bow his head and congratulate him on his rare ability, but by the time he looked up, the guest monk had disappeared.

古文：诸处寻访，不知所之。
现代文：他四处寻访，不知道他去了什么地方。
English: He looked everywhere, he didn't know where he went.

