古文：玄宗上
现代文：玄宗本纪
English: Xuanzong Hongji

古文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝讳隆基，睿宗第三子也，母曰昭成顺圣皇后窦氏。
现代文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝名隆基，睿宗第三个儿子，母亲是昭成顺圣皇后窦氏。
English: Emperor Mingxiao named Longji, the third son of Emperor Ruizong, and his mother was Empress Dou of Shuncheng.

古文：垂拱元年秋八月戊寅，生于东都。
现代文：垂拱元年秋八月初五，出生在东都。
English: He was born in Dongdu on the fifth day of the eighth month in the autumn of the first year.

古文：性英断多艺，尤知音律，善八分书。
现代文：性格英明果断，多才多艺，尤其精通音律，善写八分书。
English: Character wise and decisive, multi-talented, especially proficient in music, good at writing octavo.

古文：仪范伟丽，有非常之表。
现代文：仪表雄伟英俊，不同寻常。
English: His appearance is majestic, handsome and unusual.

古文：三年闰七月丁卯，封楚王。
现代文：垂拱三年闰七月初五，封为楚王。
English: The hanging arch is three years old on the 5th day of the 7th month, and it is named King of Chu.

古文：天授三年十月戊戌，出阁，开府置官属，年始七岁。
现代文：天授三年十月七日，出到封藩之地，建立府署设置官属，年才七岁。
English: He was only seven years old when, on October 7th, the third year of the Tenju era, he went out to the land of the feudal domain to establish a prefectural office and set up officials.

古文：朔望车骑至朝堂，金吾将军武懿宗忌上严整，诃排仪仗，因欲折之。
现代文：每月初一、十五车驾到朝堂，金吾将军武懿宗忌讳玄宗严正，大声斥责仪仗队，想趁机折服他。
English: On the first and fifteenth day of the first month, the carriage drove to the imperial palace. Kingu's general, Wu Yanzong, rebuked Xuanzong and loudly scolded the guard of honor, hoping to take advantage of the opportunity to appease him.

古文：上叱之曰： 吾家朝堂，干汝何事？
现代文：玄宗斥责他道 ：我家朝堂，关你什么事？
English: Xuanzong rebuked him, saying: My family's court, what does it have to do with you?

古文：敢迫吾骑从！ 
现代文：胆敢压迫我的仪仗？ 
English: Do you dare to oppress me?

古文：则天闻而特加宠异之。
现代文：武则天听说后特别对他宠爱并感到奇异。
English: Wu Zetian was particularly fond of him and felt strange after hearing about it.

古文：寻却入阁。
现代文：不久反而回到京师。
English: Soon, however, he returned to the capital.

古文：长寿二年腊月丁卯，改封临淄郡王。
现代文：长寿二年十二月十二日，改封为临淄郡王。
English: On December 12 of the second year of longevity, he was renamed the King of Linyi County.

古文：圣历元年，出阁，赐第于东都积善坊。
现代文：圣历元年到封藩之地，在东都积善坊赐给他府第。
English: In the first year of the Gregorian calendar, he was given a residence in the eastern capital, Jiezenbo.

古文：大足元年，从幸西京，赐宅于兴庆坊。
现代文：大足元年，跟从皇上到西京，在兴庆坊又赐给他一处府第。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he followed the emperor to Saikyo, and he was also given a residence in Xingqingfang.

古文：长安中，历右卫郎将、尚辇奉御。
现代文：长安中期，历任卫郎将，尚辇奉御。
English: In the mid-Chang'an period, the successors of the guards were promoted to the rank of general.

古文：神龙元年，迁卫尉少卿。
现代文：神龙元年，升为卫尉少卿。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：景龙二年四月，兼潞州别驾。
现代文：景龙二年四月，兼任潞州别驾。
English: In April of the second year of Jinglong, he also served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：十二月，加授银青光禄大夫。
English: In December, he was awarded the Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor.

古文：州境有黄龙白日升天。
现代文：州境有条黄龙白日飞上天。
English: On the state border, a yellow dragon soars into the sky during the day.

古文：尝出畋，有紫云在其上，后从者望而得之。
现代文：玄宗曾经出去打猎，有紫色云彩在他头上，后面跟从的人远远望见。
English: Xuanzong once went out hunting, with a purple cloud over his head and his followers visible in the distance.

古文：前后符瑞凡一十九事。
现代文：前后吉祥的事总计十九件。
English: There are a total of nineteen auspicious events.

古文：四年，中宗将祀南郊，来朝京师。
现代文：景龙四年，中宗将到南郊祭祀，玄宗来京师朝见。
English: In the fourth year of Jinglong, Zhongzong will go to the southern suburbs to worship, and Xuanzong will come to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：将行，使术士韩礼筮之，蓍一茎孑然独立。
现代文：将出行，派术士韩礼占筮，蓍草有一根茎独自站立着。
English: will travel, sent the sorcerer Han Li to occupy the cocoon, the eelgrass has a stem standing alone.

古文：礼惊曰： 蓍立，奇瑞非常也，不可言。 
现代文：韩礼惊叫道： 蓍草独立，是不同寻常的奇异征兆，密不可传。 
English: Han Li exclaimed in surprise, "The separation of the egrets is an unusual and strange sign, which cannot be passed on.

古文：属中宗末年，王室多故，上常阴引材力之士以自助。
现代文：这年恰巧属中宗末年，王朝出了很多事故，玄宗常暗中援引有才干的人来帮助自己。
English: This year happened to be the last year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, and there were many accidents in the dynasty. Emperor Xuanzong often secretly called on talented people to help him.

古文：上所居宅外有水池，浸溢顷余，望气者以为龙气。
现代文：玄宗住宅外有水池，漫漫一顷多地，望气的人认为是龙气。
English: There is a pond outside the residence of Xuanzong, which spreads over more than one hectare. People who are hopeful think that it is the dragon's breath.

古文：四年四月，中宗幸其第，因游其池，结彩为楼船，令巨象踏之。
现代文：景龙四年四月，中宗驾幸他的府第，因而在他的池中游玩，在楼船上结彩，让大象踩船划动。
English: In April of the 4th year of Jinglong, Zhongzong was lucky enough to visit his capital, so he played in his pool, colored on the houseboat, and let the elephant step on the boat.

古文：至六月，中宗暴崩，韦后临朝称制。
现代文：到六月，中宗突然去世，韦后临朝代行皇帝职权。
English: In June, Emperor Zhongzong died suddenly, and Empress Dowager Wei took over as acting emperor.

古文：韦温、宗楚客、纪处讷等谋倾宗社，以睿宗介弟之重，先谋不利。
现代文：韦温、宗楚客、纪处讷等人阴谋颠覆国家，因为睿宗是中宗地位较重的弟弟，首先图谋害他。
English: Wei Wen, Zong Chu Ke, Ji Zhennai and others conspired to subvert the country, because Ruizong was a younger brother with a higher status in the Middle Kingdom, and they first tried to kill him.

古文：道士冯道力、处士刘承祖皆善于占兆，诣上布诚款。
现代文：道士冯道力、有才德而隐居的刘承祖都擅于占卦，到玄宗处表示忠诚之心。
English: The Taoist monk Feng Daoli and the virtuous and reclusive Liu Chengzu were both good at divination and went to Xuanzong to show their loyalty.

古文：上所居里名隆庆，时人语讹以 隆 为 龙 ；韦庶人称制，改元又为唐隆，皆符御名。
现代文：玄宗所住名为隆庆，当时人以讹传讹以隆为龙；韦庶人临朝掌管皇权，改年号又为唐隆，都符合玄宗的名字。
English: The name of the place where Xuanzong lived was Longqing. At that time, it was said that Xuanzong was a dragon; Wei, a commoner, was in charge of imperial power in the Lin Dynasty, and the year was changed to Tanglong, all of which are consistent with the name of Xuanzong.

古文：上益自负，乃与太平公主谋之，公主喜，以子崇简从。
现代文：玄宗越发自负，于是就与太平公主同谋，公主很高兴，让儿子崇简跟从玄宗。
English: Xuanzong became more and more conceited, so he conspired with Princess Taiping. The princess was very happy and let her son, Chongjian, follow Xuanzong.

古文：上乃与崇简、朝邑尉刘幽求、长上折冲麻嗣宗、押万骑果毅葛福顺李仙凫、宝昌寺僧普润等定策诛之。
现代文：玄宗于是与崇简，朝邑尉刘幽求，长上折冲麻嗣宗、押万骑果毅葛福顺李仙凫、宝昌寺僧普润等人定策略诛杀她。
English: Therefore, Xuanzong made a concerted effort to kill her with the help of Chongjian, Liu Yuzhu, the lieutenant of Chaoyu, Nagasho, Erchon, Mazhizong, Guo Fu Shun, Li Xianqi, the monk of Baochang Temple, and others.

古文：或曰： 先启大王。 
现代文：有人说 ：先禀告大王 睿宗 。 
English: Some people said, "First, denounce the great King Rejong."

古文：上曰： 我拯社稷之危，赴君父之急，事成福归于宗社，不成身死于忠孝，安可先请，忧怖大王乎！
现代文：玄宗道 ：我拯救国家的危难，奔赴君父的急难，事成归福于宗社，事不成我为忠孝而死，怎么可以先请示，使大王忧惧呢！
English: Xuanzong said, "I saved the country from danger, I rushed to the urgent need of the king and father, and if I succeed, I will be blessed by the patriarchal society. If I do not succeed, I will die for loyalty and filial piety. How can I first ask for guidance and make the great king worry?"

古文：若请而从，是王与危事；请而不从，则吾计失矣。 
现代文：假若请示而大王听从，这是大王参与危险的事；请示然而大王不听从，那我的计谋就失败了。
English: If you ask and the king listens, it is the king who is in danger; if you ask but the king does not listen, then my plan has failed.

古文：遂以庚子夜率幽求等数十人自苑南入，总监钟绍京又率丁匠百余以从。
现代文：于是就在七月二十日夜率领刘幽求等数十人从南苑入，总监钟绍京又率领工匠一百多人跟从。
English: As a result, on the evening of July 20th, Liu Yucui led dozens of people from the South Garden, and Director Zhong Shaojing led more than a hundred craftsmen to follow.

古文：分遣万骑往玄武门杀羽林将军韦播、高嵩，持首而至，众欢叫大集。
现代文：分派一万骑兵前往玄武门杀了羽林将军韦播、高嵩，提着他们的首级到来，众人欢呼聚集。
English: Ten thousand cavalrymen were dispatched to the Xuanwu Gate to kill the Ulin generals Wei Banning and Gao Song. They arrived carrying their heads, and everyone gathered cheering.

古文：攻白兽、玄德等门，斩关而进，左万骑自左入，右万骑自右入，合于凌烟阁前。
现代文：又攻打白兽、玄德等门，砍断关锁而进，左面一万骑兵从左门进入，右面一万骑兵从右门进入，在凌烟阁前会合。
English: They also attacked the White Beast, Xuan De and other gates, cut the locks and entered. Ten thousand cavalrymen on the left entered from the left gate, and ten thousand cavalrymen on the right entered from the right gate, and met in front of Lingyak Pavilion.

古文：时太极殿前有宿卫梓宫万骑，闻噪声，皆披甲应之。
现代文：当时太极殿前有住宿保卫中宗棺木的一万骑兵，听见鼓噪呐喊的声音，都披上铠甲响应。
English: At that time, there were ten thousand cavalrymen staying in front of the Taiji Hall to protect Zhongzong's coffin, and when they heard the sound of drums and shouts, they all put on armor to respond.

古文：韦庶人惶惑走入飞骑营，为乱兵所害。
现代文：韦庶人惶恐逃入飞骑营，被乱兵所杀。
English: Wei Zhongren panicked and fled to the flying cavalry camp, where he was killed by the soldiers.

古文：于是分遣诛韦氏之党，比明，内外讨捕，皆斩之。
现代文：于是分头派人诛杀韦庶人的党羽，等到天明，内外声讨捕获的韦氏同党，一起斩首。
English: As a result, the leader sent people to kill Wei Shizhen's followers, and by dawn, the captured Wei followers and party members were denounced both inside and outside, and they were beheaded together.

古文：乃驰谒睿宗，谢不先启请之罪。
现代文：这才派人骑马报告睿宗，为不先行请示而谢罪。
English: It was only then that someone was sent on horseback to report Ruizong, apologizing for not asking permission first.

古文：睿宗遽前抱上而泣曰： 宗社祸难，由汝安定，神祇万姓，赖汝之力也。 
现代文：睿宗急速向前拥抱玄宗而流泪道 ：国家祸难，由你安定，神灵百姓，依赖你的力量啊！ 
English: Ruizong rushed forward to embrace Xuanzong and shed tears, saying, "National calamity, it is up to you to stabilize, divine people, rely on your strength!"

古文：拜殿中监、同中书门下三品，兼押左右万骑，进封平王。
现代文：任命玄宗为殿中监、同中书门下三品，兼管左右营一万骑兵，晋封平王。
English: He appointed Xuanzong as the palace middle superintendent, the third grade of the same middle school, and also in charge of the left and right battalions of ten thousand cavalry, and was promoted to the title of Pingwang.

古文：睿宗即位，与侍臣议立皇太子，佥曰： 除天下之祸者，享天下之福；拯天下之危者，受天下之安。
现代文：睿宗即皇帝位，与大臣议立皇太子，众人道 ：除天下祸乱的人，享受天下之福；拯救天下危难的人，享受天下太平。
English: Ruizong is the emperor, and the crown prince is set up in consultation with the minister, and the people are humane: those who eliminate the world's disasters can enjoy the world's blessings; those who save the world's peril can enjoy the world's peace.

古文：平王有圣德，定天下，又闻成器已下咸有推让，宜膺主鬯，以副群心。 
现代文：平王有圣贤之德，平定天下，又听说成器以下诸皇子都有推让之心，应接受太子之位，以符合众人之意。 
English: King Hei had the virtue of a sage, pacified the world, and it was also said that all the princes below him had a heart of concession, and should accept the position of prince in order to meet the will of the people.

古文：朕方比迹洪古，希风太皇，神与化游，思与道合，无为无事，岂不美欤！王公百僚，宜识朕意。
现代文：这天有 景云 太平的征兆，便改年号为 景云 ，大赦天下。延和元年六月，韦氏凶党借助术士的话传给睿宗听道： 根据玄象，帝座及前星有灾，皇太子理应做天子，不应再住东宫了！ 睿宗道： 传位是德，可以避灾，我意已决定了。 
English: On this day, there was a sign of peace in Jingyun, so the year name was changed to Jingyun, for the sake of world peace. In June of the first year of Yanhe, Wei's evil party used the words of a sorcerer to convey to Ruizong: According to the occult, there is a disaster in the imperial throne and the foreground star, the crown prince should be the son of heaven, and should no longer live in the East Palace! Ruizong: I have decided to pass on the position because it is virtuous and can avoid disasters.

古文：上意惶惧，驰见叩头，请所以传位之旨。
现代文：玄宗惶恐，骑马前来叩头，请示传位的原因。
English: Panic-stricken, Xuanzong came on horseback to prostrate himself, and asked for the reason for his demotion.

古文：睿宗曰： 吾因汝功业得宗社。
现代文：睿宗道： 我凭借你的功业而得到国家。
English: Ruizong Dao: I won the country thanks to your efforts.

古文：今帝座有眚，思欲逊避，唯圣德大勋，始转祸为福。
现代文：现在皇帝有过失，想要让位，惟有圣贤的德行，伟大的功勋，才能转祸为福。
English: Now that the emperor has made a mistake and wants to abdicate, only the virtuous deeds of saints and sages, great merits, can turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：易位于汝，吾知晚矣。 
现代文：传位给你，我知道晚了。 
English: I know it's late.

古文：上始居武德殿视事，三品以下除授及徒罪皆自决之。
现代文：玄宗这才开始在武德殿就职治事，三品以下官员任免及徒刑罪犯都自己决断。
English: It was only then that Xuanzong began to take office at the Wude Hall. He made his own decisions on the appointment and dismissal of officials below the third grade, as well as on prisoners.

古文：先天二年七月三日，尚书左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠崔湜、雍州长史李晋、左羽林大将军常元楷、右羽林将军李慈等与太平公主同谋，期以其月四日以羽林军作乱。
现代文：先天二年七月三日，尚书左仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠崔、雍州长史李晋、左羽林大将军常元楷、右羽林将军李慈等与太平公主同谋，约定七月四日凭借羽林军作乱。
English: On July 3, the day before yesterday, Shangshu's left-hand servant, Sho Dou Huai Zhen, his attendant, the middle-ranking eunuch, the middle-ranking eunuch, Xiao Zhizhong Cui, the Yong governor, Shi Li Jin, the left-wing eunuch, Major General Chang Yuan Kai, and the right-wing eunuch, General Li Ci, conspired with Princess Taiping and agreed to use the eunuch's army to create a disturbance on July 4.

古文：加邠王守礼实封三百户，宋王成器、申王成义各加实封一千户，岐王范、薛王业各加实封七百户。
现代文：玄宗秘密知道。因此密下旨意告诉岐王范、薛王业、兵部尚书郭元振、将军王毛仲，取马厩中的马及家人三百多人，率领太仆少卿李令问、王守一、内侍高力士、果毅李守德等亲信十多人，出武德门，进入虔化门。
English: Therefore, he secretly instructed Qi Wangfan, Xue Wangye, the military secretary Guo Yuanzhen, and the general Wang Maozhong to take the horses in the stables and more than three hundred family members, and led more than ten close confidants, such as the servant Li Lingyao, Wang Shouyi, the chamberlain Gao Lishi, and Guo Yi Li Shoude, out of the Wude Gate and into the Qianhua Gate.

古文：文武官三品以下赐爵一级，四品已下各加一阶。内外官人被诸道按察使及御史所摘伏，咸宜洗涤；选日依次叙用。丁卯，崔湜、卢藏用除名，长流岭表。
现代文：在北宫杀了常元楷、李慈。在内客省将贾膺福、李猷捉拿出来，在朝堂捕获了萧至忠、岑羲，都将他们斩首。睿宗第二天下诏书道： 朕将高枕无忧，不再治国，从现在起，军国政刑所有事情，一律由皇帝处置。 七月六日，崔、卢藏用除去名籍，长期流放岭表。
English: He killed Changyuan Kai and Li Ci in the Northern Palace, captured Jia Yufu and Li Yao in the Neige Province, and captured Xiao Zhizhong and Yao in the Imperial Palace, and beheaded them all. The next day, Emperor Ruizong issued an edict: "I will rest easy, I will no longer govern the country, from now on, all matters of military and political punishment will be handled by the emperor." On July 6, Cui and Lu Zangyong were stripped of their surnames and exiled to Lingpu for a long time.

古文：壬申，王琚为银青光禄大夫、户部尚书，封赵国公，实封三百户；姜皎银青光禄大夫、工部尚书，封楚国公，实封五百户；李令问银青光禄大夫、殿中监，实封三百户；王毛仲辅国大将军、左武卫大将军、检校内外闲廊兼知监牧使、霍国公，实封五百户；王守一银青光禄大夫、太常卿同正员，进封晋国公，实封五百户：并赏其定策功。
现代文：七月十一日，王琚任银青光禄大夫、户部尚书，封赵国公，实受封三百户；姜皎任银青光禄大夫、工部尚书，封楚国公，实受封五百户；李令问银青光禄大夫、殿中监，实受封三百户；王毛仲任辅国大将军、左武卫大将军、检校内外马厩兼任监牧使、霍国公，实受封五百户；王守一任银青光禄大夫、太常卿同正员，晋封晋国公，实受封五百户：都奖赏他们平乱定策之功。
English: On July 11th, Wang Hui, who was appointed as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu and the inspector of the Household Department, and was given the title of Zhao Guogong, actually received the title of 300 households; Jiang Hui, who was appointed as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu and the inspector of the Ministry of Industry, and was given the title of Chu Guogong, actually received the title of 500 households; Li Ling, who was appointed as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu and the supervisor of the palace, actually received the title of 300 households; Wang Maozhong, who was appointed as the assistant general of the country, the general of Zuo Wei, and the

古文：琚、皎、令问固让。
现代文：王琚、姜皎、李令问坚决辞让。
English: Wang Hui, Jiang Hui and Li Lingtao resolutely asked for concessions.

古文：癸丑，中书侍郎陆象先为益州大都督府长史兼剑南道按察兵马使，尚书左丞张说为检校中书令。
现代文：七月十二日，中书侍郎陆象先任益州大都督府长史兼剑南道按察兵马使，尚书左丞张说为检校中书令。
English: On July 12th, Lu Xiang, the second-in-command of Chinese calligraphy, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou and the military envoy of Jianan Province, and Shang Shuzo, the second-in-command of Chinese calligraphy, was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：甲戌，令毁天枢，取其铜铁充军国杂用。庚辰，王琚为中书侍郎，加实封二百户；姜皎殿中监，仍充内外闲厩使，加实封二百户；李令问殿中少监、知尚食事，加实封二百户。
现代文：七月十三日，命令毁坏天枢，取它的铜铁充作军国杂用，七月十九日，王琚为中书侍郎，加实封二百户，姜皎任殿中监，仍然充当内外马厩使，加实封二百户；李令问任殿中少监，兼管皇上食物诸事，加实封二百户。
English: On July 13th, the order was given to destroy the heavenly pivot and use its copper and iron for miscellaneous military and state purposes. On July 19th, Wang Qian was appointed as the attendant of the imperial secretary, with an additional 200 households. Jiang Qian was appointed as the palace middle supervisor, still acting as the internal and external stable attendant, with an additional 200 households. Li Lingtao was appointed as the palace middle and junior supervisor, also in charge of the emperor's food affairs, with an additional 200 households.

古文：己丑，周孝明高皇帝依旧追赠太原王，宜去帝号；孝明皇后宜称太原王妃；昊陵、顺陵并称太原王及妃墓。
现代文：七月二十八日，周孝明高皇帝依旧追赠为太原王，应该撤去皇帝号；孝明皇后应该称太原王妃；昊陵、顺陵都应称太原王及王妃墓。
English: On July 28, Emperor Zhou Xiaoming Gao was still posthumously named the King of Taiyuan, and the title of emperor should be removed; Empress Xiaoming should be called the Queen of Taiyuan; Haoling and Shunling should be called the Tomb of the King and Queen of Taiyuan.

古文：八月壬辰，封州流人刘幽求为尚书左仆射、知军国重事、徐国公，仍依旧实封七百户。
现代文：八月初一，流亡在封州的刘幽求任尚书左仆射、知军国重事，封徐国公，仍依照旧例实封七百户。
English: On the first day of August, Liu Yu, who was in exile in Fuzhou, asked Ren Shang to write a letter to his left-hand man, Zhi Jun, who was in charge of the country's important affairs, to seal Xu Guogong. Seven hundred households were still sealed in accordance with the old rules.

古文：制曰： 凡有刑人，国家常法。
现代文：皇帝命道 ：凡有施刑的事，是国家的常法。
English: The emperor ordered: "Anything that involves the imposition of punishment is the country's normal law."

古文：掩骼埋胔，王者用心。
现代文：掩埋尸骨，是帝王的良苦用心。
English: It was the emperor's good intention to bury the bones.

古文：自今已后，辄有屠割刑人骨肉者，依法科残害之罪。 
现代文：自今以后，如有屠割受刑者骨肉的人，依法判处残害人的罪名。 
English: From now on, if anyone butchers the flesh and bones of a prisoner, they will be convicted of mutilation according to the law.

古文：九月，司空兼扬州大都督、宋王成器为太尉兼扬州大都督，益州大都督兼右金吾大将军、申王成义为司徒兼益州大都督，单于大都护兼左金吾大将军、邠王守礼为司空。
现代文：九月，司空兼扬州大都督宋王成器为太尉兼扬州大都督；益州大都督兼右金吾大将军、申王成义为大司徒兼益州大都督；单于大都护兼左金吾大将军、王守礼为司空。
English: In September, Siku and Yangzhou Grand Governor Song Wangcheng was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general and Yangzhou Grand Governor; Ezhou Grand Governor and Right Kingu General, Shin Wangcheng was promoted to the rank of grand tutor and Ezhou Grand Governor; Shan Yu was promoted to the rank of Grand Guardian and Left Kingu General, and Wang Shouli was promoted to Siku.

古文：九月丁卯，宋王成器为开府仪同三司，尚书左仆射刘幽求同中书门下三品，检校中书令、燕国公张说为中书令，特进王仁皎为开府仪同三司。
现代文：九月七日，宋王成器为开府仪同三司；尚书左仆射刘幽求同中书门下三品；检校中书令、燕国公张说为中书令；享受特进待遇的王仁皎为开府仪同三司。
English: On September 7th, Song Wangcheng was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si; Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, Liu Yuqiu, was awarded the title of Caifu Yi Tong San Si; Yang Guo Gong Zhang was awarded the title of Caifu Yi Tong San Si; and Wang Renya, who enjoyed special treatment, was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si.

古文：己卯，宴王公百僚于承天门，令左右于楼下撒金钱，许中书门下五品已上官及诸司三品已上官争拾之，仍赐物有差。
现代文：九月十九日，在承天门宴请王公百僚，令左右侍从在楼下撒放金钱，允许中书省、门下省五品以上官员及各衙门三品以上官员争着拾取，仍然按等级赐物。
English: On September 19th, Wang Gong's hundred colleagues were invited to a banquet at the Chengtian Gate, and the attendants on both sides were ordered to scatter money downstairs, allowing the officials of the Central Book Ministry, the officials of the provinces below the gate with more than five prizes, and the officials of each gate with more than three prizes to compete to pick up the gifts, still according to their rank.

古文：郭元振兼御史大夫。
现代文：郭元振兼任御史大夫。
English: Guo Yuan Zhen also served as chief historian.

古文：丙戌，又置右御史台。
现代文：九月二十六日，又设置右御史台。
English: On September 26, the Right History Channel was also set up.

古文：冬十一月甲申，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：冬十月十三日，在骊山讲习武事。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, a martial arts class was held in Shaoshan.

古文：癸卯，讲武于骊山。兵部尚书、代国公郭元振坐亏失军容，配流新州；给事中、摄太常少卿唐绍以军礼有失，斩于纛下。甲辰，畋猎于渭川。
现代文：代国公郭元振犯了亏损军容之罪，发配到新州；给事中、代理太常少卿唐绍因为军礼失误，斩于大旗之下。十月十四日，玄宗在渭川打猎。
English: Guo Yuan Zhen, the deputy governor of the state, committed the crime of loss of military appearance and was sent to Xinzhou; in the process, Tang Shao, the acting Taizhong Shaoqing, was beheaded under the big flag because of a mistake in military etiquette. On October 14, Xuanzong went hunting in Luochuan.

古文：同州刺史、梁国公姚元之为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：同州刺史、梁国公姚元之为兵部尚书，同中书门下三品。
English: In the history of the same state, Liang Guogong Yao Yuanshi was the highest-ranking soldier in the military department, and the third-highest in the same school.

古文：乙巳，至自温汤。
现代文：十月十五日，玄宗从温泉归来。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：十一月乙丑，幽求兼知侍中。
现代文：十一月五日，刘幽求兼任知侍中。
English: On November 5th, Liu Yucui took on the additional role of chizamizucho.

古文：戊子，上加尊号为开元神武皇帝。
现代文：十一月二十八日，皇上加尊号为开元神武皇帝。
English: On November 28th, the Emperor's honorific title was changed to Emperor Kaiyuan Shenwu.

古文：十二月庚寅朔，大赦天下，改元为开元，内外官赐勋一转。
现代文：十二月初一，大赦天下，改元为开元，内外官赐勋一等。
English: On the first day of December, the emperor pardoned the whole country, the Yuan was changed to the Kai Yuan, and the officials at home and abroad were awarded the first class.

古文：改尚书左、右仆射为左、右丞相，中书省为紫微省，门下省为黄门省，侍中为监。
现代文：改尚书左、右仆射为左、右丞相，中书省为紫微省，门下省为黄门省，侍中为监。
English: He changed Shang Shuxi's left and right flunkeys to the left and right vice-ministers, Zhong Shuxi's province to Ziwei, his subordinate province to Huangmen, and his chamberlain to the supervisor.

古文：雍州为京兆府，洛州为河南府，长史为尹，司马为少尹。
现代文：雍州改为京兆府。洛州为河南府，长史为尹，司马为少尹。
English: Yongzhou was changed to Jingzhao Prefecture, Luozhou to Henan Prefecture, Changshi to Yin, and Sima to Shaoyin.

古文：国初以来宰相及食实封功臣子孙，一应沉翳未承恩者，令量才擢用。
现代文：开国以来，宰相以及食实封的功臣子孙，所有埋没未有承受皇恩者，令量才提拔任用。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, the prime minister and the descendants of the meritorious vassals who were buried and did not receive the royal favor were only promoted and appointed by the emperor.

古文：开元元年十二月己亥，禁断泼寒胡戏。
现代文：开元元年十二月十日，禁止泼寒胡戏。
English: On December 10th of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, cold play was banned.

古文：癸丑，尚书左丞相兼黄门监刘幽求为太子少保，罢知政事；紫微令张说为相州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十四日，尚书左丞相兼黄门监刘幽求为太子少保，罢免知政事。紫微令张说为相州刺史。
English: On December 24th, Liu Yucui, Shangshu's minister of the left and Huangmen's overseer, was appointed as the prince's minor protector and dismissed from political affairs. Zi Weiling Zhang said that he was the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：甲寅，门下侍郎卢怀慎同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：十二月二十五日，门下侍郎卢怀慎同紫微黄门平章事。
English: On December 25th, Lu Huaixin and Zi Weiguangmenping signed a contract.

古文：二年春正月，关中自去秋至于是月不雨，人多饥乏，遣使赈给。
现代文：开元二年春正月，关中从去年秋天到这月不下雨，人多缺粮，便派遣使者赈给粮食。
English: In the first month of spring of the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Guanzhong sent an emissary to bring grain because it had not rained from last autumn to this month and many people were short of grain.

古文：制求直谏昌言弘益政理者。
现代文：下诏寻求直言敢谏有益于光大政事的人。
English: The following is an edict for those who seek to be outspoken and helpful in light of major political events.

古文：名山大川，并令祈祭。
现代文：名山大川，都命人祈祷祭祀。
English: The famous mountain river, the capital ordered people to pray and worship.

古文：丙寅，紫微令姚崇上言请检责天下僧尼，以伪滥还俗者二万余人。
现代文：正月初七，紫微令姚崇上奏说检括天下僧尼，因为虚假冒充而迫令还俗的僧尼有二万人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zi Wei ordered Yao Chong to report that the monks and nuns in the world were under investigation, and that there were 20,000 monks and nuns who were forced to return to the secular world because of false impersonation.

古文：甲申，并州大都督府长史兼检校左卫大将军薛讷同紫微黄门三品，仍总兵以讨奚、契丹。
现代文：正月二十五日，并州大都督府长史兼检校左卫大将军薛讷同紫微黄门三品，仍然统领军队以讨伐奚、契丹。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the year, the governor of the prefecture, the governor of the prefecture and the inspector of the school, the left guard general Xue Ne and the purple and yellow gate three prizes, still led the army to fight against the Jurchen and Khitan.

古文：二月，突厥默啜遣其子同俄特勤率众寇北庭都护府，右骁卫将军郭虔瓘击败之，斩同俄于城下。
现代文：二月，突厥默啜遣其子同俄特勤率众入侵北庭都护府，右骁卫将军郭虔馞击败之，斩同俄于城下。
English: In February, Turku Miao sent his son and the Russian secret service to invade the Northern Court, defeating the right guard general Guo Qianqian and defeating the Russians under the city.

古文：己酉，以旱，亲录囚徒。
现代文：二月二十一日，因为旱灾，玄宗亲自审查记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On February 21, because of the drought, Xuanzong personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：改太史监罢隶秘书省。
现代文：改太史监而不再隶属秘书省。
English: It was renamed the Office of the Superintendent of History and no longer belonged to the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：闰月癸亥，令道士、女冠、僧尼致拜父母。
现代文：闰二月初五，命令道士、女道士、和尚、尼姑拜见父母。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd lunar month, he ordered Taoists, female Taoists, monks, and nuns to visit their parents.

古文：丁卯，复置十道按察使。
现代文：初九，重新设置十道按察使。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, re-set the ten-way according to the inspector.

古文：己未，突厥默啜妹婿火拔颉利发石失毕与其妻来奔，封燕山郡王，授左卫员外大将军。
现代文：闰二月初一，突厥默啜妹夫火拔颉利发石失毕与其妻子投奔前来，被封为燕山郡王，授予左卫员外大将军。
English: On the first day of the second month of the leap year, Turku Miao's brother-in-law, Hui Baili, and his wife came to visit, and he was named the county king of Yanshan County and awarded the left guard grand general.

古文：紫微侍郎、赵国公王琚左授泽州刺史，赐实封一百户，余并停。
现代文：紫微侍郎、赵国公王琚贬为泽州刺史，赐给实封一百户，其余待遇全部取消。
English: Zi Wei's attendant, Zhao Guogong Wang Yao, was relegated to the status of Zhezhou's history, and was given to one hundred households, and the rest of the treatment was cancelled.

古文：丁亥，刘幽求为睦州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，刘幽求为睦州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Liu Yucui became the history of Mutsu Province.

古文：三月甲辰，青州刺史、郇国公韦安石为沔州别驾；太子宾客、逍遥公韦嗣立为岳州别驾；特进致仕李峤先随子在袁州，又贬滁州别驾：并员外置。
现代文：三月十七日，青州刺史、郇国公韦安石为沔州别驾；太子宾客、逍遥公韦嗣立为岳州别驾；以特进的资格辞官的李峤先随儿子在袁州，又贬为滁州别驾，并且都是定员以外设置的闲官。
English: On March 17th, the history of Qingzhou and Wei Anshi, the governor of Shandong Province, became the governor of Shandong Province; the guest of the crown prince, Wei Xi, the governor of Shandong Province, became the governor of Yue Province; and Li Yuxi, who had been promoted to the position of the governor of Shandong Province, followed his son to Yuan Province and was also demoted to the position of the governor of Shandong Province. All of them were non-commissioned officers.

古文：去年九月有诏毁天枢，至今春始。
现代文：去年九月下诏书毁弃记载武则天功德的天枢，到今春才开始毁弃。
English: In September last year, the emperor issued an edict to destroy the celestial center that recorded the merits of Emperor Wu, but it was not until this spring that the destruction began.

古文：夏五月辛亥，黄门监魏知古工部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：夏五月二十二日，黄门监魏知古任工部尚书，免去知政事。
English: On the 22nd day of summer in May, Huangmen Supervisor Wei Zhigu, who was in charge of the Ministry of Industry, was removed from his post.

古文：六月丁巳，开府仪同三司、宋王成器为岐州刺史，司徒、申王成义为豳州刺史，司空、邠王守礼为虢州刺史：委务于上佐。
现代文：六月初二，开府仪同三司、宋王成器为岐州刺史；司徒、申王成义为幽州刺史；司空、王守礼为虢州刺史：委托他们务必辅佐皇上。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Kaifu Yi, the third secretary and Song Wangcheng were sent to Qizhou to write the history; Szeto and Shen Wangchengyi were sent to Yuzhou to write the history; Siku and Wang Shouli were sent to Zhangzhou to write the history: they must be entrusted to assist the emperor.

古文：内出珠玉锦绣等服玩，又令于正殿前焚之。
现代文：从宫内拿出珠玉锦绣等服饰玩好用具，又令在正殿前烧毁。
English: Jewelry, brocade, and other clothing and playthings were taken out of the palace and burned in front of the main hall.

古文：乙丑，兵部尚书致仕、韩国公张仁愿卒。
现代文：六月十日，已辞职之兵部尚书韩国公张仁愿去世。
English: On June 10, South Korean public official Jang In Gwan, who had resigned from the military, passed away.

古文：七月，薛讷与副将杜宾客、崔宣道等总兵六万自檀州道遇贼于滦河，为贼所败。
现代文：七月，薛讷与副将杜宾客、崔宣道等人统兵六万人从檀州出发在半道上与贼兵在滦河上作战，被贼人击败。
English: In July, Xue Ne, together with Vice Generals Du Binhe and Cui Xuandao and other 60,000 soldiers, set out from Danzhou to fight against the bandits on the middle of the road on the Wei River. They were defeated by the bandits.

古文：讷等屏甲遁归，减死，除名为庶人。
现代文：薛讷等人抛弃铠甲逃归，减免死罪，除去名籍而做老百姓。
English: Xue Ne and others abandoned their armour and fled back home, had their death sentences commuted, and had their surnames and surnames removed to become commoners.

古文：辛未，光禄卿窦希瑊为太子太傅。
现代文：光禄卿窦希王咸为太子太傅。
English: Guangruqing Dou Xi Wang Xian became the prince's daifu.

古文：房州刺史、襄王重茂薨于梁州，谥曰殇帝。
现代文：房州刺史、襄王重茂在梁州去世，谥为殇帝。
English: Fang Zhou and Xiang Wang Shigemo died in Liang Zhou, and Zhou became the emperor.

古文：丙午，昭文馆学士柳冲、太子左庶子刘子玄刊定《姓族系录》二百卷，上之。
现代文：七月二十一日，昭文馆学士柳冲、太子左庶子刘子玄刊定《姓族系录》二百卷，呈献给皇上。
English: On July 21, Liu Chong, a scholar at the Shouwen Library, and Liu Zihuan, Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, published 200 volumes of the "Family Tree" and presented it to the emperor.

古文：以兴庆里旧邸为兴庆宫。
现代文：以兴庆里旧邸为兴庆宫。
English: The former residence in Xingqingli is the Xingqing Palace.

古文：诸王傅并停。
现代文：诸王的太傅全部撤销。
English: All of the kings' taifu were revoked.

古文：京官所带跨巾算袋，每朝参日着，外官衙日着，余日停。
现代文：在京官员所带跨巾算袋，每次朝见皇帝时佩带；外官进见上司时佩带，其余时间停止使用。
English: In Beijing, officials carried a cloth-covered counting bag and wore it every time they met the emperor; foreign officials wore it when they met their superiors, and stopped using it the rest of the time.

古文：吐蕃寇临洮军，又游寇兰州、渭州，掠群牧，起薛讷摄左羽林将军、陇右防御使，率杜宾客、郭知运、王晙、安思顺以御之。
现代文：吐蕃入侵临洮军，又来往入侵兰州、渭州，掠夺各州。起用薛讷代理羽林将军、陇右防御使，率领杜宾客、郭知运、王腢、安思顺以抵御吐蕃。
English: Tubo invaded the Linyi army, invaded Lanzhou and Ganzhou, and plundered all the states. He appointed Xue Ne as the deputy general of Hualin and the right-hand defense envoy, and led Du Binke, Guo Zhiyun, Wang Qian and An Sishun to resist Tubo.

古文：薛讷破吐蕃于渭州西界武阶驿，斩首一万七十级，马七万七匹，牛羊四万头。
现代文：太常卿、岐王范为华州刺史，秘书监、薛王业为同州刺史。八月初三，西天竺国派遣使者献土特产。九月二十四，皇上驾幸新丰之温泉。冬十月初四日，皇上从温泉回来。薛讷在渭州西界武阶驿攻破吐蕃，斩吐蕃头颅一万零七十个，掳获马七万七千匹，牛羊四万头。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the West Heavenly Kingdom sent an envoy to present its local special products. On the 24th day of the 9th month, the emperor went to Xinfeng Hot Spring. On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor returned from the hot spring. Xue Ne defeated the Tuyu in the western border of Luzhou, and cut off 10,070 skulls of Tuyu, captured 77,000 horses, and 40,000 cattle and sheep.

古文：丰安军使郎将、判将军王海宾先锋力战，死之。
现代文：丰安军使郎将、判将军王海宾冲锋在前，奋战而死。
English: Feng'an's military envoy and general Wang Haibin led the charge and died in battle.

古文：十一月庚寅，葬殇帝于武功西原。
现代文：十一月初六，在武功西原安葬殇帝。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 11th month, Emperor Wu was buried in Wukong Xihuan.

古文：十二月乙丑，封皇子嗣真为鄫王，嗣初为鄂王，嗣玄为鄄王。
现代文：十二月十二日，封皇子嗣真为曾阝王，嗣初为鄂王，嗣玄为鄄王。
English: On December 12th, the heir to the crown prince was Zeng Xi Wang, the heir to the crown prince was E Wang, and the heir to the crown prince was Xuan Xi Wang.

古文：时右威卫中郎将周庆立为安南市舶使，与波斯僧广造奇巧，将以进内。
现代文：当时右威卫中郎将周庆立为安南市舶使，与波斯僧人大造奇巧异物，将用来进贡朝廷。
English: At that time, Yu Wei Wei Zhong Lang appointed Zhou Qing as the naval envoy of Annan City, and together with Persian monks, they made strange and exotic objects, which would be used to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：监选使、殿中侍御史柳泽上书谏，上嘉纳之。
现代文：监选使、殿中侍御史柳泽上书劝谏，皇上嘉许并采纳。
English: Yanagisawa, the supervising envoy and palace chamberlain, sent a letter of recommendation to the Emperor, who accepted it with appreciation.

古文：三年春正月丁亥，立郢王嗣谦为皇太子，降死罪已下，大酺三日。
现代文：三年春正月初四，立郢王嗣谦为皇太子，死罪以下囚徒减刑，聚饮三天。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, Wang Shiqian was appointed as the crown prince, prisoners with death sentences or less were commuted, and a drinking party was held for three days.

古文：癸卯，黄门侍郎卢怀慎为检校黄门监。
现代文：正月二十日，黄门侍郎卢怀慎为检校黄门监。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the year, Lu Huaixin, the Yellow Gate attendant, became the Yellow Gate inspector.

古文：甲辰，工部尚书魏知古卒。
现代文：正月二十一日，工部尚书魏知古去世。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the year, Wei Zhigu, the head of the engineering department, passed away.

古文：二月，禁断天下采捕鲤鱼。
现代文：二月，禁止天下采捕鲤鱼。
English: In February, cod fishing was banned worldwide.

古文：十姓部落左厢五咄六啜、右厢五弩失毕五俟斤，及高丽莫离支高文简、都督鳷跌思太等，各率其众自突厥相继来奔，前后总二千余帐。
现代文：十姓部落左厢五咄六啜、右厢五弩失毕五俟斤，及高丽莫离支高文简、都督跌思太等人，各个率领部众从突厥相继前来投奔，前前后后总计二千多营帐。
English: Ten clansmen from the left compartment of the tribe lost five to six pounds, five clansmen from the right compartment lost five to six pounds, and Gao Moliu branch Gao Wenzhian, the governor Doushita and others, all led by the leaders, came from Turkic successively, with a total of more than two thousand camp accounts.

古文：析许州、唐州置仙州。
现代文：分许州、唐州而设置仙州。
English: Xuzhou and Tangzhou were divided, and Xianzhou was set up.

古文：夏四月，岐王范兼虢州刺史，薛王业兼幽州刺史。
现代文：夏四月，岐王范兼虢州刺史，薛王业兼幽州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, Qi Wang Fan and Zhangzhou stabbed history, Xue Wangye and Yuzhou stabbed history.

古文：六月，山东诸州大蝗，飞则蔽景，下则食苗稼，声如风雨。
现代文：六月，山东各州蝗虫成灾，飞起来遮天蔽日，落下地就吃光苗禾庄稼，声音像风雨。
English: In June, locusts plagued every prefecture in Shandong Province. When they flew up, they covered the sky and the sun, and when they fell to the ground, they ate all the seedlings and crops. The sound was like wind and rain.

古文：紫微令姚崇奏请差御史下诸道，促官吏遣人驱扑焚瘗，以救秋稼，从之。
现代文：紫微令姚崇奏请皇上派御史下令各道，督促官吏派人驱赶扑灭烧埋蝗虫，以救秋天庄稼。
English: Zi Wei ordered Yao Chongso to ask the emperor to send the imperial historian to issue an order to all provinces, urging officials to send people to drive out and extinguish the locusts to save the autumn crops.

古文：是岁，田收有获，人不甚饥。
现代文：皇上听从了姚崇的意见。这年，田中有收获，人们不太饥荒。
English: The emperor listened to Yao Chong's advice. This year, there was a harvest in the fields, and people were not too hungry.

古文：秋七月，刑部尚书李日知卒。
现代文：秋七月，刑部尚书李日知去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Li Ritchi, passed away.

古文：冬十月甲寅，制曰： 朕听政之暇，常览史籍，事关理道，实所留心，中有阙疑，时须质问。
现代文：冬十月初六，皇上命令道： 朕听政之闲暇，常看史籍，有关史事道理，实乃我留心之处，中间有什么疑难，时时须要询问。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor ordered, "In my spare time when I am listening to politics, I often read historical books, and the truth about historical events is what I pay attention to. If there is any doubt in the middle, I must always ask.

古文：宜选耆儒博学一人，每日入内侍读。 
现代文：应选拔年高望重博学多才一人，每天入宫侍读。 
English: Only one person of high prestige and erudition should be selected to enter the palace every day.

古文：以光禄卿马怀素为左散骑常侍，与右散骑常侍褚无量并充侍读。
现代文：以光禄卿马怀素为左散骑常侍，与右散骑常侍褚无量并充侍读。
English: With Kōroku-kyō Ma Huai-su as the left riding attendant, and with the right riding attendant 無量 and 充侍讀.

古文：甲子，幸郿县之凤泉汤。
现代文：十六日，皇帝驾幸县之凤泉汤。
English: On the 16th, the emperor left Fengquan Tang in Jieyong County.

古文：十一月已卯，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：十一月一日，从凤泉汤回官。
English: On November 1st, I returned from Fengquan Tang.

古文：乙酉，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：七日，驾幸新丰之温汤。
English: On the seventh day, Xinfeng's hot soup was ready.

古文：丁亥，妖贼崔子岩等入相州作乱。
现代文：九日，妖贼崔子山品，等攻入相州作乱。
English: On the 9th, the villain Cui Zishanpin and others invaded the state of Xiangzhou and caused a disturbance.

古文：戊子，州司讨平之。
现代文：十日，州官讨伐平定了他。
English: On the 10th, he was subdued by state officials.

古文：甲午，至自温汤。
现代文：十六日，皇上从温汤回宫。
English: On the 16th, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：十二月庚午，以军器使为军器监，置官员。
现代文：十二月二十二日，以军器使为军器监，设置官员。
English: On December 22nd, the Ordnance Officer was appointed as the Ordnance Inspector.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：四年春正月癸未，尚衣奉御长孙昕恃以皇后妹婿，与其妹夫杨仙玉殴击御史大夫李杰，上令朝堂斩昕以谢百官。
现代文：四年春正月六日，尚衣奉御长孙昕倚仗是皇后妹夫的势力，与他的妹夫杨仙玉殴打御史大夫李杰，皇上命令在朝堂上杀长孙昕向百官谢罪。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Spring, Shang Yi, relying on the influence of the empress's brother-in-law, and his brother-in-law Yang Xianyu, beat up the imperial historian Li Jie, and the emperor ordered to kill the eldest grandson in the morning hall to thank the hundred officials.

古文：以阳和之月不可行刑，累表陈请，乃命杖杀之。丁亥，宋王成器、申王成义以 成 字犯昭成皇后谥号，于是成器改名宪，成义改为捴。
现代文：因为春天不可杀人，于是命令用棍棒打死。十日，宋王成器、申王成义因为 成 字冒犯昭成皇后谥号，于是成器改名为宪，成义改名为扌为。
English: On the 10th, Song Wangcheng Ji and Shin Wangcheng Yi changed their names to Xian Ji and Xian Yi respectively, because the characters "成" and "成" offended Empress Zhao Zheng.

古文：刑部尚书、中山郡公李乂卒。
现代文：刑部尚书、中山郡公李去世。
English: Shang Shu of the Criminal Investigation Department and Gong Li of Zhongshan County passed away.

古文：二月丙辰，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：二月九日皇上驾到新丰之温汤。
English: On February 9th, the Emperor arrived at the hot spring of Xinfeng.

古文：丁卯，至自温汤。
现代文：二十日，从温汤回宫。
English: On the 20th, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：以关中旱，遣使祈雨于骊山，应时澍雨。
现代文：因为关中旱灾，派遣使者在骊山求雨，雨水果然应时而降。
English: Because of the drought in Guanzhong, an envoy was sent to the Lushan Mountains to ask for rain, and the fruits of rain naturally fell from time to time.

古文：令以少牢致祭，仍禁断樵采。
现代文：皇上命令用猪羊祭祀上天，仍然禁止上山砍柴。
English: The emperor ordered that pigs and sheep be sacrificed to the heavens, but it was still forbidden to go up the mountain to cut firewood.

古文：夏六月庚寅，月蚀既。
现代文：夏五月十五日，月蚀已完。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth lunar month, the lunar eclipse was over.

古文：癸亥，太上皇崩于百福殿。
现代文：六月十九日，太上皇睿宗在百福殿去世。
English: On June 19th, the Emperor Reizei passed away in Baifu Hall.

古文：辛未，京师、华、陕三州大风拔木。
现代文：六月二十七日，京师、华州、陕州三州大风拔起树木。
English: On June 27th, high winds uprooted trees in Beijing Division, Huazhou, and Shaanxi.

古文：癸酉，突厥可汗默啜为九姓拔曳固所杀，斩其首送于京师。
现代文：二十九日突厥王默啜被九姓拔曳固所杀，斩其首，送到京师。
English: On the 29th, the Turkic king Mokusu was killed by a man with nine surnames, who beheaded him and sent him to the capital.

古文：默啜兄子小杀继立为可汗。
现代文：默啜兄之子小杀继立为突厥王。
English: The son of his silent brother, Koushiji, became the king of the Turks.

古文：是夏，山东、河南、河北蝗虫大起，遣使分捕而瘗之。
现代文：这年夏天，山东、河南、河北蝗虫大起，派遣使者分头捕杀掩埋蝗虫。
English: This summer, the locusts in Shandong, Henan and Hebei were on the rise, and emissaries were sent to hunt and bury the locusts.

古文：其回纥、同罗、、勃曳固、仆固五部落来附，于大武军北安置。
现代文：其间回纥、同罗、靅、勃曳固、仆固五个部落前来归附，在大武军北面安置。
English: In the meantime, five tribes, including Hui, Tongluo, Yao, Bo-Higu, and Mugu, came to attach themselves and settled in the north of the Great Military.

古文：秋七月丙申，分巂、雅二州置黎州。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，分辒州、雅州，而设置黎州。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the provinces of Bozhou and Yazhou were divided, and Lizhou was set up.

古文：冬十月癸丑，户部尚书、新除太子詹事毕构卒。
现代文：冬十月十一日，户部尚书、新任命的太子詹事毕构去世。
English: In the winter of October 11th, the newly appointed crown prince Zhan Zhi Bi Jie passed away.

古文：庚午，葬睿宗大圣贞皇帝于桥陵。
现代文：二十八日，在桥陵安葬睿宗大圣贞皇帝。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Ruizong was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：以同州蒲城县为奉先县，隶京兆府。
现代文：以同州蒲城县为奉先县，隶属京兆府。
English: The county of Pucheng in the same prefecture is called Fengxian County, which is part of Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：十一月丁亥，徙中宗神主于西庙。
现代文：十一月十五日，迁移中宗神主到西庙。
English: On November 15th, the head priest of the Middle Temple was transferred to the West Temple.

古文：甲午，尚书左丞源乾曜为黄门侍郎、同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：二十二日，尚书左丞源乾曜为黄门侍郎、同紫微黄门平章事。
English: On the 22nd, Shangshu Zuo Jiao Yuan Qianyang was appointed as the Yellow Gate's attendant and the same as Zi Wei Huangmen Ping Zhangji.

古文：辛丑，黄门监兼吏部尚书卢怀慎卒。
现代文：二十九日，黄门监兼吏部尚书卢怀慎去世。
English: On the 29th, Huangmen supervisor and clerk Shangshu Lu Huaixin passed away.

古文：十二月乙卯，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：十二月十三日，皇上驾到新丰之温汤。
English: On December 13th, the emperor arrived at the hot spring of Xinfeng.

古文：其夜，定陵寝殿灾。
现代文：当夜，定陵寝殿火灾。
English: That night, a fire broke out in Dingling's bedroom.

古文：乙丑，至自温汤。
现代文：二十三日，皇上从温汤回宫。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：尚书、广平郡公宋璟为吏部尚书兼黄门监，紫微侍郎、许国公苏颋同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：尚书、广平郡公宋王景为吏部尚书兼黄门监；紫微侍郎、许国公苏廷页同紫微黄门平章事。
English: Shangshu and Guangping County Prince Song Wangjing were Shangshu and Huangmeng supervisor of the personnel department; Zi Wei's attendant, Xu Guogong's Su Tingfa and Zi Wei's Huangmeng supervisor.

古文：兵部尚书兼紫微令、梁国公姚崇为开府仪同三司，黄门侍郎、安阳男源乾曜守京兆尹，并罢知政事。
现代文：兵部尚书兼紫微令、梁国公姚崇为开府仪同三司；黄门侍郎、安阳男源乾曜试用为京兆尹，都罢免知政事。
English: Hyobusho Shosho and Zushi Weirong, Liang Guogong Yao Chong as Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, Huangmen Jirong, and Anyang Nongyuan Qianyou probation as Jing Zhaoyin, were all removed from political affairs.

古文：停十道采访使。
现代文：停止十个道的采访使职务。
English: Stop the ten-way interviews and make them do their jobs.

古文：五年春正月壬寅朔，上以丧制不受朝贺。
现代文：开元五年春正月初一日，皇上因为服丧期不受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Heian era, the emperor was not allowed to receive morning greetings because of the mourning period.

古文：癸卯寅时，太庙屋坏，移神主于太极殿，上素服避正殿，辍朝五日，日躬亲祭享。
现代文：二日三点到五点，太庙屋坏，移神主到太极殿，皇上穿素服避开正殿，停朝五日，每天亲自祭祀。
English: From three o'clock to five o'clock on the second day, the main hall of the temple was broken, and the main god was moved to the Taiji Hall. The emperor wore plain clothes to avoid the main hall, stopped the morning on the fifth day, and personally offered sacrifices every day.

古文：辛亥，幸东都。
现代文：正月十日，驾到东都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I drove to Dongdu.

古文：戊辰，昏雾四塞。
现代文：二十七日，阴沉沉的云雾四面蔽塞。
English: On the 27th, gloomy clouds and fog rolled in on all sides.

古文：二月甲戌，至自东都，大赦天下，唯谋反大逆不在赦限，余并宥之。
现代文：二月三日，皇上从东都回来，大赦天下，惟有谋反大逆不道者不在大赦范围内，其余都加以赦免。
English: On February 3, the emperor returned from Dongdu and granted amnesty to the whole world. Only those who conspired to commit high treason were not included in the amnesty, and the rest were pardoned.

古文：河南百姓给复一年，河南、河北遭涝及蝗虫处，无出今年地租。武德、贞观以来勋臣子孙无位者，访求其后奏闻；有嘉遁幽栖养高不仕者，州牧各以名荐。
现代文：河南百姓免除徭役一年，河南、河北遭水涝及蝗虫的地方，不出今年地租，武德、贞观以来功勋大臣的子孙没有官职者，寻访他们的后人奏上；有良好归隐幽静栖息之地培养高尚情操而不做官的人，州郡长官各把他们的名字向上举荐。
English: The people of Henan Province were exempted from corvee service for one year. The land rent of Henan Province and Hebei Province, which were affected by floods and locusts, did not go up this year. The descendants of the Minister of Merit from the time of Wu De and Zhen Guan did not have official positions, and their descendants were searched for; those who had a good place to retire and live quietly and cultivate noble sentiments without being officials were recommended by the prefects of counties and prefectures.

古文：三月庚戌，于柳城依旧置营州都督府。
现代文：三月十日，在柳城依旧设置营州都督府。
English: On March 10, the Yingzhou Governor's Office was still set up in Liucheng.

古文：丁巳，以辛景初女封为固安县主，妻于奚首领饶乐郡王大酺。
现代文：十七日，以辛景初之女封为固安县主，嫁给奚首领饶乐郡王大酉甫。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the lord of Gu'an County, Xin Jingchu, married the warlord of Raole County, Wang Daxi Fu.

古文：夏四月己丑，皇帝第九子嗣一薨，追封夏王，谥曰悼。
现代文：夏四月二十日，皇帝第九子嗣一去世，追封为夏王，谥号叫悼。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor's ninth son passed away. He was posthumously named the Summer King, and his posthumous name was mourned.

古文：甲午，以则天拜洛受图坛及碑文并显圣侯庙，初因唐同泰伪造瑞石文所建，令即废毁。
现代文：二十五日，以武则天拜洛受图坛及碑文以及显圣侯庙，当初因为唐同泰伪造吉祥石文所建，命令马上毁坏废弃。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Wu Zetian ordered Bai Luo to immediately destroy and discard the picture altar and inscriptions as well as the temple of Xian Sheng Hou, which was originally built because Tang Tong Tai forged the auspicious stone text.

古文：由是礼官博士公卿大臣广参群议，钦若前古，宜存露寝之式，用罢辟雍之号。
现代文：六月十四日，巩县暴雨连月，雨水泛滥，毁坏城郭乡镇茅屋七百多家，死去七十二人。
English: On June 14, heavy rain in Gongxian County lasted for months, and the rainwater flooded, destroying more than 700 huts in towns and villages, and 72 people died.

古文：可改为乾元殿，每临御依正殿礼。 九月壬寅，改紫微省依旧为中书省，黄门省为门下省，黄门监为侍中。
现代文：汜水同一天冲坏靠近河边的百姓房屋二百多家。九月六日，改紫微省依旧为中书省、黄门省为门下省、黄门监为侍中。
English: On the same day, more than 200 people's houses near the river were washed away by the flood. On September 6, Ziwei Province was still changed to Zhongshuo Province, Huangmen Province was changed to Mengxia Province, and Huangmen Supervisor was changed to Zhanzhong.

古文：冬十月丙子，京师修太庙成。
现代文：冬十月十日，京师修太庙完成。
English: On the 10th day of October in winter, the renovation of the Imperial Temple was completed.

古文：丁丑，诏以故越王贞死非其罪，封故许王男琳为嗣越王，以继其后。
现代文：十一日，皇帝下诏，因为原越王贞判死刑而没有罪，封原许王之子琳为嗣越王，作为继承他的后代。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor issued an edict, because the original Yue Wang Zhen was sentenced to death and was not guilty, and named Lin, the son of the original Xu Wang, as the heir of Yue Wang, as the successor of his descendants.

古文：戊寅，祔神主于太庙。
现代文：十二日，奉死者之神主祭于太庙。
English: On the twelfth day, the offering to the god of the dead took place in the main temple.

古文：十一月己亥，契丹首领松漠郡王李失活来朝，以宗女为永乐公主以妻之。
现代文：十一月三日，契丹首领松漠郡王李失活来朝见皇帝，皇帝以宗族之女为永乐公主嫁给了他。
English: On November 3rd, the Khitan leader, the king of Songmok County, Li Chouvong, came to see the emperor. The emperor married him to the daughter of the clan, Princess Yongle.

古文：司徒兼邓州刺史、申王捴兼虢州刺史。
现代文：司徒兼邓州刺史、申王扌为兼任虢州刺史。
English: Sitou also served as the chief historian of Dengzhou, and Shen Wangye also served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：六年春正月丙辰朔，以未经大祥，不受朝贺。
现代文：开元六年春正月初一日，因为未经父母周年的祭祀，不接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the sixth year of the Heian era, because there was no celebration of the parents' anniversary, morning greetings were not accepted.

古文：辛酉，禁断天下诸州恶钱，行二铢四分已上好钱，不堪用者并即销破复铸。
现代文：二十六日，禁止断绝天下各州使用破损的钱，施行二铢四分以上完好无损的钱，不能用的钱都立即销毁重新铸造。
English: On the 26th, it was forbidden to stop the use of damaged money by all states in the world, the implementation of two-thirds or more intact money, and the money that cannot be used is immediately destroyed and recast.

古文：将作大匠韦凑上疏，请迁孝敬神主，别立义宗庙。
现代文：将作大匠韦凑上奏章，请求迁移孝敬的神主，另立义宗庙。
English: Wei, a great craftsman, will make a petition, requesting the relocation of the revered god and the establishment of a separate Yixing ancestral temple.

古文：以太子少师兼许州刺史、岐王范兼郑州刺史。
现代文：以太子少师兼许州刺史、岐王范兼郑州刺史。
English: With the prince's young teacher and the history of Xuzhou, and the history of Qi Wang Fan and Zhengzhou.

古文：二月甲戌，礼币征嵩山隐士卢鸿。
现代文：二月九日，以礼物征召嵩山隐士卢鸿。
English: On February 9, Lu Hong, the hermit of Songshan, was called up with a gift.

古文：夏五月乙未，孝敬哀皇后祔于恭陵。
现代文：夏五月二日，把孝敬哀皇后合葬于恭陵。
English: On the 2nd day of the 5th month of the summer, the Empress Xiao Jiemo was buried together with the Empress Dowager Xiao Jiemo in Gongling.

古文：契丹松漠郡王李失活卒。
现代文：契丹松漠郡王李失活去世。
English: Qidan Songmo County King Li Shuxing passed away.

古文：六月甲申，瀍水暴涨，坏人庐舍，溺杀千余人。
现代文：六月二十一日，氵廛水猛涨，冲坏人们的茅屋，淹死一千多人。
English: On June 21, the floodwaters surged, destroying people's huts and drowning more than a thousand people.

古文：乙酉，制以故侍中桓彦范敬晖、故中书令兼吏部尚书张柬之、故特进崔玄暐、故中书令袁恕己配飨中宗庙庭，故司空苏瑰、故左丞相太子少保郴州刺史刘幽求配飨睿宗庙庭。
现代文：二十二日，皇上命已故侍中桓彦范敬晖、已故中书令兼吏部尚书张柬之、已故特进崔玄日韦，已故中书令袁恕己在中宗庙庭附带祭祀，已故司空苏瑰、已故左丞相太子少保、郴州刺史刘幽求在睿宗庙庭附带祭祀。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor ordered the late courtier Kanehiko Fan Jingyi, the late chancellery secretary and clerk Shangshu Zhang Khamzhi, the late special envoy Cui Xuan Rihwei, the late chancellery secretary Yuan Shuji to attend the ceremony in the Chinese temple courtyard, the late secretary Ku Su Gui, the late chancellor Zuo Zheng, the late prince Shao Bao, and the state secretary Liu Yukui to attend the ceremony in the Ruizong temple courtyard.

古文：秋七月已未，秘书监马怀素卒。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，秘书监马怀素去世。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, Secretary Supervisor Ma Huai Su passed away.

古文：九月乙未，遣工部尚书刘知柔持节往河南道存问。
现代文：九月四日，派工部尚书刘知柔出使河南道慰问。
English: On September 4, the Ministry of Industry and Trade sent Shangshu Liu Zhi Rong to Henan Province to offer condolences.

古文：冬十月丙申，车驾还京师。
现代文：九月五日，车驾还京师。
English: On September 5th, I drove back to Beijing.

古文：十一月辛卯，至自东都。
现代文：十一月一日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the first day of November, Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：丙申，亲谒太庙，回御承天门，诏： 七庙元皇帝已上三祖枝孙有失官序者，各与一人五品京官。
现代文：十一月六日，皇上亲自禀告太庙，然后御驾返回承天门，下诏道： 七庙元皇帝以上三祖枝派子孙，有失去官位者，各给一人五品京官。
English: On November 6th, the emperor personally reported to the Imperial Temple, and then drove back to the Gate of Heaven, and issued the following edict: The descendants of the seven emperors of the Yuan Dynasty and above, who have lost their official positions, will each be given a five-star Beijing official.

古文：内外官三品已上有庙者，各赐物三十匹，以备修祭服及俎豆。 
现代文：内外官三品以上有宗庙者，各赐给布三十匹，以预备作祭服及祭祀使用。 
English: If there are more than three lineages of officials in the Ministry of the Interior and Foreign Affairs who have their own temples, they will each be given thirty pieces of cloth to prepare for the use of sacrificial clothing and rituals.

古文：赐文武官有差。
现代文：赐给文武官员物品各有等级。
English: The items given to civil and military officials have different levels.

古文：乙巳，传国八玺依旧改称宝，符玺郎为符宝郎。
现代文：十五日，传国八玺依旧改称为宝，符玺郎仍为符宝郎。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Eight Immortals were still renamed as treasure, and Fushiro was still Fushiro.

古文：十二月，以开府仪同三司兼泽州刺史、宋王宪为泾州刺史，司徒兼虢州刺史、申王捴为绛州刺史，以太子少师兼郑州刺史、岐王范为岐州刺史，以太子少保兼卫州刺史、薛王业为虢州刺史。
现代文：十二月，以开府仪同三司兼泽州刺史、宋王宪为泾州刺史；司徒兼虢州刺史申王扌为为绛州刺史；以太子少傅兼郑州刺史、岐王范为岐州刺史；以太子少保兼卫州刺史、薛王业为虢州刺史。
English: In December, Gaifu Yi, Tong San Si, and Zezhou Shi Shi, and Song Wang Xian were appointed as Zhangzhou Shi; Szeto Shi, and Zhangzhou Shi, Shen Wang Qian, were appointed as Zhangzhou Shi; Tai Zi Shao Fu, and Zhengzhou Shi, Qi Wang Fan, were appointed as Qizhou Shi; Tai Zi Shao Bao, and Weizhou Shi, Xue Wang Ye, were appointed as Zhangzhou Shi.

古文：七年春正月，吐蕃遣使朝贡。
现代文：七年春正月，吐蕃遣使者来朝贡。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Tubo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月丁酉，左武卫大将军、霍国公王毛仲加特进。
现代文：三月八日，左武卫大将军、霍国公王毛仲加特进。
English: On March 8th, General Zuo Wuwei and the Prince of Huo, Mao Zhongjia, marched into the capital.

古文：八月癸丑，敕： 周公制礼，历代不刊；子夏为传，孔门所受。
现代文：渤海郡王大祚荣死，他的儿子武艺继位。夏四月十五日，开府仪同三司王仁皎去世。五月一日，日蚀。
English: Wang Dazhong of Bohai County died and was succeeded by his son Wu Ying. On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, Kaifu Yi passed away, along with the third king, Wang Renyu. On the 1st day of the 5th month, the sun eclipsed.

古文：逮及诸家，或变例。与其改作，不如好古。
现代文：秋七月二十九日，皇上命令，因为炽烈的阳光干旱太久，皇上亲自察看记录囚徒的罪状，大多宽免。
English: On the 29th day of the 7th month of autumn, the emperor issued an order that, because the scorching sun had been dry for too long, the emperor would personally inspect and record the crimes of the prisoners, and most of them would be pardoned.

古文：诸服纪宜一依旧文。 九月甲子，改昭文馆依旧为弘文馆。
现代文：各州委派州、县官根据实情处置。九月九日，改昭文馆依旧为弘文馆。
English: Each state appointed state and county officials to deal with the matter according to the actual situation. On September 9th, the Changchow Museum remained the Hongwen Museum.

古文：宋王宪徙封宁王。
现代文：宋王宪改封为宁王。
English: Song Wang Xian changed his title to Ning Wang.

古文：冬十月，于东都来庭县廨置义宗庙。
现代文：冬十月，在东都来庭县官署设置义宗庙。
English: In the winter of October, the Yizong Temple was set up at the Dongdulaiting County Government Office.

古文：辛卯，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：七日，驾到新丰之温泉。
English: On the seventh day, I drove to Shintoyo Onsen.

古文：癸卯，至自温汤。
现代文：十九日，皇上从温泉回来。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor returned from the hot springs.

古文：戊寅，皇太子诣国学行齿胄礼，陪位官及学生赐物有差。
现代文：十一月二十四日，皇太子到国学与公卿之子按年龄大小排行。对陪席官及太学生赐物各有等级区别。
English: On November 24th, the Crown Prince and the sons of court nobles were ranked according to their age when it came to learning the Chinese language. There were different levels of gifts for the page boy and the page boy.

古文：十二月丙戌，置弘文、崇文两馆雠校书郎官员。
现代文：十二月三日，设置弘文、崇文馆雠校书郎官员。
English: On December 3rd, the school librarian officials of Hongwen and Chongwen were set up.

古文：八年春正月甲子朔，皇太子加元服。
现代文：开元八年春正月初一日，皇太子加冠。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the Heian era, the crown prince was crowned.

古文：乙丑，皇太子谒太庙。
现代文：二日，皇太子晋见太庙。
English: On the second day, Crown Prince Jin visited the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙寅，会百官于太极殿，赐物有差。
现代文：三日，皇帝在太极殿会见百官，赐物各有等级。
English: On the third day, the emperor met with hundreds of officials in the Taiji Hall, and the gifts had different levels.

古文：壬申，右散骑常侍、舒国公褚元量卒。
现代文：九日，右散骑常侍、舒国公褚无量去世。
English: On the 9th, the right rider, Shu Guo Gongyi, passed away.

古文：己卯，侍中宋璟为开府仪同三司，中书侍郎苏颋为礼部尚书，并罢知政事。
现代文：十六日，侍中宋王景为开府仪同三司，中书侍郎苏廷页为礼部尚书，都罢免知政事。
English: On the 16th, the attendant, Song Wangjing, was appointed as Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Third Secretary, and the secretary, Su Tingpu, was appointed as Rites and Ceremonies Third Secretary. They were both removed from the position of chancellor.

古文：京兆尹源乾曜为黄门侍郎，并州大督府长史张嘉贞为中书侍郎，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：京兆尹源乾曜为黄门侍郎，并州大都督府长史张嘉贞为中书侍郎，并且两人都任同中书门下平章事。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Yuan Qian You was the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and Zhang Jiazhen, the governor of the State Great Capital, was the attendant of the Middle Gate, and both of them were appointed as the lower-level officials of the Middle Gate.

古文：二月丁酉，皇子敏薨，追封怀王，谥曰哀。
现代文：二月十四日，皇子敏去世，追封为怀王，谥号为哀。
English: On February 14th, Prince Min passed away. He was posthumously named Prince Huai, and his posthumous name was Ai.

古文：夏五月丁卯，源乾曜为侍中，张嘉贞为中书令。
现代文：夏五月十五日，源乾曜为侍中，张嘉贞为中书令。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, Yuan Qianyou became a chamberlain, and Zhang Jiazhen became the secretary.

古文：南天竺国遣使献五色鹦鹉。
现代文：南天竺国遣使者贡献五色鹦鹉。
English: The five-colored parrot was brought by the envoys of the Southern Celestial Empire.

古文：六月壬寅夜，东都暴雨，谷水泛涨。
现代文：六月二十一日夜，东都暴雨，谷水上涨泛滥。
English: On the night of June 21st, Dongdu was hit by torrential rain, and the valley water rose and flooded.

古文：新安、渑池、河南、寿安、巩县等庐舍荡尽，共九百六十一户，溺死者八百一十五人。
现代文：新安、渑池、河南、寿安、巩县等房倒塌冲尽，共冲掉九百六十一户，淹死八百一十五人。
English: Xin'an, Dianchi, Henan, Shou'an, Gongxian and other houses collapsed and washed away, washing away a total of 961 households and drowning 815 people.

古文：许、卫等州掌闲番兵溺者千一百四十八人。
现代文：许、卫等州主管的闲散番兵淹死一千一百四十八人。
English: Xu, Wei and other idle sentries of the provincial leaders drowned 1,148 people.

古文：秋九月，突厥欲谷寇甘、凉等州，凉州都督杨敬述为所败，掠契苾部落而归。
现代文：秋九月，突厥欲谷入侵甘、凉等州，凉州都督杨敬述被突厥击败，掳掠契艹必部落而归。
English: In autumn and September, the Turks invaded the states of Gan and Liangshan in Zhigu. Yang Jing, the governor of Liangzhou, was defeated by the Turks and returned to his tribe after being captured by the Turks.

古文：以御史大夫王晙为兵部尚书兼幽州都督，黄门侍郎韦抗为御史大夫、朔方总管以御之。
现代文：以御史大夫王腢为兵部尚书兼幽州都督，黄门侍郎韦抗为御史大夫、朔方总管以抵御他。
English: To resist him, he appointed the Imperial Historian Wang Qian as the Military Secretary and the Governor of Yuzhou, and the Yellow Gate Servant Wei Yan as the Imperial Historian and the General Manager of the Shuo side.

古文：甲子，太子少师兼岐州刺史、岐王范兼太子太傅，太子少保兼虢州刺史、薛王业为太子太保，余并如故。
现代文：十五日，太子少师兼岐州刺史、岐王范兼太子太傅；太子少保兼虢州刺史、薛王业为太子太保，其余职务照旧。
English: On the 15th, the Prince Junior Teacher and the Prince of Qizhou, the Prince Fan of Qizhou and the Prince Junior Master; the Prince Junior Bodyguard and the Prince Junior Bodyguard, the Prince Junior Bodyguard and the Prince Junior Bodyguard, and Xue Wangye as the Prince Junior Bodyguard, and the remaining duties as before.

古文：冬十月辛巳，幸长春宫。
现代文：冬十月二日，驾到长春宫。
English: In winter, on October 2nd, I drove to the Changchun Palace.

古文：壬午，畋于下邽。
现代文：三日，在下圭阝打猎。
English: On the third day, they went hunting in lower Guizhou.

古文：十一月乙丑，至自长春宫。
现代文：十一月十七日，皇上从长春宫回来。
English: On November 17th, the emperor returned from the Changchun Palace.

古文：辛未，突厥寇凉州，杀人掠羊马数万计而去。
现代文：二十三日，突厥入侵凉州，杀人并掠夺数万羊马而去。
English: On the 23rd, the Turks invaded Liangzhou, killing and plundering tens of thousands of sheep and horses.

古文：秋七月戊申，罢中都，依旧为蒲州。
现代文：开元九年春正月初九日，改蒲州为河中府，设置中都。十九日，驾到新丰之温泉。秋七月三日，撤销中都，依旧为蒲州。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2

古文：先天中，重修三九射礼，至是，给事中许景先抗疏罢之。九月己巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七月四日，王腢攻破兰池州叛乱胡人，杀了三万五千敌骑兵。十一日，扬、润等州暴风，刮走房屋，拔起树木，吹跑、损坏公私船舶一千多只。十六日，召集所有酋长，杀了叛胡康待宾。九月一日，日蚀。
English: On July 4, Wang Qian defeated the rebel Hu people in Lanzhou and killed 35,000 enemy cavalrymen. On the 11th, Yang, Run and other state storms swept away houses, uprooted trees, blew away and damaged more than a thousand public and private ships. On the 16th, he gathered all the chiefs and killed the traitor Hu Kangdibin. On September 1, the solar eclipse.

古文：丁未，开府仪同三司、梁国公姚崇薨。
现代文：三日，开府仪同三司、梁国公姚崇去世。
English: On the third day, Yao Chong, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi and Liang Guogong, passed away.

古文：丁巳，御丹凤楼，宴突厥首领。
现代文：十二日，皇上到丹凤楼，宴请突厥首领。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor went to the Danfeng Building to host a banquet for the Turkic leaders.

古文：庚申，幸中书省。
现代文：十五日，驾到中书省。
English: On the 15th, I drove to the Ministry of Education.

古文：癸亥，右羽林将军、权检校并州大都督府长史、燕国公张说为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十七日，右羽林将军、暂代检校并州大都督府长史、燕国公张说为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 17th, General U Hao Lin, the provisional inspector of the school and the governor of the prefecture, and Yan Guo Gong Zhang said that it was the military department and the middle school.

古文：冬十一月丙辰，左散骑常侍元行冲上《群书目录》二百卷，藏之内府。
现代文：冬十一月十三日，左散骑常侍元行冲献上《群书目录》二百卷，藏在内府。
English: On the 13th day of the 11th month of winter, Zuo Sanzhijie, a regular attendant of Yuan Xing, presented 200 volumes of the "Group Book Catalogue," which was hidden in Neifu.

古文：庚午冬至，大赦天下，内外官九品己上加一阶，三品已上加爵一等。
现代文：二十七日冬至，大赦天下，内外官员九品以上者加一级，三品以上官员加爵位一等。
English: On the 27th day of the winter solstice, the world was amnestied, and officials at home and abroad with nine or more pins were promoted to the first grade, and officials with three or more pins were promoted to the first grade.

古文：戊申，内外官职田，除公廨田园外，并官收，给还逃户及贫下户欠丁田。二月戊寅，至东都。三月戊申，诏自今内外官有犯赃至解免已上，纵逢赦免，并终身勿齿。
现代文：十日，皇上从温泉回宫。开元十年二月七日，到东都。三月七日，皇上下诏命令自今天起，京内京外官员有犯贪污直到免职以上的罪犯，即使遇到赦免，也都应终身不再收录使用。
English: On the 10th, the emperor returned to the palace from the hot springs. On the 7th of February, the 10th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he went to the eastern capital. On the 7th of March, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that from that day on, officials in and out of Beijing who had committed crimes of corruption up to and including dismissal from office, even if they were pardoned, should not be recorded and used for life.

古文：夏四月丁酉，封契丹首领松漠都督李郁于为松漠郡王，奚首领饶乐都督李鲁苏为饶乐郡王。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，封契丹首领松漠都督李郁于为松漠郡王，奚首领饶乐都督李鲁苏为饶乐郡王。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, the leader of the Feng Chidan, the governor of Songpan, Li Yuyu, became the king of Songpan County, and the leader of the Yaole, the governor of Yaole, Li Rusu, became the king of Yaole County.

古文：五月，东都大雨，伊、汝等水泛涨，漂坏河南府及许、汝、仙、陈等州庐舍数千家，溺死者甚众。
现代文：五月，东都大雨，伊、汝等水涨水泛滥，漂坏河南府及许、汝、仙、陈等州房屋数千家，淹死很多人。
English: In May, there was heavy rain in Dongdu, and the Yi, Ru and other waters rose and flooded, destroying thousands of houses in Henan Prefecture and Xu, Ru, Xian, Chen and other states, and drowning many people.

古文：闰五月壬申，兵部尚书张说往朔方军巡边。
现代文：闰五月二日，兵部尚书张说往朔方军边境巡视。
English: On the second day of leap May, Shang Shuzhang of the Ministry of Military Affairs said that he was going to inspect the border of the Shuo Fang Army.

古文：癸卯，以余姚县主女慕容氏为燕郡公主，出降奚首领饶乐郡王李鲁苏。
现代文：八日，皇上命令所有少数民族国家充作人质而宿卫的子弟，一律放还归国。六月二日，皇上注释《孝经》，以余姚县主之女慕容氏为燕郡公主，下嫁给奚首领饶乐郡王李鲁苏。
English: On the 8th, the emperor ordered that the children of all ethnic minority countries who served as hostages and guards should be returned to the country. On June 2, the emperor commented on the "Filial Piety" that the daughter of the lord of Yuyao County, Murong, was the princess of Yan County, and married to the leader of the Yao County, Raole County, Wang Li Rusu.

古文：己巳，增置京师太庙为九室，移孝和皇帝神主以就正庙。
现代文：三十日，增设京师太庙为九室，移孝和皇帝神主到正庙。
English: On the 30th, nine rooms were added to the Beijing Shidai Temple, and the Emperor and the Emperor's god moved to the main temple.

古文：秋八月丙戌，岭南按察使裴伷先上言安南贼帅梅叔鸾等攻围州县，遣骠骑将军兼内侍杨思勖讨之。
现代文：秋七月十七日，岭南按察使裴亻由先上书说安南贼帅梅叔鸾攻打包围州县，皇上派骠骑将军兼内侍杨思曰助讨伐他。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the inspector general of Lingnan Province, Pei Jiu, first wrote that the Annan thief Mei Shuxuan attacked and besieged Zhoushan County. The emperor sent the cavalry general and chamberlain Yang Si to help fight him.

古文：丁亥，遣户部尚书陆象先往汝、许等州存抚赈给。
现代文：七月十八日，派户部尚书陆象先往汝、许等州慰问安抚救济。
English: On July 18th, the head of the Household Division, Shangshu Lu, first went to Du, Xu and other provinces to offer condolences and relief.

古文：丙申，博、棣等州黄河堤破，漂损田稼。
现代文：七月二十七日，博、棣等州黄河破堤，冲坏庄稼。
English: On July 27th, the Yellow River in Bo, Handan and other prefectures burst its banks, destroying crops.

古文：凡在宗属，用申惩诫：自今已后，诸王、公主、驸马、外戚家，除非至亲以外，不得出入门庭，妄说言语。所以共存至公之道，永协和平之义，克固籓翰，以保厥休。
现代文：九月，张说在木盘山捕捉了康原页子。皇上下诏，命转移河曲六州残余胡人五万多口到许、汝、唐、邓、仙、豫等州，开始腾空了河南朔方千里之地。六日，秘书监、楚国公姜皎犯法，皇上命打六十杖，充军到钦州，死在路上。
English: In September, Zhang said that he had captured the Kangyuan Pages in Mupanshan. The emperor issued an edict to transfer more than 50,000 remnants of Hu people from the six states of Hequ to Xu, Ru, Tang, Deng, Xian, and Yu, and began to vacate thousands of miles of land in Henan. On the 6th day, the superintendent of secretaries and the Duke of Chu, Jiang Xi, violated the law, and the emperor ordered him to beat sixty staffs, fill the army to Qinzhou, and die on the road.

古文：贵戚懿亲，宜书座右。 又下制，约百官不得与卜祝之人交游来往。
现代文：都水使者刘承祖充军流放到雷州。又下令，禁止百官，不能与卜祝之人交游来往。
English: Liu Chengzu, the water envoy of the capital, was exiled to Leizhou. He also ordered that all officials were forbidden to travel with those who wished well-wishes.

古文：乙卯夜，京兆人权梁山伪称襄王男，自号光帝，与其党权楚璧，以屯营兵数百人，自景风、长乐等门斩关入宫城构逆。
现代文：十七日夜，京兆人权梁山伪称襄王之子，自己号称为光帝，与他的同党权楚璧，以屯营兵数百人，从景风，长乐等门斩断关锁攻入宫城反叛。
English: On the evening of the 17th, the Beijing Zhao human rights Liangshan, falsely claiming to be the son of Xiang Wang, called himself Guangdi, and his fellow party member Chu Bi, with hundreds of camped soldiers, broke through the gates from Jingfeng, Changle and other gates to enter the Miyagi rebellion.

古文：至晓兵败，斩梁山，传首东都。
现代文：到早晨兵败，斩了梁山，在东都传他的首级示众。
English: In the morning, he was defeated and beheaded Liangshan, and his head was paraded in Dongdu.

古文：废河阳柏崖仓。
现代文：废除河阳柏崖仓。
English: Abolish the Kheyang Bailu Cang.

古文：冬十月癸丑，乾元殿依旧题为明堂。
现代文：冬十月十五日，乾元殿依旧题为明堂。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, the hall was still called Myeongdong.

古文：甲寅，幸寿安之故兴泰宫。
现代文：十六日，驾到寿安的旧兴泰宫，在上宜川打猎。
English: On the 16th, I drove to the former Xingtai Palace in Shouan to go hunting in the Shangyi River.

古文：畋猎于土宜川。
现代文：二十二日，从兴泰宫回宫。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to the palace from the Xingtai Palace.

古文：庚申，至自兴泰宫。波斯国遣使献狮子。
现代文：波斯国派遣使者贡献狮子。
English: The Persian Empire sent an envoy to bring a lion.

古文：十一月乙未，初令宰相共食实封三百户。
现代文：十一月二十八日，开始命令宰相共同食实封三百户。
English: On November 28th, the prime minister began to order 300 households to eat together.

古文：十二月，停按察使。
现代文：十二月，停止按察使一职。
English: In December, he stepped down from the post of deputy inspector general.

古文：十一年春正月丁卯，降都城见楚囚徒，流、死罪减一等，余并原之。
现代文：十一年春正月初一日，都城被监禁的囚徒、流放、死罪降罪减免一等，其余囚犯都赦免。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the 11th year, the prisoners, exiles, and death-penalty prisoners in the capital were reduced and pardoned to the first class, and the remaining prisoners were pardoned.

古文：庚辰，幸并州、潞州，宴父老，曲赦大辟罪已下，给复五年。别改其旧宅为飞龙宫。
现代文：三日，皇上到北都巡行境内，命所到之处慰问老年人、老而无妻、老而无夫、老而无子、无兄弟者以及外出从军的人家；流放、死罪减免一等。另外改变旧宅为飞龙宫。
English: On the third day, the emperor went on a tour of the northern capital, and wherever he went, he offered condolences to the elderly, the old without a wife, the old without a husband, the old without a son, those without a brother, and the families of those who went out to join the army; exile and death penalty were reduced to the first class. In addition, the old house was changed to the Dragon Palace.

古文：辛卯，改并州为太原府，官吏补授，一准京兆、河南两府。
现代文：二十五日，改并州为太原府，官吏补授官职，一律以京兆府、河南府为标准。
English: On the 25th, the merged prefecture was changed to Taiyuan Prefecture, and officials were awarded official posts, all of which were based on the standards of Beijing, Chaozhou and Henan.

古文：百姓给复一年，贫户复二年，元从户复五年。
现代文：老百姓减免赋税徭役一年，贫困户减免二年，开始就跟从皇上的人户减免五年。
English: The common people were exempted from tax for one year, the poor households were exempted for two years, and the households of emperors were exempted for five years.

古文：武德功臣及元从子孙，有才堪文武未有官者，委府县搜扬，具以名荐。上亲制《起义堂颂》及书，刻石纪功于太原府之南街。
现代文：武德年间的功臣以及开始跟从皇上的人的子孙，有才干能胜任文武职而未有官职的人，委令府、县访求推荐，详细把名字情况报告、皇上亲自撰写起义堂颂，在太原府之南街刻石纪功。
English: The meritorious vassals during the Wude era and the descendants of those who began to follow the emperor, and those who had the talent to be competent in civilian and military duties but did not have official positions, were recommended by the government and county visits, and the names were reported in detail. The emperor personally wrote the ode to the uprising, and carved stone records in the south street of Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：戊申，次晋州。
现代文：二月十二日，皇上临时驻扎在晋州。
English: On February 12, the emperor was temporarily stationed in Jinzhou.

古文：坛场使、中书令张嘉贞贬为幽州刺史。
现代文：坛场使、中书令张嘉贞贬为幽州刺史。
English: Zhang Jiazhen, the messenger of the altar, was relegated to a footnote in the history of Yuzhou.

古文：壬子，祠后土于汾阴之脽上，升坛行事官三品已上加一爵，四品已上加一阶，陪位官赐勋一转。
现代文：十六日，在汾阴之月隹上祭祀土神，升坛行事官三品以上官员加爵一等，四品以上加一级，陪席官赐勋升一等。
English: On the 16th day of the lunar month, the earth deities were sacrificed on the pyre, and the officials of the altar were promoted to the first grade, the officials of the third grade and above were promoted to the first grade, the officials of the fourth grade and above were promoted to the first grade, and the attendants were promoted to the first grade.

古文：改汾阴为宝鼎县。
现代文：改汾阴为宝鼎县。
English: The county was renamed Baoding County.

古文：癸亥，兵部尚书张说兼中书令。
现代文：二十七日，兵部尚书张说兼代中书令。
English: On the 27th, Hyobusho Shozhang said that he was also acting as Chushiro.

古文：三月庚午，车驾至京师，制所经州、府、县无出今年地税，京城见禁囚徒并原免之。
现代文：三月初五日，车驾到京师，命令所经过的州、府、县不出今年地税，京城被监禁囚犯都原恕宽免。
English: At the beginning of March 5th, he drove to Beijing Division and ordered the states, prefectures and counties he passed not to pay this year's local tax. The prisoners in Beijing were all pardoned.

古文：夏四月丙辰，迁祔中宗神主于太庙。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，移中宗神主到太庙附祭。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the transfer of the patriarchal god to the Imperial Temple was accompanied by a festival.

古文：癸亥，张说正除中书令，吏部尚书、中山公王晙为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十九日，张说正式任中书令；吏部尚书、中山公王腢为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 29th, Zhang said that he was officially appointed to the position of the middle school secretary; the leader of the middle school secretary, Zhongshan Guowan was the military secretary, and the middle school secretary was the third grade.

古文：秋八月戊申，尊八代祖宣皇帝庙号献祖，光皇帝庙号懿祖，始祔于太庙之九庙。九月己巳，颁上撰《广济方》于天下，仍令诸州各置医博士一人。
现代文：五月五日，北都设置军器监官员。王腢为朔方节度使，兼任主持河北郡、陇右、河西兵马使。六月，王腢到朔方军赴任。九月七日，在天下颁布皇上撰写的广济方，仍令各州各设置医博士一人。
English: On May 5th, the Northern Capital set up an official to supervise military equipment. Wang Zhe was the delegate to the Spring Festival of the Shuo side, and also served as the presiding officer of the Hebei County, Zhou Yu, and Hexi Terracotta Warriors and Horses. In June, Wang Zhe went to the Shuo side to take office. On September 7th, the Guangji side written by the emperor was promulgated to the world, and each state was still required to set up one doctor of medicine.

古文：春秋二时释奠，诸州宜依旧用牲牢，其属县用酒酺而已。
现代文：春秋二时设酒食祭奠先圣先师，各州应仍依旧用猪、牛、羊祭祀，州下属县用酒宴欢庆罢了。
English: At two o'clock in the spring and autumn, the wine and food festival is held to commemorate the saint. Each state should still use pigs, cattle, and sheep for the sacrifice, and the state's subordinate counties should celebrate with a wine banquet.

古文：冬十月丁酉，幸新丰之温泉宫。
现代文：冬十月五日，驾到新丰之温泉宫。
English: In winter, on October 5th, I drove to the Xinfeng Hot Spring Palace.

古文：甲寅，至自温泉。
现代文：二十二日，从温泉回宫。
English: On the 22nd, she returned to the palace from the hot springs.

古文：十一月戊寅，亲祀南郊，大赦天下，见禁囚徒死罪至徒流已下免除之。
现代文：十一月十六日，亲自到南郊祭祀，大赦天下，被监禁囚犯，从死罪到徒刑流放以下的犯人赦免。
English: On November 16th, he personally went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices, grant a general amnesty to the world, and pardon imprisoned prisoners, from capital punishment to prisoners under the sentence of exile.

古文：升坛行事及供奉官三品已上赐爵一级，四品转一阶。
现代文：升坛行事及供奉官员三品以上者赐爵一级，四品升一等。
English: Officials who have performed at the altar and offered three or more prizes will be awarded a first-class knighthood, and those with four prizes will be awarded a first-class promotion.

古文：武德以来实封功臣、知政宰辅沦屈者，所司具以状闻。
现代文：武德以来享受实际封户的功臣，主持政务宰相沦落委曲的人，有关官员详细报告情况。
English: Since the time of Wu De, those meritorious scholars who enjoyed the actual sealing of the house, and those who presided over the Prime Minister's downfall, the relevant officials reported the situation in detail.

古文：赐酺三日，京城五日。
现代文：赐给宴会三日，京城赐给宴会五日。
English: The banquet was given three days, and the capital gave the banquet five days.

古文：是月，自京师至于山东、淮南大雪，平地三尺余。
现代文：这月，从京师到山东、淮南下大雪，平地积雪三尺多高。
English: This month, heavy snow fell from Beijing to Shandong and Huainan, and the snow on the flat ground was more than three feet high.

古文：丁亥，废军器监官员，少府监加置少监一人以充之。
现代文：二十五日，废除军器监官员，少府监加设少监一人以补充。
English: On the 25th, officials of the Ordnance Inspectorate were abolished, and the Junior Inspectorate was supplemented by the establishment of a Junior Inspector.

古文：十二月甲午，幸凤泉汤。
现代文：十二月三日，驾幸凤泉汤。
English: On December 3rd, the Fengquan soup came out.

古文：戊申，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：十七日，皇上从凤泉汤回来。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Beijing from Fengquan Tang.

古文：庚申，王晙授蕲州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，王腢被任命为蕲州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Wang Qi was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二年春正月。
现代文：十二年春正月。
English: In the first month of spring in the 12th year.

古文：夏四月，封故泽王上金男义珣为嗣泽王。
现代文：夏四月，封原泽王上金之子义王旬为嗣泽王。
English: In the summer of April, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son, FUHARA no Sa no Okimi's son,

古文：嗣许王瓘左授鄂州别驾，以弟璆为上金嗣故也。
现代文：嗣许王腢降职为鄂州别驾，因为弟弟为上金后嗣的原因。
English: Heir Xu Wangyao was demoted to Ezhou, because his younger brother was the heir to the throne.

古文：癸卯，嗣江王祎降为信安郡王，嗣蜀王礻俞为广汉郡王，嗣密王彻为濮阳郡王，嗣曹王臻为济国公，嗣赵王琚为中山郡王，武阳郡王堪为澧国公。
现代文：十四日，嗣江王降为信安郡王，嗣蜀王衤俞为广汉郡王，嗣密王腢为濮阳郡王，嗣曹王臻为济国公，嗣赵王琚为中山郡王，武阳郡王堪为澧国公。
English: On the 14th, King Jiang was demoted to King of Xin'an County, King Shu was demoted to King of Guanghan County, King Mi was demoted to King of Shenyang County, King Cao was demoted to King of Je county, King Zhao was demoted to King of Zhongshan County, and King Can was demoted to King of Wuxi County.

古文：祎等并自神龙之后外继为王，以瓘利泽王之封，尽令归宗改封焉。
现代文：等人都是从神龙之后相继做王，因为嗣许王腢以泽王的封号为有利，尽让他们归宗改封。
English: All of them became kings one after another after Shennong, because it was advantageous for Heixu Wangye to use the title of Ze Wang, and he did his best to convert them.

古文：秋七月壬申，月蚀既。
现代文：秋七月十五日，月蚀已尽。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the lunar eclipse was over.

古文：己卯，废皇后王氏为庶人。
现代文：二十二日，废除皇后王氏为庶人。
English: On the 22nd, Empress Wang was abolished as a commoner.

古文：后弟太子少保、驸马都尉守一贬为泽州别驾，至蓝田，赐死。
现代文：皇后弟太子少保、驸马都尉王守一贬为泽州别驾，到蓝田，被赐死。
English: The empress's younger brother, the crown prince, Shōhō, and the imperial equerry, Wang Shōichi, were demoted to the rank of Zeshu Beikei and sent to Lantian, where they were sentenced to death.

古文：户部尚书、河东伯张嘉贞贬台州刺史。
现代文：户部尚书、河东伯张嘉贞贬为台州刺史。
English: Hube Shangshu and Hedong Bo Zhang Jiazhen were relegated to the history of Taizhou.

古文：冬十一月庚申，幸东都，至华阴，上制岳庙文，勒之于石，立于祠南之道周。
现代文：冬十一月四日，驾幸东都，到华阴，皇上写了岳庙文，刻在石碑上，立在祀堂南面的道边。
English: On the 4th of November, the winter solstice, after driving from Dongdu to Huayin, the emperor wrote the Yue miao text, engraved on a stone monument, standing on the roadside south of the shrine.

古文：戊寅，至自东都。
现代文：二十二日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：庚辰，司徒、申王捴薨，追谥曰惠庄太子。
现代文：二十四日，申王扌为去世，追加谥号为惠庄太子。
English: On the 24th, King Shin passed away, and his additional posthumous name was Prince Huizhuang.

古文：五溪首领覃行璋反，遣镇军大将军兼内侍杨思勖讨平之。
现代文：五溪首领覃行璋造反，派镇军大将军兼内侍杨思勖讨伐平定了他。
English: The leader of Wuxi, Xing Xing, rebelled and sent the general of the town army and chamberlain, Yang Siyu, to fight and subdue him.

古文：闰十二月丙辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰十二月初一日，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the leap month of December, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十三年春正月乙酉，以幽州都督府为大都督府。
现代文：十三年春正月一日，以幽州都督府为大都督府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, the Yuzhou Governor's Office became the Grand Governor's Office.

古文：戊子，降死罪从流，流已下罪悉原之。
现代文：三日，把死罪降为流放，流放以下的罪犯全部赦免。
English: On the third day, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and all criminals below banishment were pardoned.

古文：分遣御史中丞蒋钦绪等往十道疏决囚徒。
现代文：分别派御史中丞蒋钦绪等人往十个道整顿清理囚徒。
English: Jiang Qingsu and others were separately sent to ten provinces to rectify and clean up the prisoners.

古文：二月戊午，幸龙门，即日还宫。
现代文：二月四日，驾到龙门，当天便还宫。
English: On February 4, he drove to Longmen and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：乙亥，初置彍骑，分隶十二司。
现代文：二十一日，开始设置宿卫军士，分别隶属十二司。
English: On the twenty-first day, the establishment of the guards sergeants began, respectively subordinated to the 12th Division.

古文：丙子，改豳州为邠州，鄚州为莫州，梁州为褒州，沅州为巫州，舞州为鹤州，泉州为福州，以避文相类及声相近者。
现代文：二十二日，改豳州为州，莫阝州为莫州，梁州为褒州，沅州为巫州，舞州为鹤州，泉州为福州，以避免文字类似以及声音相近。
English: On the 22nd, the names of the provinces were changed to Bozhou, Muzhou, Muzhou, Liangzhou, Baozhou, Wuzhou, Wuzhou, Hezhou, Quanzhou and Fuzhou, in order to avoid similar words and similar sounds.

古文：三月甲午，皇太子嗣谦改名鸿；郯王嗣直改名潭，徙封庆王；陕王嗣升改名浚，徙封忠王；鄫王嗣真改名洽，徙封棣王；鄂王嗣初改名涓，徙封郎王；嗣玄改名滉，封荣王。
现代文：三月十日，皇太子嗣谦改名为鸿，郯王嗣直改名潭，调封为庆王，陕王嗣日升改名浚，调封为忠王；曾阝王嗣真改名洽，徙封为棣王；鄂王嗣初改名涓，改封郎王；嗣玄改名，封荣王。
English: On March 10th, the crown prince's son Qian changed his name to Hong, the prince of the Kingdom of Wei changed his name to Tan and his title to King of Qing, the prince of the Kingdom of Shaanxi changed his name to King of the Sun and his title to King of Loyalty, the prince of the Kingdom of Zeng changed his name to King of Jia and his title to King of Wei, the prince of the Kingdom of Hsu changed his name to King of Xing and his title to King of Lover, and the prince of the Kingdom of Hsu changed his name to King of Xing and his title to King of Glory.

古文：又第八子涺封为光王，第十二男潍封为仪王，第十三男沄封为颍王，第十六男泽封为永王，第十八男清封为寿王，第二十男洄封为延王，第二十一男沐封为盛王，第二十二男溢封为济王。
现代文：另外第八子氵居封为光王，第十二子潍封为仪王，第十三子氵云封为颍王，第十六子泽封为永王；第十八子清封为寿王；第二十子洄封为延王，第二十一子沐封为盛王；第二十二子溢封为济王。
English: In addition, the eighth son, Yu Ju, was named the King of Light, the twelfth son, Yu Fu, was named the King of Rites, the thirteenth son, Yu Yun, was named the King of Rites, the sixteenth son, Ze Fu, was named the King of Forever, the eighteenth son, Qing Fu, was named the King of Life, the twentieth son, Yu Fu, was named the King of Extension, the twenty-first son, Mu Fu, was named the King of Prosperity, and the twenty-second son, Yue Fu, was named the King of Prosperity.

古文：丙申，御史大夫程行谌奏： 周朝酷吏来子珣、万国俊、王弘义、侯思止、郭霸、焦仁亶、张知默、李敬仁、唐奉一、来俊臣、周兴、丘神勣、索元礼、曹仁哲、王景昭、裴籍、李秦授、刘光业、王德寿、屈贞筠、鲍思恭、刘景阳、王处贞等二十三人，残害宗枝，毒陷良善，情状尤重，子孙不许仕宦。
现代文：十二日，御史大夫程行湛上奏：武周朝酷吏来子王旬、万国俊、王弘义、侯思止、郭霸、焦仁、张知默、李敬仁、唐奉一、来俊臣、周兴、丘神责力、索元礼、曹仁哲、王景昭、裴籍、李秦授、刘光业、王德寿、屈贞筠、鲍思恭、刘景阳、王处贞等二十三人，残害宗亲，毒害善良，情况尤其严重，他们的子孙不许做官。
English: On the 12th, the goshi daifu, Cheng Xingtan, gave a speech: the twenty-three people, including the cruel officials of the Wuzhou Dynasty, Lai Zi Wang Shun, Wang Guojun, Wang Hongyi, Hou Sizhi, Guo Ba, Jiao Ren, Zhang Zhiming, Li Jingren, Tang Bongyi, Lai Juncin, Zhou Xing, Qiu Shen Li Li, Su Yuanli, Cao Renzhe, Wang Jingzhao, Baizhong, Li Qin Zhu, Liu Guangye, Wang Deshou, Qu Zhengyu, Bao Sijun, Liu Jingyang, Wang

古文：陈嘉言、鱼承晔、皇甫文备、傅游艺四人，情状虽轻，子孙不许近任。
现代文：陈嘉言、鱼承晔、皇甫文备、傅游艺四人，情节虽轻，子孙也不许亲近信任。
English: Although the plot is light, the four actors, Chen Jiayan, Yu Chengtao, Wang Fu Wenbi and Fu Youyi, are not allowed to be trusted by their children and grandchildren.

古文：请依开元二年二月五日敕。 
现代文：请皇上依照开元二年二月五日命令办。
English: I would like to ask the Emperor to do so in accordance with the order issued on February 5, 1861.

古文：燎发，群臣称万岁，传呼自山顶至岳下，震动山谷。
现代文：夏四月四日，改集仙殿为集贤殿，丽正殿书院改为集贤殿书院；内臣近侍五品以上为学士，六品以下为直学士。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Shisen-den was changed to Shisen-den, and Risho-den Academy was changed to Shisen-den Academy; Naishin attendants with the rank of 5 or higher were given a bachelor's degree, and those with the rank of 6 or lower were given a bachelor's degree.

古文：上还斋宫，庆云见，日抱戴。
现代文：五月八日，妖贼刘定高率领他的同党夜晚进攻通洛门，被全部捉住杀掉。
English: On May 8th, the thief Liu Dinggao led his fellow party members to attack Tonglomen at night, and they were all caught and killed.

古文：辛卯，祀皇地祇于社首，藏玉册于石感，如封祀坛之礼。
现代文：六月二十三日，新铸造的铜仪完成，放在景运门以内，让百官瞻仰参观。十一日，从东都出发，往东去祭祀太山。
English: On June 23rd, the newly cast bronze altar was completed and placed inside the Jingyun Gate for hundreds of officials to admire and visit. On the 11th day, they set out from Dongdu and went east to worship Mount Tai.

古文：壬辰，御帐殿受朝贺，大赦天下，流人未还者放还。
现代文：十一月十二日，皇上在设置的帷帐之殿接受朝贺，大赦天下，流放的人没有放回的一律放回。
English: On November 12th, the emperor received morning greetings at the curtain-draped hall. He granted amnesty to the whole world, and all exiles who had not been released were released.

古文：内外官三品已上赐爵一等，四品已下赐一阶，登山官封赐一阶，褒圣侯量才与处分。
现代文：内官、外官三品以上官员赐爵一等，四品以下加一级，登泰山陪侍官封加一级，褒圣侯则量才录用。
English: Officials with three or more court ranks were given a first-class knighthood, officials with four or fewer court ranks were given an additional first-class knighthood, officials accompanying the Emperor to Mount Tai were awarded an additional first-class knighthood, and officials with more than three court ranks were awarded a second-class knighthood.

古文：封泰山神为天齐王，礼秩加三公一等，近山十里，禁其樵采。赐酺七日。
现代文：封泰山神为天齐王，近山十里，禁止打草砍柴。赐群臣宴会聚餐七天。
English: The mountain god Fong Tai is the king of heaven and earth, he is ten miles away from the mountain, he forbids weeding and chopping wood. He grants the group of courtiers a banquet for seven days.

古文：侍中源乾曜为尚书左丞相兼侍中，中书令张说为尚书右丞相兼中书令。
现代文：侍中源乾曜为尚书左丞相兼侍中，中书令张说为尚书右丞相兼中书令。
English: The chamberlain, Gen Kanyo, was Shosho, the left chancellor and chamberlain, and the chancellor, Zhang, was Shosho, the right chancellor and chancellor.

古文：甲午，发岱岳。
现代文：十四日，从泰山出发。
English: On the 14th, we set out from Mount Tai.

古文：丙申，幸孔子宅，亲设奠祭。
现代文：十六日，皇上驾到孔子住宅，亲自设奠祭祀。
English: On the 16th, the emperor drove to Confucius' residence and personally held a memorial service.

古文：十二月己巳，至东都。
现代文：十二月二十日，皇上回到东都。
English: On December 20, the emperor returned to Dongdu.

古文：时累岁丰稔，东都米斗十钱，青、齐米斗五钱。
现代文：当时连年丰收，东都之米每一斗十个钱，青州、齐州每斗米五个钱。
English: At that time, there was a bumper harvest year after year, with rice in Dongdu costing ten yuan per bucket, and rice in Qingzhou and Qizhou costing five yuan per bucket.

古文：是冬，分吏部为十铨，敕礼部尚书苏颋、刑部尚书韦抗、工部尚书户从愿等分掌选事。
现代文：这年冬天，分吏部为十铨，命礼部尚书苏廷页、刑部尚书韦抗、工部尚书卢从愿等分管科举考试和选拔人才之事。
English: In the winter of that year, the division of officials was divided into ten departments, with the Ministry of Ceremonies being in charge of the examination and the selection of talents, the Ministry of Justice being in charge of the punishment, and the Ministry of Industry being in charge of the examination and the selection of talents.

古文：十四年春正月癸亥，改封契丹松漠郡王李召固为广化王，奚饶乐郡王李鲁苏为奉诚王，封宗室外甥女二人为公主，各以妻之。
现代文：开元十四年春二月十四日，改封契丹松漠郡王李召固为广化王，奚饶乐郡王李鲁苏为奉诚王，封宗室女、甥女二人为公主，分别嫁给广化王和奉诚王。
English: On February 14, the 14th day of the first month of the 14th year of the Chinese calendar, the county king of Qidan Songmo County, Li Zhaogu, was renamed as Guanghua King, the county king of Qi Raole County, Li Rusu, was renamed as Fengcheng King, and Fuzong's wife and two nieces were renamed as princesses and married to Guanghua King and Fengcheng King respectively.

古文：二月庚戌朔，邕州獠首领梁大海、周光等据宾、横等州叛，遣骠骑大将军兼内侍杨思勖讨之。
现代文：二月一日，邕州獠首领梁大海、周光等人占据宾州、横州叛乱，派骠骑大将军兼内侍杨思勖讨伐他们。
English: On February 1, Liang Haichuan, Zhou Guang and others, the leaders of the Zhangzhou Rebellion, occupied Pengzhou and Hengzhou Rebellion, and sent Yang Siyu, the general of the Horse Cavalry and the chamberlain, to fight them.

古文：三月壬寅，以国甥东华公主降于契丹李召固。
现代文：三月二十四日，以皇上的外甥女东华公主下嫁给契丹李召固。
English: On March 24th, Empress Dowager Donghua, the emperor's niece, married Khitan Ri Zhaogu.

古文：夏四月癸丑，御史中丞宇文融与御史大夫崔隐甫弹尚书右丞相、兼中书令张说，鞫于尚书省。
现代文：夏四月五日，御史中丞宇文融与御史大夫崔隐甫弹劾尚书右丞相兼中书令张说，在中书省对张说进行查问。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Vice-Minister of History Yu Wenyong and the Vice-Minister of History Cui Yingfu impeached the Vice-Minister of the Right and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China Zhang Shuling, and interrogated Zhang Shuling in the Vice-Ministry of the People's Republic of China.

古文：丁巳，户部侍郎李元纮同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九日，户部侍郎李元任命为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 9th, the head of the household, Li Yuan, was appointed to be the next Taira Shosho.

古文：庚申，张说停兼中书令。
现代文：十二日，张说不再兼任中书令。
English: On the 12th, Zhang said that he would no longer concurrently hold the post of Zhongshirong.

古文：丁卯，太子少师、岐王范薨，册赠惠文太子。
现代文：十九日，太子少师、岐王范去世，封赠为惠文太子。
English: On the 19th, the prince's apprentice, Qi Wangfan, passed away, and he was given the title of Prince Huiwen.

古文：辛丑，于定、恆、莫、易、沧等五州置军以备突厥。五月癸卯，户部进计帐，今年管户七百六万九千五百六十五，管口四千一百四十一万九千七百一十二。六月戊午，大风，拔木发屋，毁端门鸱吻，都城门等及寺观鸱吻落者殆半。
现代文：五月二十六日，户部奉上统计户口，今年管辖户数是七百零六万九千五百六十五户，管辖人口是四千一百四十一万九千七百一十二人。六月十二日，起大风，拔起了树木吹倒了房屋，毁坏了皇宫端门门上像鸱的嘴唇的装饰，都城门等以及寺、观门上像鸱唇的装饰物毁坏大半。
English: On May 26th, the Household Department submitted the statistical household registration. This year, the number of households under its jurisdiction is 7,069,565, and the population under its jurisdiction is 41,419,712. On June 12th, a strong wind blew up, uprooted trees, knocked down houses, and destroyed the decoration resembling a dragonfly's lips on the gate at the end of the Imperial Palace. Most of the decorations resembling a dragonfly's lips on the gates of the capital, as well as temples and observation gates, were destroyed.

古文：上以旱、暴风雨，命中外群官上封事，指言时政得失，无有所隐。
现代文：皇上因为旱灾、暴风雨，命令朝廷内外官员奉上封章奏事，评议朝政得失，不要有什么隐瞒。
English: Due to droughts and storms, the emperor ordered officials inside and outside the imperial court to submit a sealed report to discuss the gains and losses of the imperial government, and not to hide anything.

古文：秋七月癸丑夜，瀍水暴涨入漕，漂没诸州租船数百艘，溺者甚众。
现代文：秋八月八日，氵廛水猛涨进入漕河，冲走了各州租船数百艘，淹死很多人。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of autumn, the floodwaters surged into the Cao River, washing away hundreds of chartered ships from various states and drowning many people.

古文：九月己丑，检校黄门侍郎兼碛西副大都护杜暹同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月十五日，检校黄门侍郎兼碛西副大都护杜暹任命为同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 15th, Du Siam, Huangmen Attendant and Deputy Mayor of Shaanxi Province, was appointed as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：是秋，十五州言旱及霜，五十州言水，河南、河北尤甚，苏、同、常、福四州漂坏庐舍，遣御史中丞宇文融检覆赈给之。
现代文：这年秋天，十五个州报告旱灾及霜冻之灾，五十个州报告水灾，河南、河北尤其厉害，苏、同、常、福四州大水冲坏漂走了房屋，派御史中丞宇文融检查属实回报并发仓救济。
English: In the autumn of that year, fifteen states reported droughts and frosts, and fifty states reported floods. Henan and Hebei were particularly hard hit. Floods in the four states of Su, Tong, Chang and Fu washed away houses and sent the inspector general, Zhongzheng Yuwenlun, to check the veracity of the returns and provide warehouse relief.

古文：冬十月，废麟州。
现代文：冬十月，废弃麟州。
English: Winter October, abandoned Linzhou.

古文：庚申，幸汝州广成汤。
现代文：十六日，皇上驾到广成汤。
English: On the 16th, the emperor drove to Guangcheng Tang.

古文：己巳，还东都。
现代文：二十五日，返回东都。
English: On the 25th, he returned to Dongdu.

古文：十一月甲戌，突厥遣使来朝。
现代文：三十日，突厥遣使者前来朝见。
English: On the 30th, a Turkish envoy came to see the emperor.

古文：辛丑，渤海靺鞨遣其子义信来朝，并献方物。
现代文：十一月二十七日，渤海派遣儿子义信前来朝见，并且进贡土特产。
English: On November 27th, Bohai sent his son, Yixin, to visit the imperial court, and paid tribute with local specialties.

古文：十二月丁巳，幸寿安之方秀川。
现代文：十二月十四日，驾到寿安之方秀川。
English: On December 14th, he drove to Shouan's Hata Hidekawa.

古文：己未，日色赤如赭。
现代文：十六日，阳光呈赤褐色。
English: On the 16th, the sun was reddish brown.

古文：壬戌，还东都。
现代文：十九日，皇上返回东都。
English: On the 19th, the emperor returned to the eastern capital.

古文：十五年春正月戊寅，制草泽有文武高才，令诣阙自举。
现代文：十五年春正月五日，皇上命令民间有文武高才的人，让他们到朝廷来自我推荐。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of the Spring, the emperor ordered people with literary and military talents to come to the imperial court for self-recommendation.

古文：庚子，太史监复为太史局，依旧隶秘书省。
现代文：二十七日，太史监重新命名为太史局，依旧隶属于秘书省。
English: On the 27th, the Office of the Superintendent of Archives was renamed the Office of the Superintendent of Archives, which is still subordinate to the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：辛丑，凉州都督王君掞破吐蕃于青海之西，虏辎车、马羊而还。
现代文：二十八日，凉州都督王君在青海之西攻破吐番，缴获辎车、马羊而回。
English: On the 28th, Wang Jun, the governor of Liangzhou, defeated Tuban in the west of Qinghai, captured the carriage, horses and sheep, and returned.

古文：二月，遣左监门将军黎敬仁往河北赈给贫乏，时河北牛畜大疫。
现代文：二月，派左监门将军黎敬仁往河北救济贫困百姓，当时河北的牛发生瘟疫。
English: In February, he sent General of the Left Division Li Jingren to Hebei to help the poor people. At that time, the cattle in Hebei had a plague.

古文：己巳，尚书右丞相张说、御史大夫崔隐甫、中丞宇文融以朋党相构，制说致仕，隐甫免官侍母，融左迁魏州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，尚书右丞相张说、御史大夫崔隐甫、御史中丞宇文融因为互相勾结而成为宗派集团，命张说辞官，命崔隐甫免官职回家侍候母亲，宇文融降职为魏州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Minister of the Right Zhang Shuxu said that Grand Historian Cui Yingfu and Grand Historian Yu Wenyong had become a sectarian group because of their collusion, ordered Zhang to resign, ordered Cui Yingfu to be relieved of his post and return home to wait for his mother, and demoted Yu Wenyong to the post of Wei State Historian.

古文：夏五月，晋州大水，漂损居人庐舍。
现代文：夏五月晋州大水，冲坏漂走了百姓房屋。
English: The floods in Jinzhou in summer and May swept away people's houses.

古文：癸酉，以庆王潭为凉州都督兼河西诸军节度大使，忠王浚为单于大都护、朔方节度大使，棣王洽为太原冀北牧、河北诸军节度大使，鄂王涓为幽州都督、河北节度大使，荣王滉为京兆牧、陇右节度大使，光王涺为广州都督、五府节度大使，仪王潍为河南牧，颍王潭为安东都护、平卢军节度大使，永王泽为荆州大都督，寿王清为益州大都督、剑南节度大使，延王洄为安西大都护、碛西节度大使，盛王沐为扬州大都督，并不出阁。
现代文：一日，以庆王潭为凉州都督兼河西诸军节度使；忠王浚为单于大都护、朔方节度大使；棣王洽为太原冀北牧、河北诸军节度大使；鄂王涓为幽州都督、河北节度大使；荣王讠晃为京兆牧、陇右节度大使；光王氵居为广州都督，五府节度大使，仪王潍为河南牧；颍王氵云为安东都护、平卢军节度大使；永王泽为荆州大都督；寿王清为益州大都督、剑南节度大使；延王洄为安西大都护、碛西节度使；盛王沐为扬州大都督，都不到封藩之地去。
English: On the first day, Qing Wang Tan was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou and the festival envoy of the armies in Hexi; Zhong Wang Jun was appointed as the ambassador of the festival in Datong and Shuofang; Gong Wang Ciao was appointed as the ambassador of the festival of the armies in Taiyuan, Hebei and Hebei; E Wang Jie was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou and the ambassador of the festival in Hebei; Rong Wang Jie was appointed as the ambassador of the festival in Beijing and Shandong; Guang Wang Jie was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou and the ambassador of the festival in the five provinces; Yi Wang Jie was appointed as

古文：秋七月甲戌，雷震兴教门楼两鸱吻，栏槛及柱灾。礼部尚书苏颋卒。
现代文：秋七月四日，雷震坏了兴教门门楼上的两个鸱唇状的装饰，栏杆及柱子发生火灾，礼部尚书苏廷页去世。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, a thunderstorm damaged the two lip-shaped decorations on the gate tower of the Xingjia Gate, a fire broke out in the railings and pillars, and the ceremonial secretary Su Tingpai passed away.

古文：庚寅，鄜州洛水泛涨，坏人庐舍。
现代文：二十日，州洛水泛滥，损坏百姓房屋。
English: On the 20th, floods hit Luo County, damaging people's houses.

古文：辛卯，又坏同州冯翊县廨宇，及溺死者甚众。
现代文：二十一日，又冲坏了同州冯翊县县署房屋，淹死的人很多。
English: On the 21st, another house of the county office of Fengye County in the same state was washed away, and many people drowned.

古文：丙申，改武临县为颍阳县。
现代文：二十六日，改武临县为颍阳县。
English: On the 26th, Wulin County was changed to Shenyang County.

古文：己亥，赦都城系囚，死罪降从流，徒已下罪悉免之。
现代文：二十九日，赦免都城关押的囚犯，死罪降罪为流放，徒刑以下罪犯全部赦免。
English: On the 29th, the prisoners detained in the capital were pardoned, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and all criminals below the prison sentence were pardoned.

古文：九月丙子，吐蕃寇瓜州，执刺史田元献及王君掞父寿，杀掠人吏，尽取军资仓粮而去。
现代文：九月七日，吐蕃入侵瓜州，抓住了刺史田元献以及王君之父王寿，屠杀掳掠百姓和官吏，全部掠取了军用物资及仓库粮食而去。
English: On September 7th, the Tubo invaded Guazhou, captured the prince's father Wang Shou and the prince's father Tian Yuanxian, slaughtered and plundered the people and officials, plundered all the military supplies and grain warehouses, and left.

古文：丙戌，突厥毗伽可汗使其大臣梅录啜来朝。
现代文：十七日，突厥毗伽可汗派他的大臣梅钅录啜前来朝见。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Turk Vijayakhan sent his minister, Meyrick, to see the emperor.

古文：闰月庚子，突骑施苏禄、吐蕃赞普围安西，副大都护赵颐贞击走之。
现代文：闰九月二日，突骑施苏禄、吐蕃赞普包围安西，副大都护赵颐贞将他们击溃。
English: On September 2nd, Shsulu and Tubo Zampu led a surprise attack to encircle Anxi, and the vice-governor Zhao Yuzhen defeated them.

古文：庚申，车驾发东都，还京师。
现代文：二十二日皇上车驾从东都出发，回到京师。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor departed from Dongdu by carriage and returned to Beijing.

古文：回纥部落杀王君掞于甘州之巩笔驿。
现代文：回纥部落在甘州之巩笔驿杀了王君。
English: The Uighur tribe killed Wang Jun in Gongpeng, Ganzhou.

古文：制检校兵部尚书萧嵩兼判凉州事，总兵以御吐蕃。
现代文：皇上命令检校兵部尚书萧嵩判凉州事，统兵以抵御吐蕃。
English: The emperor ordered the inspection of the school's military department, Shangshu Xiaosong, to judge the situation in Liangzhou, and to lead the troops to resist the Tuyi.

古文：是秋，六十三州水，十七州霜旱；河北饥，转江淮之南租米百万石以赈给之。
现代文：这年秋天，六十三州水灾，十七个州霜冻和旱灾；河北是荒年，转运江淮之南的税收米一百万石来救济河北。
English: In the autumn of that year, flooding occurred in 63 prefectures, and frost and drought occurred in 17 prefectures. Hebei was in a bad year, and a million kilos of tax-collected rice from the south of the Huai River was transported to help Hebei.

古文：冬十月己卯，至自东都。
现代文：冬十月十一日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the winter's 11th day of October, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：十二月乙亥，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十二月八日，皇上驾到温泉宫。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month, Xuanzong went to the hot spring palace.

古文：丙戌，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十九日，皇上从温泉宫回来。
English: On the 19th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十六年春正月庚子，始听政于兴庆宫。
现代文：开元十六年春正月三日，皇上开始在兴庆宫听朝政。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 16th year of the Heian era, the emperor began to listen to the government at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：春、泷等州獠首领泷州刺史陈行范、广州首领冯仁智、何游鲁叛，遣骠骑大将军杨思勖讨之。
现代文：春州、泷州獠的首领泷州刺史陈行范、广州首领冯仁智、何游鲁叛变，派骠骑大将军杨思日助征讨他们。
English: The leaders of Chunzhou and Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou Zhishi Chen Xingfan, Guangzhou leader Feng Renzhi, and He Yulu mutinied, and sent the cavalry general Yang Sili to help them.

古文：壬寅，安西副大都护赵颐贞败吐蕃于曲子城。
现代文：五日，安西副大都护赵颐贞在曲子垅击败吐蕃。
English: On the fifth day, Zhao Yuzhen, the vice-governor of Anxi Province, defeated Tubo in Quzixing.

古文：甲子，黑水靺鞨遣使来朝献。
现代文：二十七日，黑水派使者前来朝见献礼。
English: On the 27th, Blackwater sent an emissary to present a gift to the emperor.

古文：秋七月，吐蕃寇瓜州，刺史张守珪击破之。
现代文：秋七月，吐蕃入侵瓜州，刺吏张守王圭击破了他。
English: In autumn and July, Tu Wei invaded Guazhou, and the assassin Zhang Shou Wang Gui defeated him.

古文：乙巳，检校兵部尚书萧嵩、鄯州都督张志亮攻拔吐蕃门城，斩获数千级，收其资畜而还。
现代文：十一日，检校兵部尚书萧嵩、鄯州都督张志亮攻克吐蕃门城，斩数千个人头，缴获吐蕃资财畜牧而回。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shangshu Xiao Song of the Inspection Corps and Zhang Zhiliang, the governor of Zhangzhou, conquered Tuyun Gate City, beheaded thousands of people, seized Tuyun's wealth and livestock, and returned.

古文：丙辰，新罗王金兴光遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十二日，新罗王金兴光派遣使者贡献土特产。
English: On the 22nd, King Jin Xingguang of Silla sent an envoy to contribute local products.

古文：八月己巳，特进张说进《开元大衍历》，诏命有司颁行之。
现代文：八月六日，特进张说奉上《开元大衍历》，皇上下诏命令有关部门颁行。
English: On August 6, Zhang Tejin said that the "Kaiyuan Great Calendar" was submitted, and the emperor ordered the relevant departments to issue it.

古文：辛卯，萧嵩又遣杜宾客击吐蕃于祁连城，大破之，获其大将一人，斩首五千级。
现代文：二十八日，萧嵩又派遣杜宾客在祁连城打击吐蕃，大破吐蕃，抓住吐蕃大将一名，斩首五千级。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Song also sent Du Bin to attack the Tuyun in Qilian City, smashed the Tuyun, captured a Tuyun general, and beheaded five thousand.

古文：九月丙午，以久雨，降死罪从流，徒以下原之。
现代文：九月十三日，因为长久下雨，死罪降为流放，徒刑以下罪犯都宽恕。
English: On September 13, because of the long rain, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and all criminals below the prison sentence were pardoned.

古文：冬十月己卯，幸温泉宫。
现代文：冬十月十七日，驾到温泉宫。
English: In winter, on October 17th, I drove to the Onsen Palace.

古文：己丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二十七日，从温泉宫回来。
English: On the 27th, he returned from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，检校兵部尚书、河西节度判凉州事萧嵩为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事，余如故。
现代文：冬十月一日，检校兵部尚书、河西节度兼管凉州事萧嵩为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事，其余职责依旧。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Xiao Song, who was also in charge of the inspection of the school's military department and the Hexi Festival and the affairs of Liangzhou, was appointed as the military department's military secretary and the middle school's military secretary, and the remaining duties remained the same.

古文：十二月丁卯，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十二月六日，驾到温泉宫。
English: On December 6th, I drove to the Onsen Palace.

古文：丁丑，至自温泉宫。
现代文：十六日，从温泉宫回来。
English: On the 27th, he returned to Kyoto from the Onsen Palace.

古文：十七年二月丁卯，巂州都督张审素攻破蛮，拔昆明城及盐城，杀获万人。
现代文：十七年二月六日，辒州都督张审素攻破蛮夷，攻克昆明城及盐城，杀死和俘虏了一万人。
English: On February 6, 1717, Zhang Xiusu, the governor of Zhangzhou, broke through the barbarians and conquered Kunming City and Yancheng, killing and capturing ten thousand people.

古文：庚子，特进张说复为尚书左丞相，同州刺史陆象先为太子少保。
现代文：二月三日，特进张说重新任尚书左丞相，同州刺史陆象先为太子少保。
English: On February 3rd, Zhang Tejin said that Shang Shuxu was reappointed as the Minister of the Left, and the same province's Shishi Lu Xiang was appointed as the Prince's Junior Vice-Minister.

古文：甲寅，礼部尚书、信安王祎帅众攻拔吐蕃石堡城。
现代文：三月二十四日，礼部尚书信安王率领部众攻克吐蕃石堡城。
English: On March 24th, Prince Yang Shuxin of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies led the troops to conquer the Tujiaosi Castle.

古文：夏四月癸亥，令中书门下分就大理、京兆、万年、长安等狱疏决囚徒。
现代文：夏四月三日，命令中书省、门下省分别在大理、京兆、万年、长安等地清理整顿囚徒。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, he ordered the Ministry of Literature and the subordinate ministries to clean up and rectify the prisoners in Dali, Jingzhao, Wannian and Chang'an, respectively.

古文：制天下系囚死罪减一等，余并宥之。
现代文：命令将天下被关押的死囚减罪一等，其余都加以宽恕。
English: Ordered that all death row prisoners be commuted to the first degree, and the rest to be pardoned.

古文：丁亥，大风震电，蓝田山崩。
现代文：二十七日，起大风打雷闪电，蓝田山崩塌。
English: On the 27th, there was a strong wind, thunder and lightning, and Mount Lantian collapsed.

古文：五月癸巳，复置十道按察使。
现代文：五月四日，重新设置十个道的按察使。
English: On May 4, the inspectors of ten provinces were re-established.

古文：右散骑常侍徐坚卒。
现代文：右散骑常侍徐坚去世。
English: Xu Jian, the right rider, passed away.

古文：六月甲戌，尚书左丞相源乾曜停兼侍中，黄门侍郎杜暹为荆州大都督府长史，中书侍郎李元纮为曹州刺史。
现代文：六月十五日，尚书左丞相源乾曜停止兼任侍中，黄门侍郎杜暹为荆州大都督府长史，中书侍郎李元为曹州刺史。
English: On June 15th, Shangshu Zuojo Minister Yuan Qianyang ceased to serve as an attendant, Huangmen attendant Du Siam was the governor of Jingzhou, and the attendant Li Yuan was the governor of Caozhou.

古文：兵部尚书萧嵩兼中书令。
现代文：兵部尚书萧嵩兼任中书令。
English: Hyobusho Shosho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho Sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho sho

古文：户部侍郎兼鸿胪卿宇文融为黄门侍郎，兵部侍郎裴光庭为中书侍郎，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部侍郎兼鸿胪卿宇文融为黄门侍郎，兵部侍郎裴光庭为中书侍郎，都任命为同中书门下平章事。
English: Uwen Rong, the steward of the Household Division and the secretary of Hung Hsiang, was appointed as the steward of the Yellow Gate, and Pei Guang Ting, the steward of the Military Division, was appointed as the steward of the Middle Gate. Both were appointed as the lower-ranking officials of the Middle Gate.

古文：秋七月辛丑，工部尚书张嘉贞卒。
现代文：秋七月十三日，工部尚书张嘉贞去世。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhang Jiazhen, a member of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, passed away.

古文：八月癸亥，上以降诞日，宴百僚于花萼楼下。
现代文：八月五日，皇上以这天是自己诞辰之日，在花萼楼下宴请百官。
English: On August 5th, the emperor celebrated his birthday and invited hundreds of officials to a banquet downstairs.

古文：百僚表请以每年八月五日为千秋节，王公已下献镜及承露囊，天下诸州咸令宴乐，休暇三日，仍编为令，从之。
现代文：百官上表奏请以每年八月五日为千秋节，王公以下官员奉献宝镜和承露袋，天下各州都让他们宴饮作乐，休假三天，按旧例整理为命令下达，皇上听从了百官奏请。
English: Every year on August 5th, officials below the rank of prince dedicate a precious mirror and a dewdrop bag. All the states in the world let them feast and make music, take three days off, and organize according to the old practice. The emperor obeyed the request of the hundred officials.

古文：丙寅，越州大水，漂坏廨宇及居人庐舍。
现代文：八月八日，越州大水，冲坏了官署衙门及百姓房屋。
English: On August 8th, the flood in Yuezhou damaged the gate of the government office and people's houses.

古文：己卯，中书侍郎裴光庭兼御史大夫，依旧知政事。
现代文：二十一日，中书侍郎斐光庭兼任御史大夫，依旧管理政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the junior secretary of the Central Committee, Fei Guangting, also assumed the post of chief historian and continued to manage government affairs.

古文：乙酉，尚书右丞相、开府仪同三司兼吏部尚书宋璟为尚书左丞相，尚书左丞相源乾曜为太子少傅。
现代文：二十七日，尚书右丞相、开府仪同三司兼吏部尚书宋王景为尚书左丞相，尚书左丞相源乾曜为太子少傅。
English: On the 27th, Shang Shuxu, the Minister of the Right, and Kaifu Yi, the Third Secretary of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third

古文：九月壬子，宇文融左迁汝州刺史，俄又贬昭州平乐尉。壬寅，裴光庭为黄门侍郎，依旧知政事。
现代文：九月二十五日，宇文融降职为汝州刺史，不久又贬为昭州平乐县尉，十五日，裴光庭任黄门侍郎，依旧管理政事。
English: On September 25, Uwen Rong was demoted to the post of Ruzhou magistrate, and soon he was demoted to the post of Zhaozhou Pingle County lieutenant. On the 15th, Pei Guangting was appointed as Huangmen waiter, and still managed political affairs.

古文：冬十月戊午朔，日有蚀之，不尽如钩。
现代文：冬十月一日，发生日蚀，太阳仅剩弯钩大小。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a solar eclipse occurs, and the sun is reduced to the size of a hook.

古文：癸未，睦州献竹实。
现代文：二十六日，睦州贡献竹子的果实。
English: On the 26th, Mutsu Province donated bamboo shoots.

古文：庚申，前太子宾客元行冲卒。
现代文：三日，前太子宾客元行冲去世。
English: On the third day, the former prince's guest, Yuan Xingchong, passed away.

古文：十一月庚申，亲飨九庙。
现代文：十一月四日，皇上亲祭九庙。
English: On November 4th, nine temples were dedicated to the emperor's relatives.

古文：辛卯，发京师。
现代文：五日，从京师出发。
English: On the fifth day, they set off from Beijing.

古文：丙申，谒桥陵。
现代文：十日，晋见桥陵。
English: On the 10th, Jin saw the bridge and mausoleum.

古文：上望陵涕泣、左右并哀感。
现代文：皇上望陵墓流泪，左右的人都感动悲哀。
English: The emperor looked at the mausoleum with tears, and people on both sides were moved with sadness.

古文：制奉先县同赤县，以所管万三百户供陵寝，三府兵马供宿卫，曲赦县内大辟罪已下。
现代文：诏命奉先县级别等同于赤县，以它所管辖的一万零三百户的税收供应陵墓，三府兵马供应住宿保卫，特赦县内死罪以下囚犯。
English: The imperial edict ordered Fuxian County, which is equivalent to Aka County, to use the taxes from the 10,300 households under its jurisdiction to supply the mausoleum, the soldiers and horses from the three prefectures to provide accommodation and security, and to grant amnesty to the county's prisoners with crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：戊戌，谒定陵。
现代文：十二日，皇上晋谒定陵。
English: On the twelfth day, Emperor Jinxing passed away.

古文：己亥，谒献陵。
现代文：十三日，晋谒献陵。
English: On the 13th, the tomb was dedicated.

古文：壬寅，谒昭陵。乙巳，谒乾陵。
现代文：十六日，晋谒昭陵，十九日，晋谒乾陵。
English: On the 16th, the tomb of Jingu Shouling, and on the 19th, the tomb of Jingu Qianling.

古文：戊申，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十二日，皇上车驾回宫。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial carriage drove back to the palace.

古文：大赦天下，流移人并放还，左降官移近处。
现代文：大赦天下，流放到远处的都放回故里，降职到远处的官员移到近处。
English: The country was amnestied, and those who had been exiled to faraway places were returned to their hometowns, while officials who had been demoted to faraway places were moved to nearby places.

古文：百姓无出今年地税之半。每陵取侧近六乡供陵寝。
现代文：今年一半地税百姓不出。每一个陵墓取附近的六个乡供应陵墓。
English: This year, half of the land tax will not be paid by the people. Each mausoleum will take six townships nearby to supply the mausoleum.

古文：内外官三品巳上加爵一等，四品已下赐一阶，五品已上清官父母亡者，依级赐官及邑号。
现代文：内外官员三品以上加爵一等，四品以下赐加一级，五品以上清官父母去世者，依照等级赐给官职及封邑称号。
English: Officials at home and abroad with three or more pins and a peerage of the first class, four or fewer pins and a first class, and five or more pins and the death of a Qing official's parents, were given official posts and fief titles according to their ranks.

古文：十二月辛酉，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十二月十五日，驾到温泉宫，九日，在渭水边打猎。
English: On December 15th, they drove to the Onsen Palace, and on the 9th, they went hunting near Surabaya.

古文：乙丑，校猎渭滨。
现代文：十六日，从温泉宫回宫。
English: On the 16th, he returned to the Imperial Palace from the Onsen Palace.

古文：壬申，至自温泉宫。是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：十八年春正月辛卯，黄门侍郎裴光庭为侍中，依旧兼御史大夫。
现代文：十八年春正月六日，黄门侍郎裴光庭为侍中，依旧兼任御史大夫。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 18th year of spring, Huangmen waiter Pei Guangting became a chamberlain, and still concurrently held the post of imperial secretary.

古文：左丞相张说加开府仪同三司。
现代文：左丞相张说加开府仪同三司。
English: Zhang, the Minister of the Left, said that the Kaifu ceremony was the same as the three divisions.

古文：丙午，幸薛王业宅，即日还宫。
现代文：二十一日，皇上驾到薛王业之住宅，即日回宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove to Xue Wangye's residence and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：二月丙寅，大雨雪，俄而雷震，左飞龙厩灾。
现代文：二月十一日，下大雪，不久打雷，宫中左飞龙马厩火灾。
English: On February 11th, there was heavy snowfall, soon followed by thunder, and a fire broke out in Zuo Feilong's stables in the palace.

古文：三月辛卯，改定州县上中下户口之数，依旧给京官职田。
现代文：三月七日，改定了州县上中下户口的数目，依旧给予京官按官品等级分给的禄米田。
English: On March 7th, the number of upper, middle and lower hukou in prefectures and counties was revised, and the rice fields allocated to Beijing officials according to the official grade were still given.

古文：夏四月乙卯，筑京城外郭城，凡十月而功毕。
现代文：夏四月一日，建筑京城外郭城墙，计十个月完工。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the construction of the outer wall of the capital city was completed in ten months.

古文：壬戌，幸宁亲公主第，即日还宫。
现代文：八日，皇上驾到宁亲公主府第，当日便回宫。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor drove to Princess Ningxian's residence and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：乙丑，裴光庭兼吏部尚书。
现代文：十一日，裴光庭兼任吏部尚书。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Pei Guangting also assumed the post of Secretary of the Personnel Department.

古文：是春，命侍臣及百僚每旬暇日寻胜地宴乐，仍赐钱令所司供帐造食。
现代文：这年春天，命令侍臣及百官每十天休息的时候寻找风景名胜欢宴，仍然赐钱，命令有关部门供给帷帐做好饭菜。
English: In the spring of this year, he ordered the courtiers and officials to look for scenic spots and banquets every ten days when they were resting. He still gave money and ordered the relevant departments to provide curtains and prepare meals.

古文：丁卯，侍臣已下宴于春明门外宁王宪之园池，上御花萼楼邀其回骑，便令坐饮，递起为舞，颁赐有差。
现代文：十三日，侍臣以下官员在春明门外宁王宪的园林池塘欢宴，皇上登上花萼楼邀请百官回马，让他们坐下饮酒，轮流起舞，颁赐财物各有差别等级。
English: On the 13th day, the officials below the courtiers held a banquet in the garden pond of Ning Wangxian outside the Chunming Gate. The emperor boarded the Calyx Building to invite hundreds of officials to return to the horse, let them sit down to drink, take turns to dance, and award different levels of property.

古文：五月，契丹衙官可突干杀其主李召固，率部落降于突厥，奚部落亦随西叛。
现代文：五月，契丹衙官可突干杀其主子李召固，率领部落投降突厥，奚部落也随他在西边叛乱。
English: In May, the Khitan eunuch suddenly killed his master, Li Zhaogu, and led the tribe to surrender to the Turks. The Yi tribe also followed him to rebel in the west.

古文：奚王李鲁苏来奔，召固妻东华公主陈氏及鲁苏妻东光公主韦氏并奔投平卢军。
现代文：奚王李鲁苏前来投奔。李召固之妻东华公主陈氏及李鲁苏妻东光公主韦氏都投奔平卢军。
English: The warlord Li Rusu came to join the army. Li Zhaogu's wife, Donghua Princess Chen, and Li Rusu's wife, Dongguang Princess Wei, both joined the Pinglu army.

古文：丙子，命单于大都护、忠王浚为河北道行军元帅，御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴伷先为副，率十八总管以讨契丹及奚等。事竟不行。
现代文：皇上诏命幽州长史赵含章率领军队讨伐他们。六月七日，命左右丞相、尚书及中书门下五品以上官员，举荐才干能担任边疆重任及刺史的人。二十三日，命单于大都护、忠王浚为河北道行军元帅，御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴亻由先为副，率领十八个总管讨伐契丹和奚，讨伐之事最终取消。
English: The emperor's edict ordered the governor Shi Zhao Hanzhang to lead the army to fight them. On June 7, he ordered the left and right ministers, Shang Shu and Zhong Shu, and more than five officials under them to recommend people who could serve as frontier heavyweights and historians. On the 23rd, the order was issued to Dadu Gu and Zhong Wang Jun as marshals marching in Hebei Province, and the chief historian Li Chaoying and Jing Zhaoyun Pei Jun as deputies, leading eighteen chiefs to fight the Khitan and Qin, and the crusade was finally canceled.

古文：壬午，东都瀍、洛泛涨，坏天津、永济二桥及提象门外仗舍，损居人庐舍千余家。
现代文：二十九日，东都氵廛水洛水猛涨，冲坏天津、永济二桥及提象门外兵器库房，损坏民房一千多家。
English: On the 29th, the Dongduan River and Luo River water surged, destroying Tianjin, Yongji Second Bridge and the weapon depot outside Jizangmen, and damaging more than a thousand houses.

古文：闰月甲申，分幽州置蓟州。
现代文：闰六月一日，分幽州而设立蓟州。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, he divided Yuzhou and established Zhangzhou.

古文：已丑，令范安及、韩朝宗就瀍、洛水源疏决，置门以节水势。辛卯，礼部奏请千秋节休假三日，及村闾社会，并就千秋节先赛白帝，报田祖，然后坐饮散之。
现代文：六日，命范安及、韩朝宗到氵廛水、洛水水源疏导挖决，设置闸门以控制水势、八日，礼部上奏请求在千秋节时休假三日，让乡村里巷百姓集会庆祝，并在千秋节先在白帝赛舟，祭祀田祖神农以庆丰收，然后坐饮宴会，皇上采纳了礼部上奏。
English: On the 6th, he ordered Fan An and Han Chaozong to go to Surabaya and Lohshui to supervise the excavation of water sources and set up sluice gates to control the water flow. On the 8th, he requested that the ceremonial staff should take a three-day holiday during the Mid-Autumn Festival, so that the people in the countryside could gather to celebrate. On the Mid-Autumn Festival, he first held a boat race in Baidi to worship Tianzu Shennong to celebrate the harvest, and then held a banquet. The emperor accepted the ceremonial staff's request.

古文：秋七月庚辰，幸宁王宪第，即日还宫。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，驾到宁王宪之住宅，当日便回宫。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, he drove to the residence of Ning Wangxian and returned to the palace on the same day.

古文：八月丁亥，上御花萼楼，以千秋节百官献贺，赐四品已上金镜、珠囊、缣彩，赐五品已下束帛有差。
现代文：八月五日，皇上驾到花萼楼，因为千秋节百官献宝祝贺，赐四品以上官员金镜、珠囊、缣采，赐给五品以下官员五匹绸缎都有等级区别。
English: On August 5th, the emperor drove to the Calyx Building, because of the Thousand-Autumn Festival, hundreds of officials offered congratulations, giving officials with four or more awards gold mirrors, bead bags, and brooches, and giving officials with five or fewer awards five pairs of silk brooches.

古文：上赋八韵诗，又制《秋景诗》。
现代文：皇上赋八韵诗，又写了秋景诗。
English: The emperor composed eight rhyme poems, and also wrote an autumn landscape poem.

古文：冬十月，吐蕃遣其大臣名悉猎献方物，请降，许之。
现代文：二十九日，皇上驾到永宁公主府第，当日便还宫。冬十月，吐蕃派遣大臣名悉猎献土特产请求归降，朝廷同意了。
English: On the 29th, the emperor drove to Princess Yongning's residence and returned to the palace on the same day. In the winter of October, Tuvalu sent a minister to request the surrender of the famous hunting and offering of local special products, and the court agreed.

古文：庚寅，幸岐州之凤泉汤。
现代文：九日，皇上驾到岐州之凤泉汤。
English: On the 9th, the emperor drove to Fengquan Tang in Qizhou.

古文：癸卯，至自凤泉汤。
现代文：二十二日，皇上从凤泉汤归来。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor returned from Fengquan Tang.

古文：十一月丁卯，幸新丰温泉宫。
现代文：十一月十七日，皇上驾到新丰之温泉宫。
English: On November 17th, the emperor drove to the hot spring palace in Xinfeng.

古文：十二月戊子，丰州刺史袁振坐妖言下狱死。
现代文：十二月八日，丰州刺史袁振犯妖言惑众之罪下狱而死。
English: On December 8th, Fengzhou assassin Yuan Zhen was sentenced to death for the crime of inciting the public with evil words.

古文：戊申，尚书左丞相、燕国公张说薨。
现代文：二十八日，尚书左丞相、燕国公张说去世。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Zuozhong and Yan Guo Gongzhang passed away.

古文：是岁，百僚及华州父老累表请上尊号内请加 圣文 两字，并封西岳，不允。
现代文：这年，百官及华州父老累次上表请求奉上尊号内请加 圣文 两字，并且筑坛祭祀西岳，皇上不允许。
English: In this year, hundreds of officials and the elders of Huazhou repeatedly asked the emperor to add two words of scripture to the name of the emperor, and to build an altar to worship the West Mountain, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：十九年春正月壬戌，开府仪同三司、霍国公王毛仲贬为襄州别驾，中路赐死，党与贬黜者十数人。
现代文：十九年春正月十三日，开府仪同三司、霍国公王毛仲贬为襄州别驾，半路被皇上赐他自尽，党羽被贬斥者十多人。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 19th year of the Spring, Kaifu Yi, along with the Three Departments, and the Prince of Huo, Mao Zhong, were relegated to the special status of Xiangzhou. Halfway through the journey, he was given permission by the emperor to commit suicide. More than ten members of the party were relegated.

古文：辛卯，遣鸿胪卿崔琳入吐蕃报聘。
现代文：二十二日，派鸿胪卿崔琳入吐蕃回访。
English: On the 22nd, he sent Hongyuqing Cui Lin to pay a return visit to Tubo.

古文：丙子，亲耕于兴庆宫龙池。
现代文：二十七日，皇上在兴庆宫龙池耕作。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to work on the dragon pond at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：己卯，禁采捕鲤鱼。
现代文：三十日，禁止采捕鲤鱼。
English: On the 30th, cod fishing was banned.

古文：天下州府春秋二时社及释奠，停牲牢，唯用酒酺，永为常式。
现代文：天下各州各府春秋二时祭祀土地神以及陈设酒祭祀先圣先师，停止用猪、牛、羊，只用酒宴欢庆，永为常法。
English: It has always been a common practice for all prefectures in all the states of the world to hold a ceremony to worship the land god at the second hour of spring and autumn, as well as to set up a wine ceremony to worship the first saint and the first teacher, and to stop using pigs, cows, and sheep, and only use wine to celebrate.

古文：二月甲午，以崔琳为御史大夫。三月乙酉朔，崔琳使于吐蕃。
现代文：三月一日，崔琳出使到吐蕃。夏四月四日，在京城设置礼部。
English: On March 1, Choireen sent an envoy to Tubo. In the summer, on April 4, a ceremonial section was set up in the capital.

古文：夏四月壬午，于京城置礼院。丙申，令两京及天下诸州各置太公尚父庙，以张良配飨，春秋二时仲月上戊日祭之。五月壬戌，五岳各置老君庙。
现代文：十八日，令两京及天下各州设置太公尚父庙，以功臣张良配祭于庙，在春秋两季第二个月前五日祭祀。五月十五日，五岳各设置老君庙。
English: On the 18th, the two capitals and all the states of the country were ordered to set up temples to the Grand Duke Shang Shifu, with the hero Zhang Liang being enshrined in the temple, and the five days before the second month of the spring and autumn seasons. On the 15th of May, the five mountains were set up to set up the Laojun Temple.

古文：六月乙酉，大风拔木。
现代文：六月八日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：秋八月辛巳，降天下死罪从流，徒已下悉原之。
现代文：秋八月五日，天下死罪囚降为流放，徒刑以下罪囚都加以宽恕。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of autumn, all death-row prisoners were reduced to exile, and all prisoners were pardoned.

古文：九月辛未，吐蕃遣其国相论尚他硉来朝。
现代文：九月二十五日，吐蕃派遣他的国相论尚他石聿前来来朝见。
English: On September 25th, Tubo dispatched his minister of state, Shangtao Shijie, to come and see the emperor.

古文：冬十月丙申，幸东都。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，皇上驾到东都。
English: On the winter's 21st of October, the Emperor drove to the Eastern Capital.

古文：十一月丙辰，至自东都。
现代文：十一月十一日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On November 11th, the Emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：甲子，太子少傅源乾曜薨。
现代文：十九日，太子少傅源乾曜去世。
English: On the 19th, the young prince Fu Yuan passed away.

古文：十二月，巂州都督张审素以劫制使监察御史杨汪伏诛。
现代文：十二月，辒州都督张审素因为劫持制使监察御史杨汪而伏法。
English: In December, Zhang Jingsu, the governor of Zhangzhou, had the inspector Yang Wang arrested for kidnapping.

古文：是冬，浚苑内洛水，六十余日而罢。
现代文：这年冬天，疏通宫苑内洛水，六十余天而水退走。
English: In the winter of this year, the dredging of the water in Gongyuan Nelluo lasted for more than 60 days, and the water receded.

古文：戊戌，裴光庭上《瑶山往则》、《维城前轨》各一卷，上令赐太子、诸王各一本。
现代文：二十三日，裴光庭奉上《瑶山往则》、《维城前轨》各一卷，皇上命令赐给太子、诸王各一本。
English: On the 23rd, Pei Guangting sent one volume each of "The Past of Lushan" and "The Past of Weicheng," and the emperor ordered to give the prince and the kings one each.

古文：三月，信安王祎与幽州长史赵含章大破奚、契丹于幽州之北山。
现代文：二十年春正月十一日，以礼部尚书、信安王率兵讨伐契丹。十三日，皇上驾到长芬公主府第；二十一日，驾到薛王业府第；都是即日回宫。三月信安王与幽州长史赵含章大破奚、契丹在幽州之北山。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 20th year of the Spring, King Shanshu of the Ministry of Rites and Letters and King Shinyan led an army to fight against Khitan. On the 13th day, the emperor drove to Princess Changfen's residence; on the 21st day, he drove to King Xue's residence; both returned to the palace on the same day. In March, King Shinyan and the governor of Yuzhou, Shi Zhao Hanzhang, had a big fight, and Khitan was in the north mountain of Yuzhou.

古文：夏四月乙亥，宴百僚于上阳东州，醉者赐以床褥，肩舆而归，相属于路。
现代文：夏四月三日，在上阳东州欢宴百官，赐给喝醉酒的官员床褥，用轿子抬归家，轿子在路上一个接一个。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, when hundreds of officials were feasting in Dongzhou, Shangyang, a drunken official was given a mattress and carried home in a palanquin. The palanquins followed one after another on the way.

古文：癸巳，改造天津桥，毁皇津桥，合为一桥。
现代文：二十一日，改建天津桥，毁掉皇津桥，合为一个桥。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tianjin Bridge was rebuilt, and Wangjin Bridge was destroyed and merged into one bridge.

古文：五月癸卯，寒食上墓，宜编入五礼，永为恆式。
现代文：五月一日，寒食节扫墓，应编入五礼，永为常法。
English: On May 1, the tomb-sweeping ceremony of the Cold Food Festival should be incorporated into the Five Rites, and it will always be the common law.

古文：辛亥，金仙长公主薨。
现代文：九日，金仙长公主去世。
English: On the 9th, Gold Immortal Eldest Princess passed away.

古文：戊辰，信安王献奚、契丹之俘，上御应天门受之。
现代文：二十六日，信安王献奚、契丹俘虏，皇上到应天门受俘。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the emperor of Xin'an offered the imperial scepter to the Khitan emperor, and the emperor was taken prisoner at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：六月丁丑，单于大都护、河北东道行军元帅、忠王浚加司徒，都护如故；副大使信安王祎加开府仪同三司。
现代文：六月六日，单于大都护、河北东道行军元帅、忠王浚加授司徒，仍然任大都护。副大使信安王加授开府仪同三司。
English: On June 6, in Daduo, Hebei alone, the host marching marshal, Zhong Wangjun, was awarded the title of scholar, and still held the title of Daduo. The deputy ambassador, Xin'an Wang, was awarded the title of grand marshal and the title of three divisions.

古文：庚寅，幽州长史赵含章坐盗用库物，左监门员外将军杨元方受含章馈饷，并于朝堂决杖，流瀼州，皆赐死于路。
现代文：十九日，幽州长史赵含章犯了盗用库藏财物之罪，左监门员外将军杨元方接受了赵含章赠送的银两，都在朝堂判为杖刑，流放襄州，都在半路赐死。
English: On the 19th, Yu Governor Shi Zhao Hanzhang committed the crime of embezzling the treasury's property, and the left guard gatekeeper Yang Yuanfang accepted Zhao Hanzhang's gift of silver. Both were sentenced to the cane in the imperial court, exiled to Xiangzhou, and both were sentenced to death halfway.

古文：其月，遣范安及于长安广花萼楼，筑夹城至芙蓉园。
现代文：这月，皇上派遣范安及在长安扩建花萼楼，建筑夹城直到芙蓉园。
English: This month, the emperor dispatched Fan An and expanded the Calyx Building in Chang'an, building the city up to the Hibiscus Garden.

古文：秋七月戊辰，幸宁王宪宅，即日还宫。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，驾到宁王宪府，即日还宫。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, he drove to the Ning Wang Xianfu and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：八月辛未朔，日有蚀之。己卯，户部尚书王晙卒。
现代文：八月一日，有日蚀。九日，户部尚书王腢去世。
English: On August 1st, there was a solar eclipse. On the 9th, the head of the household, Prince Shosho passed away.

古文：九月乙巳，中书令萧嵩等奏上《开元新礼》一百五十卷，制所司行用之。
现代文：九月五日，中书令萧嵩等人奉上《开元新礼》一百五十卷，诏命所管部门施行使用。
English: On September 5, Xiao Song and others submitted the 150 volumes of "Kaiyuan New Rites" to the Chinese government, which ordered the relevant departments to use them.

古文：渤海靺鞨寇登州，杀刺史韦俊，命左领军将军盖福顺发兵讨之。
现代文：渤海入侵登州，杀刺史韦俊，皇上命左领军将军盖福顺发兵讨伐。
English: Bohai invaded Dengzhou, assassinated Shi Weijun, and the emperor ordered the left-wing leader, General Gaifu Shun, to send troops to fight.

古文：冬十月丙戌，命巡幸所至，有贤才未闻达者举之。
现代文：冬十月十六日，皇上命令巡行所到之处，有贤才而名声没有显达的人应举荐他们。
English: On the 16th of October, in the winter, the emperor ordered that wherever the procession went, those who had talents but were not famous should recommend them.

古文：仍令中书门下疏决囚徒。
现代文：仍然令中书省门下省整顿清理囚徒。
English: He still ordered the provincial rectification to clean up the prisoners.

古文：辛卯，至潞州之飞龙宫，给复三年，兵募丁防先差未发者，令改出余州。
现代文：二十一日，皇上到潞州之飞龙宫，免税三年，军队所募兵士先前差遣还没出发者，命令他们改从其他州出发。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor went to the Flying Dragon Palace in Zhangzhou, which had been tax-free for three years. The soldiers recruited by the army who had not been sent before were ordered to leave from other states.

古文：辛丑，至北都。
现代文：十一月二日，皇上到北都。
English: On November 2, the emperor arrived in the northern capital.

古文：癸丑，曲赦太原，给复三年。
现代文：十四日，由于特殊情况而赦免太原免税三年。
English: On the 14th, due to special circumstances, Taiyuan was pardoned from tax exemption for three years.

古文：十一月庚午，祀后土于脽上，大赦天下，左降官量移近处。
现代文：十二月一日，在月隹上祭祀土地神，大赦天下，降职官员衡量情况改移到近处。
English: On December 1st, the land god was sacrificed on the crescent moon, the world was amnestied, and the demotion of officials was moved to a nearby place.

古文：内外文武官加一阶，开元勋臣尽假紫及绯。
现代文：内外文武官员加一级，开元功臣佩服饰全部给予紫色和大红色。
English: The civil and military officials at home and abroad were upgraded to the next level, and the meritorious heroes of the founding of the People's Republic of China were all given purple and red clothes.

古文：大酺三日。
现代文：聚会宴饮三天。
English: Three days of partying and feasting.

古文：十二月壬申，至京师。
现代文：十二月三日，皇上到京师。
English: On December 3, the emperor arrived in Beijing.

古文：其年户部计户七百八十六万一千二百三十六，口四千五百四十三万一千二百六十五。
现代文：这年户部统计全国有七百八十六万一千二百三十六户，人口有四千五百四十三万一千二百六十五人。
English: In that year, according to the statistics of the Household Department, there were 7,861,236 households nationwide, with a population of 45,431,265.

古文：二十一年春正月庚子朔，制令士庶家藏《老子》一本，每年贡举人量减《尚书》、《论语》两条策，加《老子》策，乙巳，迁祔肃明皇后神主于庙，毁仪坤庙。
现代文：二十一年春正月一日，诏令士子和庶民每家收藏《老子》一本，每年科举每个人酌量减少《尚书》、《论语》两条策问，增加《老子》策问。六日，迁移肃明皇后神主到太庙去附祭，毁掉仪坤庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the 21st year of the Heian period, the emperor decreed that every household of the nobles and the common people should collect one copy of "Lao Zi," and that the annual academic examination should reduce the number of questions on "Shang Shu" and "Analects" and increase the number of questions on "Lao Zi." On the 6th day of the month, the empress deity Su Ming was transferred to the Great Temple to attend the festival, and the Ceremonial Temple was destroyed.

古文：丁巳，幸温泉宫。
现代文：十八日，皇上驾到温泉宫。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor drove to the Onsen Palace.

古文：己未，命工部尚书李嵩使于吐蕃。
现代文：二十日，命工部尚书李嵩出使到吐蕃。
English: On the 20th, Li Song from the Ministry of Industry and Trade was dispatched to Tubo.

古文：癸亥，至自温泉宫。
现代文：二十四日，皇上从温泉宫回来。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor returned from the Onsen Palace.

古文：三月乙巳，侍中裴光庭薨。
现代文：三月七日，侍中裴光庭去世。
English: On March 7th, chamberlain Pei Guangting passed away.

古文：甲寅，尚书右丞韩休为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十六日，尚书右丞韩休为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 16th, Shang Shuyuan Han was relieved of his duties as Yellow Gate Attendant, and the same happened with Zhong Shumen Shimohei.

古文：闰月，幽州道副总管郭英杰等讨契丹，为所败于都山之下，英杰死之。
现代文：闰三月，幽州道副总管郭英杰等讨伐契丹，在都山之下被契丹打败，郭英杰战死。
English: In March, Guo Yingjie, deputy head of Yuzhou Road, and others went to fight against the Khitan. They were defeated by the Khitan at the foot of the Capital Hill, and Guo Yingjie died in the battle.

古文：夏四月丁巳，以久旱，命太子少保陆象先、户部尚书杜暹等七人往诸道宣慰赈给，及令黜陟官吏，疏决囚徒。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，因久旱，命太子少保陆象先、户尚书杜暹等七人往各道安抚救济，又命令他们升降官吏，整顿清理囚徒。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of the summer, due to a long drought, seven people, including the life prince Shao Bao, Lu Xiang Xian, and Hushanshu Du Xian, went to various places to pacify and provide relief, and ordered them to promote and demote officials, rectify and clean up prisoners.

古文：丁酉，宁王宪为太尉，薛王业为司徒，庆王潭为太子太师，忠王浚为开府仪同三司，棣王洽为太子少傅，鄂王涓为太子太保。
现代文：四月一日，宁王宪为太尉，薛王业为司徒，庆王潭为太子太师，忠王浚为开府仪同三司，棣王洽为太子少傅，鄂王涓为太子太保。
English: On April 1, Ning Wangxian became the first lieutenant, Xue Wangye became the first apprentice, Qing Wangtan became the prince's first teacher, Zhong Wangjun became the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, Yao Wangchao became the prince's junior tutor, and He Wangtao became the prince's tutor.

古文：五月甲申，皇太子纳妃薛氏。
现代文：五月十八日，皇太子娶妃薛氏。
English: On May 18, the crown prince married Princess Xue.

古文：制天下死罪降从流，流已下释放。
现代文：诏命天下死罪降为流放，流放以下罪囚释放。
English: The imperial edict reduced the death penalty to banishment, and the following prisoners were released after banishment.

古文：京文武官赐勋一转。
现代文：在京的文武官员赐给勋位各升一等。
English: The civil and military officials in Kyoto gave the order one grade higher each.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月一日，有日蚀。
English: Autumn On July 1st, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月壬午，封皇子溢为济王，沔为信王，泚为义王，漼为陈王，澄为丰王，潓为恆王，漩为凉王，滔为深王。
现代文：九月十八日，封皇子溢为济王，沔为信王，氵此为义王，氵崔为陈王，澄为丰王，氵惠为恒王，語为凉王，滔为深王。
English: On September 18th, Prince Fong became King Ji, Prince Yu became King Xin, Prince Xie became King Yi, Prince Guo became King Chen, Prince Cheng became King Feng, Prince Xie became King Heng, Prince Guo became King Liang, and Prince Tao became King Sheng.

古文：冬十月庚戌，幸温泉宫。
现代文：冬十月十七日，驾到温泉宫。
English: In winter, on October 17th, I drove to the Onsen Palace.

古文：十一月戊子，尚书右丞相宋璟以年老请致仕，许之。
现代文：十一月二十五日，尚书右丞相宋王景因年老请求辞职，同意了他的请求。
English: On November 25th, Song Wangjing, Minister of the Right of Shangshu, requested to resign due to old age and agreed to his request.

古文：十二月丁未，兵部尚书、徐国公萧嵩为尚书右丞相，黄门侍郎韩休为兵部尚书，并罢知政事。
现代文：十二月十四日，兵部尚书、徐国公萧嵩为尚书右丞相，黄门侍郎韩休为兵部尚书，都罢免知政事。
English: On December 14th, Hyobu Shoshu, Xu Guogong Xiaosong as Hyobu Shoshu's minister of the right, and Huangmen waiter Han Xiu as Hyobu Shoshu, were all dismissed from political affairs.

古文：京兆尹裴耀卿为黄门侍郎，前中书侍郎张九龄起复旧官，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：京兆尹裴耀卿为黄门侍郎，前中书侍郎张九龄起用恢复旧官职，都担任同中书门下平章事。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Pei Yao was appointed as the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, and Zhang Julin, the former Secretary of the Middle School, was appointed to restore the old official position. Both of them served as the Secretary of the Middle School.

古文：是岁，关中久雨害稼，京师饥，诏出太仓米二百万石给之。
现代文：这年，关中长期下雨危害庄稼，京师发生荒年，皇上诏命拿出太仓之米二万石来供给。
English: In that year, the mid- and long-term rains in Kansai damaged crops, and there was a drought in Kyoto, so the emperor gave the order to take out 20,000 koku of rice from Taicang to supply it.

古文：二十二年春正月癸亥朔，制古圣帝明皇、岳、渎、海镇用牲牢，余并以酒酺充奠。
现代文：二十二年春正月一日，诏令古代圣贤皇帝英明君主，五岳四渎四海四镇祭祀用猪、牛、羊，其余都以聚饮酒宴来祭祀。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the 22nd year, the ancient sage emperor and wise monarch decreed that the five mountains, four seas and four towns would be sacrificed with pigs, cattle and sheep, and the rest would be sacrificed with a drinking party.

古文：己巳，幸东都。
现代文：六日，驾幸东都。
English: On the 6th, I drove to Dongdu.

古文：辛未，太府卿严挺之、户部侍郎裴宽于河南存问赈给。
现代文：八日，太府卿严挺之、户部侍郎裴宽到河南安抚救济。
English: On the eighth day, the grand steward Yan Tingzhi and the steward of the household, Pei Kuan, went to Henan to pacify and provide relief.

古文：乙酉，怀、卫、邢、相等五州乏粮，遣中书舍人裴敦复巡问，量给种子。
现代文：二十二日，怀、卫、邢、相等州缺粮，派中书舍人裴敦复巡访慰问，酌情给予种子。
English: On the 22nd, due to the grain shortage in Huai, Wei, Qian and Jiaozhou, Pei Dunfu, a Chinese scholar, was sent to pay a condolence visit, and seeds were given as appropriate.

古文：己丑，至东都。
现代文：二十六日，皇上到东都。
English: On the 26th, the emperor left for the eastern capital.

古文：二月壬寅，秦州地震，廨宇及居人庐舍崩坏殆尽，压死官吏以下四十余人，殷殷有声，仍连震不止。
现代文：二月十日，秦州地震，官署衙门及百姓住宅完全崩塌破坏，压死官吏以下百姓四十多人，殷殷震动之声，仍然连续不止。
English: On February 10, the Qinzhou earthquake, the government office gate and the people's residence completely collapsed and destroyed, crushing more than forty people below the officials, and the sound of the shaking was still continuous.

古文：命尚书右丞相萧嵩往祭山川，并遣使存问赈恤之，压死之家给复一年，一家三人已上死者给复二年。
现代文：命令尚书右丞相萧嵩前往祭祀山川，并派使者慰问抚恤。压死之家免税一年，一家有死亡三人以上者，免税二年。
English: He ordered Shangshu Righteous Minister Xiao Song to go to the sacrificial mountains and rivers, and sent an emissary to pay condolences. The home of the dead was exempt from tax for one year, and those with more than three deaths in a family were exempt from tax for two years.

古文：辛亥，初置十道采访处置使。
现代文：十九日，开始设置十道采访处置使。
English: On the 19th, the setting up of ten interviewing and handling agents began.

古文：征恆州张果先生，授银青光禄大夫，号曰通玄先生三月，没京兆商人任令方资财六十余万贯。
现代文：征召恒州张果先生，授予银青光禄大夫，号曰通玄先生。三月，没收京兆商人任令方资财六十多万贯。
English: Mr. Zhang Guo from Hengzhou was conscripted and awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, called Mr. Tong Xuan. In March, the assets of more than 600,000 yuan of the Beijing Zhao merchant Renlingfang were confiscated.

古文：废太庙署，以太常寺奉宗庙。庚子，唐州界准胜州例立表，测候日晷影长短。
现代文：二十一日，想命令不必禁止私人铸造钱，让公卿百官详细商议可还是不可。
English: On the twenty-first day, it is not necessary to prohibit the private minting of money if you want to order it, but it is still impossible to let the nobles and officials discuss it in detail.

古文：乙巳，诏京都见禁囚徒，令中书门下及留守检覆降罪，天下诸州委刺史。
现代文：众人议论认为不可，于是废止了这种想法。四月四日，伊西、北庭暂且依照旧制成为节制一方的藩镇。废除太庙署，以太常寺供奉宗庙。十四日，诏命京都被监禁囚徒，令中书省、门下省及留守审查核实降低罪名，天下各州委任刺史执行。
English: On April 4th, Ishi and Hokutei temporarily became han towns in accordance with the old system. The Imperial Temples Office was abolished, and Hokutei-ji Temple was dedicated to the Imperial Family. On the 14th, Kyoto was ordered to imprison prisoners, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the subordinate provinces and the left-behind review were ordered to verify and reduce the charges, and the states of the world were appointed to carry out the history.

古文：丁未，眉州鼎皇山下江水中得宝鼎。
现代文：十六日，眉州鼎皇山下江水中得到了宝鼎。
English: On the 16th, Meizhou Dinghuangshan got Baoding in the river.

古文：甲寅，北庭都护刘涣谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十三日，北庭都护刘涣谋反，外以死刑。
English: On the 23rd, the Beiyuan tutelary Liu Xuan plotted a rebellion and was put to death.

古文：五月戊子，黄门侍郎裴耀卿为侍中，中书侍郎张九龄为中书令，黄门侍郎李林甫为礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月二十八日，黄门侍郎裴耀卿为侍中，中书侍郎张九龄为中书令，黄门侍郎李林甫为礼部尚书，同中书门下平章事。
English: On May 28, Pei Yaoqing, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, became the junior attendant, Zhang Jiuling, the attendant of the Chinese book, became the secretary of the Chinese book, and Li Linfu, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, became the secretary of the etiquette department.

古文：关中大风拔木，同州尤甚。
现代文：关中大风拔起树木，同州尤其严重。
English: Strong winds uprooted trees in Guanzhong, and the situation was particularly serious in Guanzhong.

古文：是夏，上自于苑中种麦，率皇太子已下躬自收获，谓太子等曰： 此将荐宗庙，是以躬亲，亦欲令汝等知稼穑之难也。 
现代文：这年夏天，皇上亲自在宫苑中种麦，率领皇太子以下的臣属亲自收获，对太子等人道： 要用这些收获的麦子奉宗庙，因此亲自耕种，也想让你们众人知道稼穑之艰难。 
English: In the summer of that year, the Emperor personally sowed wheat in the palace garden, and led the vassals below the Crown Prince to harvest it themselves. To the Prince and others, he said, "I want to use the harvested wheat to build the family temple, so I will cultivate it myself. I also want to let you all know how difficult it is to earn a living."

古文：因分赐侍臣，谓曰： 比岁令人巡检苗稼，所对多不实，故自种植以观其成；且《春秋》书麦禾，岂非古人所重也！ 
现代文：因而将麦分赐给侍臣，对他们说 ：每年令人巡视检查庄稼，所答对大多不符实际，所以亲自种植来观看成效；再说《春秋》上写着麦禾之事，难道不是古人看重吗？ 
English: Therefore, he gave the wheat to his attendants and said to them: Every year, people are sent to inspect the crops, and most of the answers are not realistic, so he planted them himself to see the results; moreover, "Spring and Autumn" wrote about wheat, isn't it important for the ancients?

古文：六月乙未，遣左金吾将军李佺于赤岭与吐蕃分界立碑。
现代文：六月六日，派遣左金吾将军李亻全在赤岭与吐蕃分界立碑。
English: On June 6th, he dispatched Zuo Kingu's general, Li Shizhen, to erect a monument marking the boundary between Akaling and Tubo.

古文：七月己巳，司徒、薛王业薨，追谥为惠宣太子。
现代文：七月十日，司徒、薛王业去世，追加谥号为惠宣太子。
English: On July 10th, Prince Sito and Prince Xue passed away, and Prince Hui Xuan became the new crown prince.

古文：甲申，遣中书令张九龄充河南开稻田使。
现代文：二十五日，派中书令张九龄任河南开稻田使。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Jiuling was appointed as Henan rice field development envoy.

古文：八月，先是驾至东都，遣侍中裴耀卿充江淮、河南转运使，河口置输场。
现代文：八月，在此以前皇上驾到东都，派侍中裴耀卿任江淮、河南转运使、河口设置运输场。
English: In August, before this, the emperor drove to Dongdu and sent his aide-de-camp Pei Yaoqing to serve as the Jianghuai, Henan transshipment envoy, and to set up a transport yard in Hekou.

古文：壬寅，于输场东置河阴县。
现代文：十四日，在运输场东设置河阴县。
English: On the 14th, Hebei County was set up in the east of the transport yard.

古文：又遣张九龄于许、豫、陈、亳等州置水屯。
现代文：又派张九龄在许、豫、陈、亳等州设置水田屯田。
English: Zhang Julin was also sent to set up paddy fields in Xu, Yu, Chen and Handan.

古文：九月壬申，改饶乐都督府为奉诚都督府。
现代文：九月十四日，改饶乐都督府为奉诚都督府。
English: On September 14th, the Raole Town Governor's Office was renamed the Bongseong Town Governor's Office.

古文：辛巳，移登州平海军于海口安置。
现代文：二十三日，转移登州平海军到海口安置。
English: On the 23rd, Dengzhou Ping Navy was transferred to Haikou for resettlement.

古文：冬十月甲辰，试司农卿陈思问以赃私配流瀼州。
现代文：冬十月十七日，试用司农卿陈思问因为贪污营私流放到氵襄州。
English: In the winter of October 17th, Chen Sicai, the probationary Secretary of Agriculture, was exiled to Zhangyang Province for corruption.

古文：十二月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月一日，有日蚀。
English: On December 1st, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：乙巳，幽州长史张守珪发兵讨契丹，斩其王屈烈及其大臣可突干于阵，传首东都，余叛奚皆散走山谷。
现代文：十八日，幽州长史张守王圭发兵讨伐契丹，在阵上斩契丹王屈烈及其大臣可突干，将首级传到东都，其余反叛的奚国人都散乱逃跑到山谷中去。
English: On the 18th, Governor Zhang Shou Wang Gui sent an army to fight against the Khitan. He killed the Khitan King Qurei and his minister Qian Xuan in the battle, and sent the heads to the eastern capital. The rest of the rebel Han people scattered and fled to the valley.

古文：立其酋长李过折为契丹王。
现代文：于是立他们的酋长李过折为契丹王。
English: So they made their chieftain, Li Koro, the king of Khitan.

古文：是岁，突厥毗伽可汗死。
现代文：这年，突厥毗伽可汗死。
English: In the same year, the Turk Vijayakhan died.

古文：断京城乞兒。
现代文：禁绝京城乞丐。
English: Ban beggars from the capital.

古文：二十三年春正月己亥，亲耕籍田，上加至九推而止，卿已下终其亩。
现代文：二十三年春二月十三日，皇上亲自耕种籍田。
English: On February 13th, the 23rd spring, the Emperor himself began to cultivate his ancestral fields.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：京文武官及朝集采访使三品已下加一爵，四品已下加一阶，外官赐勋一转。
现代文：京城文武官员及朝集采访使三品以下加一爵，四品以下加一级，外官勋位升一等。
English: The interviews with the officials of the capital's cultural and martial arts and the morning assembly resulted in a knighthood for those with three or fewer awards, a first-class rank for those with four or fewer awards, and a promotion to the first class of the Foreign Officers' Decoration.

古文：其才有霸王之略、学究天人之际、及堪将帅牧宰者，令五品已上清官及刺史各举一人。
现代文：那些才干有称霸称王的韬略、学问能推求到自然人事、以及能胜任将帅州牧县宰者，令五品以上清官及刺史各举荐一人。
English: Those who have the ability to dominate and dominate, the ability to learn natural personnel, and those who can competently serve as the governor of Shuaizhou and Muxian County, are recommended by more than five officials and one historian.

古文：致仕官量与改职，依前致仕。
现代文：辞官的人量才给予改职，仍依先前辞官。
English: Only after the number of resigners has increased will they be given a new position, but they will still be dismissed as before.

古文：赐酺三日。
现代文：赐宴聚饮三天。
English: Allow three days for your subjects to gather and drink.

古文：三月丁卯，殿中侍御史杨万顷为仇人所杀。
现代文：三月十一日，殿中侍御史杨万顷被仇人所杀。
English: On March 11th, the palace chamberlain Shi Yang Wanhao was killed by an enemy.

古文：夏五月戊寅，宗子请率月俸于兴庆宫建龙池，上《圣德颂》。
现代文：夏五月二十三日，嫡长子请求带月俸在兴庆宫建龙池，奉上圣德颂。
English: On the 23rd day of the fifth month of the summer, the eldest son requested to bring a monthly salary to build a dragon pond in Xingqing Palace, and was given a hymn of virtue.

古文：秋七月丙子，皇太子鸿改名瑛，庆王直已下十四王并改名。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，皇太子改名为瑛，庆王直以下十四个王都改名。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the crown prince changed his name to Ei, and the following fourteen kings changed their names.

古文：又封皇子玭为义王，珪为陈王，珙为丰王，琪为恆王，璿为凉王，敬为汴王。
现代文：又封皇子笿为义王，王圭为陈王，珙为丰王，琪为恒王，王睿为凉王，王敬为汴王。
English: In addition, the crown prince was named the King of Righteousness, Wang Gui was named the King of Chen, Zou was named the King of Abundance, Qi was named the King of Constancy, Wang Rui was named the King of Coolness, and Wang Jing was named the King of Longing.

古文：其荣王琬已下并开府置官属，各食实封二千户。
现代文：荣王琬以下皇子都成立府署，设置官属，各食实封二千户。
English: Princes from Rong Wangtao onward established government offices, set up subordinate officials, and each of them provided food for 2,000 households.

古文：八月戊子，制鳏寡惸独免今年地税之半，江淮已南有遭水处，本道使赈给之。
现代文：八月五日，诏命老而无妻、老而无夫、幼而无父，老而无子之人，免除今年地税的一半，江淮以南有遭水灾之处，本道派使者救济。
English: On August 5th, the imperial edict ordered that those who are old and have no wife, old and have no husband, young and have no father, and old and have no children should be exempted from half of this year's land tax.

古文：九月戊申，移泗州就临淮县置。
现代文：二十五日，移泗州靠近临淮县安置。
English: On the 25th, he was resettled in Yanzhou near Linhuai County.

古文：冬十月辛亥，移隶伊西、北庭都护属四镇节度。
现代文：冬十月二十九日，改伊西、北庭都护隶属四镇节制调度。
English: In winter, on October 29th, the protection of Issi and Beiting was transferred to the control of the four towns.

古文：突骑施寇北庭及安西拨换城。
现代文：突骑施入侵北庭及安西拨换城。
English: Surge of cavalry invades Beidaihe and Anxi Switch Town.

古文：十一月壬申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月一日，有日蚀。
English: On November 1st, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月，新罗遣使朝献。
现代文：十二月，新罗派使者朝拜贡献。
English: In December, Silla sent an envoy to pay homage.

古文：二十四年春正月，吐蕃遣使献方物。
现代文：二十四年春正月，吐蕃派使者贡献土特产。
English: In the first month of the spring of the twenty-fourth year, the emissaries of Tubo sent a contribution of local special products.

古文：北庭都护盖嘉运率兵击突骑施，破之。
现代文：北庭都护盖嘉运率兵攻打突骑施，打败了他们。
English: Bei Tingdu was defended by Gao Jiayun, who led his troops to attack and defeat Turki Shi.

古文：三月乙未，始移考功贡举遣礼部侍郎掌之。
现代文：三月十五日，才开始改变考功司负责科举，派礼部侍郎主持科举。
English: It was only on March 15th that they began to change the official in charge of the imperial examinations, sending a servant from the etiquette department to preside over the examinations.

古文：夏六月丙午，京兆醴泉妖人刘志诚率众为乱，将趋京城，咸阳官吏烧便桥以断其路，俄而散走，京兆府尽擒斩之。
现代文：五月二十七日，京兆醴泉妖人刘志诚率兵叛乱，将奔向京师。咸阳官吏烧便桥拦断了他们奔向京城的道路，不久，叛军四散逃跑，京兆府全部将其捉住斩首。
English: On May 27th, Liu Zhicheng, the demon of Jingzha and Quanquan, led his troops in a rebellion and rushed to the capital. The officials of Xianyang burned the Ben Bridge to block their path to the capital. Soon, the rebels scattered and fled, and all of Jingzha was captured and beheaded.

古文：己亥，深王滔薨九月壬午，改尚书主爵曰司封。
现代文：这年夏天特别热，道路上有渴死的人。秋七月二十三日，太子太保陆象先去世。二十四日，李林甫任兵部尚书，依旧任知政事。
English: This summer was particularly hot, and there were people dying of thirst on the roads. On the 23rd of July in autumn, the Crown Prince Taibao Lu Xiangxian died. On the 24th, Li Linfu was appointed as the Secretary of the Military Department, and still served as the Secretary of State.

古文：冬十月戊申，车驾发东都，还西京。
现代文：八月二十八日，深王滔去世。冬十月二日，车驾从东都出发，回到西京。
English: On August 28th, Shen Wangtao passed away. In the winter, on October 2nd, he drove from Dongdu and returned to Xijing.

古文：甲子，至华州，曲赦行在系囚。
现代文：十八日，到华州，因特殊情况而赦免行在所监禁的囚徒。
English: On the 18th, he went to Huazhou and pardoned the prisoners in the detention center due to special circumstances.

古文：丁丑，至自东都。
现代文：十一月二日，皇上从东都返回。
English: On November 2, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：十一月壬寅，侍中裴耀卿为尚书左丞相，中书令张九龄为尚书右丞相，并罢知政事。
现代文：二十七日，侍中裴耀卿为尚书左丞相，中书令张九龄为尚书右丞相，都罢免知政事。
English: On the 27th, Vice-Admiral Pei Yao was appointed as Vice-Admiral of the Left and Vice-Admiral of the Right, and Vice-Admiral Zhang Jiuling was appointed as Vice-Admiral of the Right.

古文：兵部尚书李林甫兼中书令，殿中监牛仙客兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：兵部尚书李林甫兼任中书令，殿中监牛仙客为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: Li Linfu, the secretary of the military department, concurrently served as the secretary of the middle school, and Niu Xianke, the overseer of the palace, was the secretary of the military department and the third grade of the middle school.

古文：尚书右丞相萧嵩为太子太师，工部尚书韩休为太子少保。
现代文：尚书右丞相萧嵩为太子太师，工部尚书韩休为太子太保。
English: Shang Shuxu, Minister of the Right, Xiao Song, became the Crown Prince's Grand Master, and Shang Shuxu, Minister of Industry, Han Hui, became the Crown Prince's Grand Protector.

古文：十二月戊申，太子太师、庆王琮为司徒。
现代文：十二月三日，太子太师、庆王琮为司徒。
English: On December 3rd, the crown prince and the great teacher, Qing Wangyao, became a disciple.

古文：丙寅，牛仙客知门下省事。
现代文：二十一日，牛仙客主持门下省工作。
English: On the twenty-first day, Niu Xianke presided over the provincial work.

