古文：长孙览从子炽炽弟晟
现代文：长孙览，字休因，河南洛阳人。
English: The eldest grandson, Zhan, surnamed Xiuyin, is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：长孙览，字休因，河南洛阳人也。祖稚，魏太师、假黄钺、上党文宣王。
现代文：祖父长孙稚，西魏太师、假黄钺、上党文宣王。
English: His grandfather, the eldest grandson, was the West Wei Taishi, the false Huang Qi, and the upper party, King Wenxuan.

古文：父绍远，周小宗伯、上党郡公。
现代文：父亲长孙绍远，北周小宗伯、上党郡公。
English: His father was the eldest son of Sun Shaoyuan, the Northern Zhou Minor Zongbo, and the Shangdang County official.

古文：览性弘雅，有器量，略涉书记，尤晓钟律。
现代文：长孙览生性弘雅，有器量，略涉书记，尤通音律。
English: The eldest grandson, Yansheng, is very elegant, has the ability, is slightly involved in secretarial work, and has a good musical ear.

古文：魏大统中，起家东宫亲信。
现代文：西魏大统中，他开始任东宫亲信。
English: He became a close confidant of the Eastern Court during the Great Reign of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：周明帝时，为大都督。
现代文：北周明帝时，任大都督。
English: When Northern Zhou was Emperor Ming, he served as the Grand Governor.

古文：武帝在籓，与览亲善，及即位，弥加礼焉，超拜车骑大将军。
现代文：周武帝任藩王时，与长孙览亲近，即位后，对他更加礼遇，越级提拔他当车骑大将军。
English: When Zhou Wudi was the king of the domain, he was close to his eldest grandson, Qian. After he ascended the throne, he treated him with more courtesy and promoted him to the rank of general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：每公卿上奏，必令省读。
现代文：每每公卿们上奏，必让他先读一读。
English: Whenever a nobleman plays a piece, he must first read it.

古文：览有口辩，声气雄壮，凡所宣传，百僚属目，帝每嘉叹之。
现代文：长孙览有口才，声气俱壮，凡是他宣读诏书，百官都看着他，皇上每每赞赏他。
English: The eldest grandson Yan had eloquence and a powerful voice. Whenever he read out the imperial edict, all the officials looked at him, and the emperor praised him every time.

古文：览初名善，帝谓之曰： 朕以万机，委卿先览。 遂赐名焉。
现代文：长孙览起初名叫长孙善，皇帝对他说： 我让你先览奏章。 于是赐他名 览 。
English: Changsun Zhan was originally named Changsun Zhen, and the emperor said to him, "I'll let you preview the movement," and gave him the name Zhan.

古文：及诛宇文护，以功进封薛国公。
现代文：到杀宇文护后，因功晋封薛国公。
English: After the death of Wu Wenguo, he was awarded the title of Xue Guogong.

古文：其后历小司空。
现代文：其后历任小司空。
English: Subsequent successors have been empty-chaired.

古文：从平齐，进位柱国，封第二子宽管国公。
现代文：随皇上平定齐国，进位任柱国，封他第二个儿子长孙宽为管国公。
English: With the emperor's pacification of Qi, he was promoted to the post of pillar state, and his second son, the eldest grandson, was appointed as the governor.

古文：宣帝时，进位上柱国、大司徒，俄历同、泾二州刺史。
现代文：北周宣帝时，升任上柱国、大司徒，不久历任同、泾二州刺史。
English: When Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was promoted to Shangzhu Guo and Daishi Tuo, and soon after, he was appointed to Tong, and became the governor of two states.

古文：高祖为丞相，转宜州刺史。
现代文：高祖为北周丞相时，转任宜州刺史。
English: When Gaozu was the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of the Governor of Yizhou.

古文：开皇二年，将有事于江南，征为东南道行军元帅，统八总管出寿阳，水陆俱进。
现代文：开皇二年，隋国将进攻江南，调长孙览当东南道行军元帅，统领八大总管出兵寿阳，水陆并进。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, the Sui Dynasty will attack the south of the Yangtze River. Sun Qian, the governor, will be the marshal of the southeast road. He will lead the eight general managers to send troops to Shouyang, and the water and land will advance together.

古文：师临江，陈人大骇。
现代文：军临长江，陈国人十分惊恐。
English: When the army arrived at the Yangtze River, the people of Chen were very frightened.

古文：会陈宣帝卒，览欲乘衅遂灭之，监军高颎以礼不伐丧而还。
现代文：适逢陈宣帝去世，长孙览想乘机消灭陈国，监军高赹以礼不伐丧而退军。
English: When Chen Xuandi died, his eldest grandson Yan wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to eliminate Chen Guo, and Gao Qi, the supervisor of the army, withdrew from the army with a bow.

古文：上常命览与安德王雄、上柱国元谐、李充、左仆射高颎、右卫大将军虞庆则、吴州总管贺若弼等同宴，上曰： 朕昔在周朝，备展诚节，但苦猜忌，每致寒心。
现代文：高祖曾让长孙览与安德王杨雄、上柱国元谐、李充、左仆射高赹、右卫大奖军虞庆则、吴州总管贺若弼等一同饮宴。皇上说： 我过去在北周时，备展诚节，但苦于被猜忌，每每寒心。
English: Gao Zu once had his eldest grandson Yan have a banquet with Ando Wang Yang Xiong, Shangzhu Guo Yuan Rong, Li Chong, Zuo minion Ya Gao Jie, Right Guard Grand Prize Army Yu Qing Zi, Wuzhou General Manager He Ruo Jie, etc. The emperor said: I used to prepare for the Spring Festival when I was in North Zhou, but I suffered from being suspected, and I was always cold.

古文：为臣若此，竟何情赖？
现代文：为臣下的到了这地步，怎么能受得了？
English: How could I bear being treated like a vassal?

古文：朕之于公，义则君臣，恩犹父子。朕当与公共享终吉，罪非谋逆，一无所问。
现代文：我对各位，道义上是君臣，恩情上像父子，我当与各位共享福气，如非造反之罪，概不追究。
English: To all of you, I am a prince and a vassal morally, and I am like a father and son in terms of gratitude. I should share the blessings with all of you. If it is not a crime of rebellion, I will not pursue it.

古文：朕亦知公至诚，特付太子，宜数参见之，庶得渐相亲爱。
现代文：我也知你十分忠诚，特将太子交给你，你应多帮助他，庶几得以渐渐亲近。
English: I also know that you are very loyal, and that you will hand over the crown prince to you. You should help him more, so that you can gradually get closer to him.

古文：柱臣素望，实属于公，宜识朕意。 
现代文：我对大臣们的厚望，实在在你身上，你应该明白我的意思。 
English: My high hopes for the ministers rest on you, you should understand what I mean.

古文：其恩礼如此。
现代文：对他的恩典礼遇就是这样。
English: So much for his grace and favour residence.

古文：又为蜀王秀纳览女为妃。
现代文：皇上又为蜀王杨秀纳长孙览之女为王妃。
English: The empress is also the daughter of Yang Xuna, the eldest grandson of King Shu, and the princess.

古文：其后以母忧去职。
现代文：其后因遭母丧而离职。
English: She later resigned from her position due to the death of her mother.

古文：岁馀，起令复位。
现代文：一年多后，让他复职。
English: More than a year later, he was reinstated.

古文：俄转泾州刺史，所在并有政绩。
现代文：不久他转任泾州刺史，所在之处，均有政绩。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, and he has made great achievements wherever he has been.

古文：卒官。
现代文：在官任上去世。
English: He later died in office.

古文：子洪嗣。仕历宋顺临三州刺史、司农少卿、北平太守。
现代文：他儿子长孙洪继承爵禄，历任宋州顺州临州三州刺史、司农少卿、北平太守。
English: His eldest son, Sun Hong, inherited the peerage, and successively served as Songzhou, Shunzhou, Linzhou, Sanshou, Sino-Shanghai, Sino-Shanghai, and Beiping governor.

古文：炽字仲光，上党文宣王稚之曾孙也。
现代文：长孙炽，字仲光，上党文宣王长孙稚的曾孙。
English: He is the great-grandson of Blazing, also known as Zhongguang, and the great-grandson of the eldest grandson of the Shang Party's King Wenxuan.

古文：祖裕，魏太常卿、冀州刺史。
现代文：祖父长孙裕，西魏太常卿、冀州刺史。
English: His grandfather, the eldest Sun Yu, was the First Secretary of the Western Wei Dynasty and the founder of Jizhou.

古文：父兕，周开府仪同三司、熊绛二州刺史、平原侯。
现代文：父亲长孙兕，北周开府仪同三司、熊绛二州刺史、平原侯。
English: His father was Sun Yat-sen, the first emperor of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the founder of the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：炽性敏慧，美姿仪，颇涉群书，兼长武艺。
现代文：长孙炽生性敏慧，容貌漂亮，颇读群书，兼善武艺。
English: The eldest grandson is bright and intelligent, good-looking, an avid reader, and good at martial arts.

古文：建德初，武帝尚道法，尤好玄言，求学兼经史、善于谈论者，为通道馆学士。
现代文：北周建德初，周武帝崇尚道法，尤其喜欢玄学，求取那些兼通经史、善于谈论的人，为通道馆学士。
English: At the beginning of Northern Zhou Jiande, Emperor Zhou Wu advocated Taoism, especially liked metaphysics, and sought out those who were both versed in history and good at talking about it. He was a scholar of the passage hall.

古文：炽应其选，与英俊并游，通涉弥博。
现代文：长孙炽应其选，与英才们一起，读书更多。
English: Eldest Grandson Blazing should choose, together with the talented, to read more.

古文：建德二年，授雍州仓城令，寻转盩啡令。
现代文：建德二年，授他雍州仓城县令，不久转任周至县令。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was awarded the county magistrate of Cangcheng County, Yongzhou, and was soon transferred to the county magistrate of Zhou.

古文：频宰二邑，考绩连最，迁崤郡守。
现代文：连任两县县令，政绩连连最突出，迁任崤郡太守。
English: He was re-elected as the county magistrate of the two counties, and his political achievements were the most outstanding.

古文：入为御正上士。
现代文：入京为御正上士。
English: He entered the capital as a staff sergeant.

古文：高祖作相，擢为丞相府功曹参军，加大都督，封阳平县子，邑二百户。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，提拔他任丞相府功曹参军，加封大都督，封为阳平县子爵，食邑二百户。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou, he was promoted to the post of minister of Gong Cao, joined the army, and was awarded the title of grand governor, and was awarded the title of viscount of Yangping County, with 200 households.

古文：迁稍伯下大夫。
现代文：升任稍伯下大夫。
English: Promoted to junior doctor.

古文：其年王谦反，炽从信州总管王长述溯江而上。
现代文：这年王谦反叛，长孙炽随信州总管王长述溯江而上。
English: This year, Wang Qian rebelled, and his eldest grandson, Blazing, followed the general manager of Xinzhou, Wang Changsu, up the river.

古文：以炽为前军，破谦一镇，定楚、合等五州，擒伪总管荆山公元振，以功拜仪同三司。
现代文：王长述以长孙炽为前锋，打破王谦所辖一镇，平定楚州、合州等五州，俘虏伪总管荆山公元振。他因功拜授仪同三司。
English: Wang Chang described the eldest grandson Blazing as the striker, breaking a town under the jurisdiction of Wang Qian, pacifying five states such as Chuzhou and Hezhou, and capturing the pseudo head of Jingshan A.D. Zhen. He was awarded the ceremony with the three divisions for his service.

古文：及高祖受禅，炽率官属先入清宫，即日授内史舍人、上仪同三司。
现代文：到隋高祖受周禅让时，长孙炽率领部下先进宫中，清除杂人，即日授他内史舍人、上仪同三司。
English: When Emperor Gaozong of the Sui Dynasty accepted Zhou Zhen's offer, the eldest grandson Blaze led his subordinates to the front of the palace to clear out the impostors, and on the same day, he conferred the Inner History, the Upper Ritual, and the Three Departments.

古文：寻以本官摄判东宫右庶子，出入两宫，甚被委遇。
现代文：不久以本官兼任东宫右庶子，出入两宫，很被重用。
English: Soon, he also served as the right son of the Eastern Palace, entering and leaving the two palaces, and was highly valued.

古文：加以处事周密，高祖每称美之。
现代文：加上他做事很周密，高祖每每称赞他。
English: In addition, he was very thorough in his work, and Gaozhu praised him every time.

古文：授左领军长史，持节，使于东南道三十六州，废置州郡，巡省风俗。
现代文：授他左领军长史，持节出使到东南道的三十六州，废置州郡，巡视风俗民情。
English: He was awarded the title of "Leader of the Left Armies of the Long March," and was sent to the 36 prefectures of Southeastern Province, abolished prefectures and counties, and inspected the customs and folkways.

古文：还授太子仆，加谏议大夫，摄长安令。
现代文：还京后，授他太子仆，加任谏议大夫，兼任长安县令。
English: After he returned to Beijing, he was awarded the title of Prince's Servant, and was also appointed to the post of Doctor of Political Science, as well as the post of Chang'an County Governor.

古文：与大兴令梁毗俱为称职。
现代文：他与大兴县令梁毗，都很称职。
English: He and Daxing County Governor Liang Bei are both very competent.

古文：然毗以严正闻，炽以宽平显，为政不同，部内各化。
现代文：但梁毗以严正出名，长孙炽以宽厚公平出名，为政虽然不同，所辖地区都治得很好。
English: However, Liang Pi is famous for his strictness, and his eldest grandson Blazing is famous for his generosity and fairness. Although the politics are different, the areas under their jurisdiction are well healed.

古文：寻领右常平监，迁雍州赞治，改封饶良县子。
现代文：不久任右常平监，升任雍州赞治，改封饶良县子爵。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of the Right Standing Peace Inspector, promoted to the post of Yongzhou Zanzhi, and changed his title to the Viscount of Raoliang County.

古文：迁鸿胪少卿。
现代文：后升任鸿胪少卿。
English: Later, he was promoted to Hung Shun Shaoqing.

古文：后数岁，转太常少卿，进位开府仪同三司。
现代文：几年后，转任太常少卿，升任开府仪同三司。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing and was promoted to the third division of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：复持节为河南道二十八州巡省大使，于路授吏部侍郎。
现代文：又持节任河南道二十八州的巡省大使，在路上被授为吏部侍郎。
English: He was also appointed as the provincial ambassador of 28 counties in Henan Province, and was awarded the title of the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：大业元年，迁大理卿，复为西南道大使，巡省风俗。
现代文：大业元年，任大理卿，又为西南道巡省大使，巡视各地风俗。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, he assumed the post of Daliqing and was also the ambassador of the Southwest Province, inspecting the customs of various regions.

古文：擢拜户部尚书。
现代文：提拔当户部尚书。
English: The promotion of the head of the household department is still in progress.

古文：吐谷浑寇张掖，令炽率精骑五千击走之，追至青海而还，以功授银青光禄大夫。
现代文：吐谷浑进犯张扌夜，令长孙炽率骑兵五千打跑他们，追到青海而还，以功授银青光禄大夫。
English: Tuyun invaded Zhangye at night, causing the eldest grandson to lead five thousand cavalry to chase them, chase them to Qinghai and return, and award the silver to the Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：六年，幸江都宫，留炽于东都居守，仍摄左候卫将军事。
现代文：大业六年，炀帝幸江都行宫，留长孙炽在东都留守，仍执掌左侯卫将军事。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gaozong marched to the capital, leaving his eldest grandson Gaozong to stay in the eastern capital, still in charge of the military affairs of Zuo Weizhong.

古文：其年卒官，时年六十二。
现代文：这年在官任上去世，时年六十二岁。
English: He died in office that year, aged 62.

古文：谥曰静。
现代文：谥号叫 静 。
English: Her nickname is Jing.

古文：子安世，通事谒者。
现代文：儿子长孙安世，任通事谒者。
English: His son, the eldest grandson, Yasushi, was appointed as a magistrate.

古文：晟字季晟，性通敏，略涉书记，善弹工射，趫捷过人。
现代文：长孙晟，字季晟，生性通敏，略涉书史，善于骑射，矫捷过人。
English: The eldest grandson, Zi Qian, is naturally sensitive, slightly involved in book history, good at riding and shooting, and extremely agile.

古文：时周室尚武，贵游子弟咸以相矜，每共驰射，时辈皆出其下。
现代文：当时周朝崇尚武艺，贵族子弟都因有武艺而觉得了不起，每每与他骑马射箭，那些人都在他之下。
English: At that time, the Zhou Dynasty advocated martial arts, and the children of aristocrats felt great because they had martial arts. Whenever they rode with him and shot arrows, those people were under him.

古文：年十八，为司卫上士。
现代文：十八岁，任司卫上士，初不出名，人们还不认识他。
English: Eighteen years old, serving as a senior sergeant of the National Guard, he was not famous at first, and people did not know him.

古文：初未知名，人弗之识也，唯高祖一见，深嗟异焉，乃携其手而谓人曰： 长孙郎武艺逸群，适与其言，又多奇略。
现代文：只有隋高祖一见他，就嗟叹不已，于是携起他的手而对人们说： 长孙郎武艺超群，刚与他交谈，他又有很多奇策。
English: Only Sui Gao Zu sighed deeply when he saw him, so he took his hand and said to the people: "My eldest grandson is a great martial artist. I just talked to him, and he has a lot of tricks."

古文：后之名将，非此子邪？ 
现代文：以后的名将，难道不是他吗？ 
English: Isn't he the future superstar?

古文：宣帝时，突厥摄图请婚于周，以赵王招女妻之。
现代文：北周宣帝时，突厥的摄图请求与北周通婚和亲，朝廷以赵王宇文招之女嫁给他为妻。
English: When Northern Zhou proclaimed himself emperor, the Turk's emissary requested marriage and kinship with Northern Zhou, and the court married him to the daughter of Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao.

古文：然周与摄图各相夸竞，妙选骁勇以充使者，因遣晟副汝南公宇文神庆送千金公主至其牙。
现代文：但北周与摄图各相夸耀实力，都选拔骁勇之士以作使者，北周因派长孙晟为汝南公宇文神的副使，送千金公主到摄图的牙旗之下。
English: However, both the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Southern Zhou Dynasty boasted of their strength, and both chose brave men to be their emissaries. The Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Qianjin Princess to the Southern Zhou Dynasty under the banner of the Southern Zhou Dynasty because it sent the eldest grandson of the Southern Zhou Dynasty as the deputy envoy of the Southern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：前后使人数十辈，摄图多不礼，见晟而独爱焉，每共游猎，留之竟岁。
现代文：前后使者数十人，摄图多不礼遇，独对长孙晟特别喜爱，每每与他一起游猎，留他在突厥到年底。
English: Dozens of emissaries came and went, many of whom were rude to the photographer, but he was especially fond of his eldest grandson, Yao. He often went hunting with him and stayed with him in Turkey until the end of the year.

古文：尝有二雕，飞而争肉，因以两箭与晟曰： 请射取之。 
现代文：曾有二雕飞着争肉吃，摄图给长孙晟两支箭，说： 请射取它们。 
English: Once there were two eagles flying to compete for meat to eat. He gave two arrows to his eldest grandson, saying, "Please shoot them."

古文：晟乃弯弓驰往，遇雕相攫，遂一发而双贯焉。
现代文：长孙晟于是弯弓奔去，遇雕相夺，于是一发而射穿两雕。
English: Therefore, the eldest grandson, Yao, ran with a bow and arrow to catch up with the two carvings, so he shot through the two carvings with one shot.

古文：摄图喜，命诸子弟贵人皆相亲友，冀昵近之，以学弹射。
现代文：摄图欢喜，让各位子弟贵人都与他亲近，以学习弹射。
English: He is delighted with the photo and invites all of you to get close to him to learn how to eject.

古文：其弟处罗侯号突利设，尤得众心。而为摄图所忌，密托心腹，阴与晟盟。
现代文：摄图的弟弟处罗侯名叫突利设，尤得众心，但被摄图忌恨，因此密派心腹，偷偷与长孙晟结盟。
English: The photographer's younger brother, Chu Luo Hou, was named Tu Li Shiu. He won the hearts of everyone, but was hated by the photographer. Therefore, he secretly formed an alliance with his eldest grandson, Yao.

古文：晟与之游猎，因察山川形势，部众强弱，皆尽知之。
现代文：长孙晟和他一起游猎，因便考察山川形势、部众强弱，全都知道了。
English: The eldest grandson, Hao, went hunting with him, and because he examined the situation of the mountains and rivers and the strength and weakness of the animals, he knew everything.

古文：时高祖作相，晟以状白高祖。
现代文：当时隋高祖为北周丞相，长孙晟把情况告诉高祖。
English: At that time, Sui Gaozu was the Minister of North Zhoucheng, and the eldest grandson told Gaozu about the situation.

古文：高祖大喜，迁奉车都尉。
现代文：高祖大喜，升他当奉车都尉。
English: Gao Zu was overjoyed and promoted him to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：至开皇元年，摄图曰： 我周家亲也，今隋公自立而不能制，复何面目见可贺敦乎 ？
现代文：到开皇元年，摄图说： 我是周家的亲戚，现在隋公自立为帝，我不能制服他，又有什么面目见人呢？ 
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, the photo said: I am a relative of the Zhou family, and now Sui Gong has established himself as the emperor. I can't subdue him. What kind of face should I show to others?

古文：因与高宝宁攻陷临渝镇，约诸面部落谋共南侵。
现代文：因此与高宝宁攻陷临渝镇，与各部落相约，一起南侵。
English: Therefore, he and Gao Baoning captured the town of Linyu and made an agreement with the tribes to invade the south together.

古文：高祖新立，由是大惧，修筑长城，发兵屯北境，命阴寿镇幽州，虞庆则镇并州，屯兵数万人以为之备。
现代文：高祖刚刚登基，因此很害怕，就修筑长城，发兵屯驻北境，命令阴寿镇守幽州，虞庆则镇守并州，屯兵几万人以为防备。
English: Gaozu had just ascended to the throne, so he was very afraid, so he built the Great Wall, stationed troops in the northern border, ordered Yin Shou to guard Yuzhou, Yu Qing to guard Yuzhou, and tens of thousands of soldiers to be prepared.

古文：晟先知摄图、玷厥、阿波、突利等叔侄兄弟各统强兵，俱号可汗，分居四面，内怀猜忌，外示和同，难以力征，易可离间，因上书曰： 臣闻丧乱之极，必致升平，是故上天启其机，圣人成其务。
现代文：长孙晟早就知道摄图、玷厥、阿波、突利等叔侄兄弟各统强兵，都号可汗，分居四面，内怀猜忌，外示和好。对他们难以力征，容易离间。因此上书高祖说： 我听说，丧乱到极点，必然招致升平。因此上天启其机运，圣人成其要务。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, had long known that all the powerful soldiers, including brothers and cousins such as Zhengtu, Zurgu, Abo, and Turi, were called khans. They lived in separate quarters, harbored suspicions, and were outwardly reconciled. It was difficult to force them, and it was easy to separate them. Therefore, Gaozu, who wrote the letter, said: I heard that chaos to the extreme would inevitably lead to leveling. Therefore, heaven opened its opportunity, and saints became its important task.

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下当百王之末，膺千载之期，诸夏虽安，戎场尚梗，兴师致讨，未是其时，弃于度外，又复侵扰。
现代文：皇帝陛下正在百王之末，遇千载之期，中原虽然安定，但戎敌尚为梗阻。这时发兵讨敌，还不是时候；放着他们不管，又会遭到侵扰。
English: His Majesty the Emperor is at the end of a thousand years, and although the Central Plains are stable, the military enemy is still an obstacle. At this time, it is not time to send troops to fight the enemy; if they are left alone, they will be harassed again.

古文：故宜密运筹策，渐以攘之，计失则百姓不宁，计得则万代之福。
现代文：所以应该秘密策划，渐渐攘除他们。计策失当则百姓不宁，计策合适则是万代之福。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to plan secretly and gradually eliminate them. If the strategy is improper, the people will be restless, but if the strategy is appropriate, it will be a blessing for all generations.

古文：吉凶所系，伏愿详思。
现代文：吉凶所系，诚请详思。
English: Please think carefully about the causes of good and bad luck.

古文：臣于周末，忝充外使，匈奴倚伏，实所具知。
现代文：我在北周末年，曾经忝列外使，匈奴实情，我都知道。
English: I was a foreign envoy in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and I know the truth about the Xiongnu.

古文：玷厥之于摄图，兵强而位下，外名相属，内隙已彰，鼓动其情，必将自战。
现代文：玷厥与摄图相比，兵强但位下，表面上属摄图管，内地里矛盾已很突出。如鼓动他的不平之情，他们必将打内战。
English: Compared with Zhe Jue and Zhe Tu, Zhe Jue is militarily strong but subordinate, ostensibly belonging to Zhe Tu, and the contradictions in the inland are already very prominent. If his dissatisfaction is encouraged, they will surely fight a civil war.

古文：又处罗侯者，摄图之弟，奸多而势弱，曲取于众心，国人爱之，因为摄图所忌，其心殊不自安，迹示弥缝，实怀疑惧。
现代文：另外，处罗侯是摄图的弟弟，奸诈多谋而势力弱小，他曲己迎众，国人喜欢他，因此被摄图忌恨，他的心里很不安定，迹象已显示出矛盾，他心里实际上很是疑惧。
English: In addition, Zhenluo Hou is the younger brother of Zhengtu. He is treacherous and resourceful, but his power is weak. He is popular with the public, the people like him, so he is hated by Zhengtu. His heart is very unstable, the signs have shown contradictions, and he is actually very suspicious in his heart.

古文：又阿波首鼠，介在其间，颇畏摄图，受其牵率，唯强是与，未有定心。
现代文：又，阿波是个首鼠两端的人，他在几个人中间，很怕摄图，受到他的牵制，谁强大他就跟谁，没有一个定心。
English: Moreover, Abo is a man of two halves of a rat. Among several people, he is very afraid of being photographed, and he is held back by him. Whoever is strong, he will follow, and there is no one who is determined.

古文：今宜远交而近攻，离强而合弱，通使玷厥，说合阿波，则摄图回兵，自防右地。
现代文：现在应该远交近攻，离间强者，而联合他们中的弱者，派使者到玷厥那里去，与阿波联合，那么，摄图就会回兵，自防其右边的地盘。
English: Now is the time to attack from far and near, to divide the strong and unite the weak among them, to send messengers to Turtle, to unite with Apo, and then the Picts will return to defend their right flank.

古文：又引处罗，遣连奚、，则摄图分众，还备左方。
现代文：另引导处罗侯，让他连结奚人、靅人，那么摄图就会又分兵马，去防备他左边的地盘。
English: On the other hand, if the guide places Luo Hou in front of the camera, and lets him connect the two people, then the photo will be divided into soldiers and horses to guard the area on his left.

古文：首尾猜嫌，腹心离阻，十数年后，承衅讨之，必可一举而空其国矣。 
现代文：摄图首尾猜疑，心腹离心，十几年后，我国再乘机讨伐，必可一举歼敌了。 
English: After more than ten years of suspicion and disloyalty, our country will once again seize the opportunity to fight and defeat the enemy in one fell swoop.

古文：上省表大悦，因召与语。
现代文：皇上看表大喜，因此召长孙晟来和他说话。
English: The emperor was overjoyed to see the watch, so he summoned his eldest son, Sun Yat-sen, to speak with him.

古文：晟复口陈形势，手画山川，写其虚实，皆如指掌。
现代文：长孙晟又口述形势，手画山川，写出突厥的虚实，都了如指掌。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, also dictated the situation, hand-painted mountains and rivers, and wrote about the reality and falsity of the Turks, all of which he knew well.

古文：上深嗟异，皆纳用焉。
现代文：皇上叹赏不已，全部采纳他的计谋。
English: The emperor was so impressed that he adopted all of his strategies.

古文：因遣太仆元晖出伊吾道，使诣玷厥，赐以狼头纛，谬为钦敬，礼数甚优。
现代文：朝廷因此派太仆元晖出伊吾道，让他拜访玷厥，赐给他狼头纛，假装对他很钦敬，对他很礼貌。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent a servant named Yuan Xuan out of Yiwu Province to pay him a visit, gave him a wolf's head, and pretended to be very respectful and polite to him.

古文：玷厥使来，引居摄图使上。
现代文：玷厥的使者来朝，让他处在摄图的使者之上。
English: The messenger of defilement comes to the morning, let him be on top of the messenger of photography.

古文：反间既行，果相猜贰。
现代文：反间之计既已推行，突厥果然互相猜忌。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, had a heart-to-heart talk with Zhenluo, and persuaded him to lead his tribe to submit to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：授晟车骑将军，出黄龙道，赍币赐奚、、契丹等，遣为向导，得至处罗侯所，深布心腹，诱令内附。
现代文：朝廷任长孙晟为车骑将军，出黄龙道，送一些钱给奚人、靅人、契丹人，让他们当向导，得以到处罗侯的住处，与他深深交好，引诱他，让他内附朝廷。
English: The head of the imperial court, Sun Yat-sen, was a chariot and cavalry general. He rode out of Huanglong Road and sent some money to the Qiang, Qiang and Khitan people. He asked them to be his guides, so that he could go to all of Luo Hou's residences, make deep friendships with him, seduce him, and make him subordinate to the imperial court.

古文：二年，摄图四十万骑自兰州入，至于周盘，破达奚长儒军，更欲南入。
现代文：开皇二年，摄图的四十万骑兵从兰州入侵，到了周盘，打败达奚长孺的部队，还想南侵。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, the 400,000 cavalrymen in the photo invaded from Lanzhou to Zhoupan, defeated the troops of Dagu Changyu, and also wanted to invade the south.

古文：玷厥不从，引兵而去。
现代文：玷厥不同意，带兵而去。
English: When he disagreed, he took his soldiers and left.

古文：时晟又说染干诈告摄图曰： 铁勒等反，欲袭其牙。 
现代文：当时长孙晟，又游说染干，让他假告摄图说： 铁勒等谋反，想袭击你的牙地。 
English: At that time, the eldest grandson, Yao, also lobbied Dye-Dry to have him falsely sue the photographer, saying: "Tiller is plotting a rebellion and wants to attack your territory."

古文：摄图乃惧，回兵出塞。
现代文：摄图于是很害怕，带兵出塞去了。
English: So the photographer was very scared and took the soldiers out of the camp.

古文：后数月，突厥大入，发八道元帅分出拒之。
现代文：几个月后，突厥人大举入侵。朝廷派八道元帅分兵拒敌。
English: A few months later, the Turks invaded en masse. The imperial court sent eight marshal detachments to repel the enemy.

古文：阿波至凉州，与窦荣定战，贼帅累北。
现代文：阿波到了凉州，与窦荣定交战，贼帅屡屡败北。
English: Abo arrived in Liangzhou and fought with Dou Rongding. The thief-commander was repeatedly defeated.

古文：时晟为偏将，使谓之曰： 摄图每来，战皆大胜。
现代文：当时长孙晟是偏将，窦荣定派他对阿波说： 摄图每次来打仗，都获得很大的胜利。
English: At that time, the eldest grandson Zou was a partial general, Dou Rongding sent him to Abo and said: "Photographs have won great victories every time they come to fight.

古文：阿波才入，便即致败，此乃突厥之耻，岂不内愧于心乎？
现代文：阿波才到内地，就被打败了。这是突厥人的耻辱，难道你心里不惭愧吗？
English: When Abo reached the interior, he was defeated. This is a disgrace for the Turks. Aren't you ashamed?

古文：且摄图之与阿波，兵势本敌。
现代文：而且摄图与阿波，兵力本来差不多。
English: Moreover, the photo and Abo, the troop strength was originally similar.

古文：今摄图日胜，为众所崇，阿波不利，为国生辱。
现代文：现在摄图天天取胜，被众人推崇，阿波出师不利，为国家带来耻辱。
English: Now, Foton is winning every day and is respected by everyone, while Abo is out of favor and brings shame to the country.

古文：摄图必当因以罪归于阿波，成其夙计，灭北牙矣。
现代文：摄图肯定会把罪过归结到阿波头上，成就他早有的计谋，消灭你这一支北牙。
English: The photo will definitely pin the blame on Abo, fulfilling his long-standing plan to destroy you, the northern tooth.

古文：愿自量度，能御之乎？ 
现代文：请你好好想一想，你能对付摄图吗？ 
English: I hope you put yourself in their shoes and think to yourself, can you resist being photographed?

古文：阿波使至，晟又谓之曰： 今达头与隋连和，而摄图不能制。
现代文：阿波的使者来了，长孙晟又对他说： 现在，达头已与我隋国联合，但摄图却拿他没办法。
English: Abo's emissary arrived, and the eldest grandson, Yao, also said to him: Now, Dadu has united with my Sui State, but there is no way to take a picture of him.

古文：可汗何不依附天子，连结达头，相合为强，此万全之计。
现代文：可汗何不依附隋国天子，连结达头，互相联合，成为强者，这是万全之计。
English: Why doesn't Khan adhere to the heavenly son of Sui, connect the leaders, unite with each other, and become strong? This is a perfect plan.

古文：岂若丧兵负罪，归就摄图，受其戮辱邪？ 
现代文：何必丧失兵马，自遭罪过，归去在摄图手下，受他的凌辱和杀戮呢？ 
English: Why did they have to lose their soldiers and horses, suffer the sin of returning to the hands of Trn Th, and suffer his abuse and killing?

古文：阿波纳之，因留塞上，使人随晟入朝。
现代文：阿波采纳了这个建议，因而留兵塞上，派人随长孙晟入朝。
English: Abo accepted this suggestion, and as a result, he put a stop to his remaining troops and sent someone to accompany his eldest grandson into the imperial court.

古文：时摄图与卫王军遇，战于白道，败走至碛。
现代文：摄图与卫王的军队相遇，在白道一带作战，败走到碛。
English: He encountered the troops of King Wei, fought along the White Road, and was defeated.

古文：闻阿波怀贰，乃掩北牙，尽获其众而杀其母。
现代文：他听说阿波心怀二意，于是掩袭北牙，全部俘虏了阿波的部众，杀了阿波的母亲。
English: He heard that Abo had second thoughts, so he attacked the North Fang, captured all of Abo's followers, and killed Abo's mother.

古文：阿波还无所归，西奔玷厥，乞师十余万，东击摄图，复得故地，收散卒数万，与摄图相攻。
现代文：阿波无法回家，往西跑到玷厥那里，借了十几万人马，向东袭击摄图，又得到了北牙失地，收到了散兵几万，与摄图作战。
English: Unable to return home, Apo ran to the west to Tsering, borrowed a hundred thousand people's horses, attacked Zengtu to the east, and gained the lost territory of Beibei, received tens of thousands of scattered soldiers, and fought with Zengtu.

古文：阿波频胜，其势益张。
现代文：阿波屡屡得胜，其势力更大。
English: Abo has repeatedly won victories, and its power is even greater.

古文：摄图又遣使朝贡，公主自请改姓，乞为帝女，上许之。
现代文：摄图又派使者到隋朝来上贡，北周公主也请求改姓杨，乞求当高祖的女儿，皇上同意了。
English: The emperor also sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to pay tribute, and Princess Beizhou also requested to change her surname to Yang, begging to be Gao Zu's daughter. The emperor agreed.

古文：四年，遣晟副虞庆则使于摄图，赐公主姓为杨氏，改封大义公主。
现代文：开皇四年，派长孙晟当虞庆则的副使，出使到摄图处，赐北周公主姓杨，改封她为大义公主。
English: In the fourth year of the emperor's reign, he sent the vice-envoy of Sun Yat-sen to the photography department to give Princess Beizhou the surname Yang and change her title to Princess Dayi.

古文：摄图奉诏，不肯起拜，晟进曰： 突厥与隋俱是大国天子，可汗不起，安敢违意。
现代文：摄图奉诏，却不肯下拜。长孙晟上前说： 突厥与隋，都是大国天子，可汗不起身下拜，怎敢违逆你的意愿？
English: The photo was issued, but he refused to bow. The eldest grandson, Yu, came forward and said: Turk and Sui, are the sons of the great country, Khan did not stand up to bow, how dare you go against your will?

古文：但可贺敦为帝女，则可汗是大隋女婿，奈何无礼，不敬妇公乎？ 
现代文：但你的夫人是隋帝之女，那么你就是大隋的女婿，你为什么无礼，不孝敬你岳父呢？ 
English: But your wife is the daughter of Emperor Sui, so you are the son-in-law of Emperor Sui. Why are you so rude and disrespectful to your father-in-law?

古文：摄图乃笑谓其达官曰： 须拜妇公，我从之耳。 
现代文：摄图于是笑着对他的达官们说： 应该下拜岳父，我听就是了。 
English: The photographer then smiled and said to his dignitaries: "You should bow to your father-in-law, that's what I heard.

古文：于是乃拜诏书。
现代文：于是才下拜授受诏书。
English: It was only then that the imperial edict was issued.

古文：使还称旨，授仪同三司、左勋卫车骑将军。
现代文：长孙晟出使突厥，能按圣旨办事，因此被授为仪同三司、左勋卫车骑将军。
English: As the eldest grandson of the emissary of the Turks, he was able to act according to the holy will, so he was awarded the title of General of the Three Departments and the Left Honor Guard.

古文：七年，摄图死，遣晟持节拜其弟处罗侯为莫何可汗，以其子雍闾为叶护可汗。
现代文：开皇七年，摄图死去。朝廷派长孙晟持节授他的弟弟处罗侯为莫何可汗，让他的儿子雍闾为叶护可汗。
English: In the seventh year of the emperor's reign, the emperor died. The imperial court sent the eldest son, Sun Xizhi, to confer the title of Mo He Khan on his brother, Zhu Rong, and to make his son, Yong Xuan, the Ye Zhou Khan.

古文：处罗侯因晟奏曰： 阿波为天所灭，与五六千骑在山谷间，伏听诏旨，当取之以献。 
现代文：处罗侯请长孙晟上奏朝廷说： 阿波被老天爷所灭，只与五、六千骑兵在山谷间，愿听圣旨，当取他献给朝廷。 
English: The lord of the manor asked his eldest grandson to deliver a message to the imperial court, saying, "Apo was destroyed by God, leaving only five or six thousand cavalry in the valley. I would like to hear God's will and offer him to the imperial court."

古文：乃召文武议焉。
现代文：高祖于是召文武百官商议这事。
English: Gaozu then summoned hundreds of officials to discuss the matter.

古文：乐安公元谐曰： 请就彼枭首，以惩其恶。 
现代文：乐安公元谐说： 请让他到阿波处，砍下阿波的头，以惩罚他的罪恶。 
English: Le An said to everyone in unison: Please let him go to Abo's place and cut off Abo's head to punish him for his sins.

古文：武阳公李充曰： 请生将入朝，显戮以示百姓。 
现代文：武阳公李充说： 请把他活捉入朝，当众杀他。 
English: Wuyang Gong Li Chong said: Please capture him alive and kill him in front of everyone.

古文：上谓晟曰： 于卿何如？ 
现代文：皇上对长孙晟说： 你以为如何？ 
English: The emperor said to the eldest grandson: What do you think?

古文：晟对曰： 若突厥背诞，须齐之以刑。
现代文：长孙晟回答说： 若论突厥人背叛，那应该都予以施刑。
English: The eldest grandson replied, "If Abokhan violated the order of the court and fought against me, he should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：今其昆弟自相夷灭，阿波之恶，非负国家，因其困穷，取而为戮，恐非招远之道，不如两存之。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：现在，他们兄弟互相消灭。阿波有罪，但不是对国家。如在他穷困时捉来杀他，恐怕不是招致远人的办法。不如让阿波与处罗侯两存之。 皇上说： 好！ 
English: Now, their brothers are destroying each other. Abo is guilty, but not of the country. If he is caught and killed when he is poor, I am afraid it is not a way to attract people from far away. It is better to let Abo and Zhenluo coexist. The emperor said: Good!

古文：八年，处罗侯死，遣晟往吊，仍赍陈国所献宝器以赐雍闾。
现代文：开皇八年，处罗侯死了，朝廷派长孙晟前往吊口言，并把陈国所献的宝物送给雍闾。
English: In the eighth year of the Emperor's reign, Prince Zhenluo died, and the imperial court sent the head of Sun Yat-sen to pay homage, and gave the treasure presented by Chen Guo to Yongzheng.

古文：十三年，流人杨钦亡入突厥，诈言彭公刘昶共宇文氏女谋欲反隋，称遣其来，密告主。
现代文：开皇十三年，内地流放者杨钦逃到突厥，诈言彭公刘昶和宇文氏女谋划反隋，说是他们派他来突厥，秘密地告诉公主的。
English: In the 13th year of the Emperor's reign, Yang Qin, an exile from the mainland, fled to Turkey and falsely claimed that Peng Gong Liu Ye and the daughter of the Uwen clan were plotting against the Sui Dynasty, saying that they had sent him to Turkey to secretly tell the princess.

古文：雍闾信之，乃不修职贡。
现代文：雍闾信了这话，就不向朝廷上贡了。
English: Yong Xuan believed this and did not pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：又遣晟出使，微观察焉。
现代文：朝廷又派长孙晟出使突厥，观察情况。
English: The imperial court also sent an envoy to Turkey, Sun Yat-sen, to observe the situation.

古文：公主见晟，乃言辞不逊，又遣所私胡人安遂迦共钦计议，扇惑雍闾。
现代文：公主见了长孙晟，出言不逊，又派她的相好的安遂迦与杨钦谋议，煽动迷惑雍闾。
English: When the princess saw her eldest grandson Yao, she spoke harshly to him, and sent her friend An Sui Jia to consult with Yang Qin, inciting him to mislead Yong Yao.

古文：晟至京师，具以状奏。
现代文：长孙晟回到京师，把情况全部报告朝廷。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, returned to Beijing to report the entire situation to the imperial court.

古文：又遣晟往索钦，雍闾欲勿与，谬答曰： 检校客内，无此色人。 
现代文：朝廷又派长孙晟去突厥要索杨钦。雍闾想不给，假装说： 查了客人，没有这个人。 
English: The imperial court also sent the eldest grandson, Sun Yat-sen, to the Turks to ask for Yang Chin. Yong Xuan did not want to give it to him, and pretended to say, "I checked the guests, and there is no such person."

古文：晟乃货其达官，知钦所在，夜掩获之，以示雍闾，因发公主私事，国人大耻。
现代文：长孙晟于是贿赂他的达官，知道杨钦所在之处，夜里掩袭，抓住了他，给雍闾看，就便还揭发了公主偷汉子的事，突厥人感到很耻辱。
English: The eldest grandson Yan then bribed his senior officials, knew where Yang Qin was, attacked at night, caught him, showed him to Yongzheng, and then revealed the story of the princess stealing Han Zi. The Turks felt very humiliated.

古文：雍闾执遂迦等，并以付晟。
现代文：雍闾抓住安遂迦等人，都交给长孙晟。
English: Yong Xuan seized An Sui Jia and the others, and handed them all over to the eldest grandson, Yao.

古文：上大喜，加授开府，仍遣入籓，莅杀大义公主。
现代文：皇上大喜，加授长孙晟开府，仍派他到突厥，亲自督杀大义公主。
English: The emperor was overjoyed to have his eldest grandson, Shunkaifu, promoted, but still sent him to Turkey to personally supervise the murder of Princess Dayi.

古文：雍闾又表请婚，佥议将许之。
现代文：雍闾又上表请求和亲通婚，朝廷将许可。
English: Once again, Yong Xuan went to court to ask for permission to marry his cousin, and the court granted it.

古文：晟又奏曰： 臣观雍闾，反覆无信，特共玷厥有隙，所以依倚国家。
现代文：长孙晟又上奏说： 我看雍闾，反复无常，没有信义，只因与玷厥有矛盾，所以才依附我们国家。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, also made a report, saying, "I think that the Yongle Emperor is capricious and has no loyalty. He only clings to our country because he is in conflict with the defilement.

古文：纵与为婚，终当必叛。
现代文：即使与他联姻，最终肯定会反叛。
English: Even if she were to marry him, she would surely rebel in the end.

古文：今若得尚公主，承藉威灵，玷厥、染干必又受其征发。
现代文：现在，他若得以娶公主为妻，承借国家威力，玷厥、染干肯定又会受他制约。
English: Now, if he is able to marry a princess as his wife and inherit the power of the state, he will certainly be constrained by him.

古文：强而更反，后恐难图。
现代文：他强大以后再反叛，以后恐怕难以对付。
English: In this way, the Blue Khan's forces will be more powerful, and when they are strong, they will rebel, and it will be difficult to subdue them in the future.

古文：且染干者，处罗侯之子也，素有诚款，于今两代。
现代文：而且那染干是处罗侯的儿子，他家一向忠诚，到现在有两代了。
English: Moreover, Nazengan is the son of the lord of Zhenluo, and his family has always been loyal, and now there are two generations.

古文：臣前与相见，亦乞通婚，不如许之，招令南徙，兵少力弱，易可抚驯，使敌雍闾，以为边捍。 
现代文：我此前与染干相见，也求与朝廷通婚，不如答应他，让他南迁，他兵少力弱，容易驯服，让他对付雍闾，以作边境的保卫。 
English: I had previously met with Zeng Gan, and also asked for marriage with the imperial court. It is better to agree with him and let him move south. His soldiers are weak and easy to tame. Let him deal with Yongzheng to defend the border.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：皇上说： 好！ 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：又遣慰喻染干，许尚公主。
现代文：又派长孙晟告诉染干，同意他娶公主。
English: He also sent his eldest son, Sun Yat-sen, to tell Zeng Jian that he agreed to marry the princess.

古文：十七年，染干遣五百骑随晟来逆女，以宗女封安义公主以妻之。
现代文：开皇十七年，染干派五百骑兵随长孙晟来朝廷迎接公主。皇上以宗室之女封为安义公主，嫁给他。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Emperor's reign, Zeng Gan sent five hundred cavalrymen to the imperial court to welcome the princess, accompanied by his eldest grandson Yao. The Emperor married him to Princess An Yi, a daughter of the imperial family.

古文：晟说染干率众南徙，居度斤旧镇。
现代文：长孙晟劝染干率众南迁，住在度斤旧镇。
English: The eldest grandson, Zou Yan, persuaded and led the people to move to the south and lived in the old town of Dujin.

古文：雍闾疾之，亟来抄略。
现代文：雍闾很恨朝廷，动不动就来抢掠。
English: Yongzheng hated the imperial court very much and came to plunder at every turn.

古文：染干伺知动静，辄遣奏闻，是以贼来每先有备。
现代文：染干得知动静，马上派人上奏朝廷，因此贼人南下，朝廷总是先有防备。
English: When Dye-Dry learned of the movement, he immediately sent someone to report it to the imperial court. As a result, the thieves went south, and the imperial court always took precautions first.

古文：十九年，染干因晟奏，雍闾作攻具，欲打大同城。
现代文：开皇十九年，染干请长孙晟上奏，雍闾正在作攻城的器具，想攻打大同。
English: In the 19th year of the Emperor's reign, Dye asked his eldest grandson, Yao, to play the harp. Yong Yao was making instruments to attack the city and wanted to attack Datong.

古文：诏发六总管，并取汉王节度，分道出塞讨之。
现代文：下诏发六总管兵，都由汉王节度，分路出塞讨伐。
English: The following edict was issued to the six general officers, all of whom were from Han Wang Jiedu, and they set out separately to fight against the Turks.

古文：雍闾大惧，复共达头同盟，合力掩袭染干，大战于长城下。
现代文：雍闾十分恐惧，又与达头结盟，合力袭击染干，大战于长城之下。
English: Yongzheng was very afraid, and allied with Dadu to jointly attack Zengcheng, and the war broke out under the Great Wall.

古文：染干败绩，杀其兄弟子侄，而部落亡散。
现代文：染干失败，雍闾杀了他兄弟子侄，部落都逃散了。
English: When the dyeing and drying failed, Yong Xuan killed his brother and nephew, and the tribe dispersed.

古文：染干与晟独以五骑逼夜南走，至旦，行百馀里，收得数百骑，乃相与谋曰： 今兵败入朝，一降人耳，大隋天子岂礼我乎？
现代文：染干与长孙晟只与五个骑兵连夜往南跑，天亮时，走了一百多里，收得几百骑兵，于是谋划道： 现在兵败入朝，只是一个降人罢了，大隋天子怎么会礼遇我？
English: Dyed-dry and his eldest grandson Yao ran south overnight with only five cavalrymen. At dawn, he walked more than a hundred miles and collected several hundred cavalrymen, so he planned: Now that the soldiers have been defeated into the North, it's just a demotion, how can the great Sui God treat me politely?

古文：玷厥虽来，本无冤隙，若往投之，必相存济。 
现代文：玷厥虽来袭击我，我们之间本无仇怨，如去投奔他，他必定会帮我。 
English: Although Tatou Khan Tseruk came to join forces with Du Lan Khan, he and I had no grudge against each other. If I went to join him, he would certainly accept my help.

古文：晟知其怀贰，乃密遣从者入伏远镇，令速举烽。
现代文：长孙晟知道他心怀二志，于是秘密派随从到伏远镇，让他们快举烽火。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, knew that he had a second ambition, so he secretly sent his followers to Fuyuan Town and told them to quickly build a bonfire.

古文：染干见四烽俱发，问晟曰： 城上然烽何也？ 
现代文：染干见四个烽火都举起来了，问长孙晟说： 城上为何燃烧烽火呢？ 
English: Seeing that all four bonfires had been lit, he asked the eldest grandson: "Why are there bonfires burning in the city?"

古文：晟绐之曰： 城高地迥，必遥见贼来。
现代文：长孙晟骗他说： 那里城池很高，必定是远远地看见贼人来了。
English: The eldest grandson tricked him, saying, "The castle is very high there, so I must have seen the thief coming from far away."

古文：我国家法，若贼少举二烽，来多举三烽，大逼举四烽，使见贼多而又近耳。 
现代文：我大隋国的办法是，如贼人少就举二烽，多了举三烽，很多举四烽。让人知道贼人又多又逼近罢了。 
English: The method of our great Sui Dynasty is that if the number of thieves is small, raise two hoops, if there are more thieves, raise three hoops, and if there are many thieves, raise four hoops. Let people know that there are many thieves and that they are approaching.

古文：染干大惧，谓其众曰： 追兵已逼，且可投城。 
现代文：染干很害怕，对部众说： 追兵已经逼迫，我们暂且进城去罢。 
English: Dyed-dry was very frightened, and said to his followers: "The pursuers are already in hot pursuit. Let's go into the city for the time being."

古文：既入镇，晟留其达官执室以领其众，自将染干驰驿入朝。
现代文：进镇后，长孙晟留下染干的达官执室率领部众，自带染干由驿道回朝廷。
English: After entering the town, the eldest grandson, Yao, left the dyed-and-dried dignitaries in charge of the office to lead the people, and took the dyed-and-dried cloth with him back to the imperial court.

古文：帝大喜，进授左勋卫骠骑将军，持节护突厥。
现代文：皇上大喜，升长孙晟为左勋卫骠骑将军，让他持节保护染干。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and promoted Sun Yat-sen to the rank of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, allowing him to protect the festival.

古文：晟遣降虏觇候雍闾，知其牙内屡有灾变，夜见赤虹，光照数百里，天狗陨，雨血三日，流星坠其营内，有声如雷。
现代文：长孙晟让投降的突厥人侦察雍闾，知道雍闾的牙内屡有灾变，夜见赤虹，光照几百里，天狗星陨落，下了三天血雨，流星坠落在雍闾的营内，声音像打雷。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, asked the surrendering Turks to scout Yong Xuan. They knew that there were frequent disasters in the teeth of Yong Xuan. At night, there were red rainbows, hundreds of miles of light, the Tengu star fell, and it rained blood for three days. A meteor fell in the camp of Yong Xuan, and the sound was like thunder.

古文：每夜自惊，言隋师且至。
现代文：突厥每天夜里都自相惊扰，说隋军将到了。
English: Every night, the Turks startled each other, saying that the Sui army was about to arrive.

古文：并遣奏知，仍请出讨突厥。
现代文：长孙晟派人把这些都报告朝廷，仍请出兵讨伐突厥。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, sent someone to report all of this to the imperial court, and he was still asked to send troops to fight the Turks.

古文：都速等归染干，前后至者男女万馀口，晟安置之。
现代文：都速等人归附染干，前后来的男女人口一万多。长孙晟安置好他们。
English: It was quickly annexed by others, and more than 10,000 men and women lived there before and after. Nagasuna resettled them.

古文：由是突厥悦附。
现代文：由此突厥人很高兴内附朝廷。
English: As a result, the Turks were happy to annex the imperial court.

古文：寻以染干为意利珍豆启人可汗，赐射于武安殿。
现代文：不久，朝廷让染干当意利珍豆启人可汗，赏他在武安殿上行射礼。
English: Soon after, the imperial court put Dyeing and Drying under the watchful eye of Li Zhenzu Kai Ren Khan, and rewarded him with a salute at the Wu'an Palace.

古文：选善射者十二人，分为两朋。
现代文：选拔善射的十二个人，分为两队。
English: Twelve people who are good at shooting are selected and divided into two teams.

古文：启人曰： 臣由长孙大使得见天子，今日赐射，愿入其朋。 
现代文：启人可汗说： 我因长孙大使得以朝见天子，今天赐我射箭，我愿加入他那一队。 
English: Qijin Khan said, "I have been granted the right to see the Son of Heaven because of my eldest grandson, and today I have been given the right to shoot arrows. I would like to join his team."

古文：许之。
现代文：皇上同意。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：给晟箭六侯，发皆入鹿，启人之朋竟胜。
现代文：给长孙晟箭矢六侯，都射进了鹿，启人所在的这一队取胜了。
English: He gave six arrows to the eldest grandson, and they all hit the deer. The team led by Kai Ren won the game.

古文：时有群飞，上曰： 公善弹，为我取之。 
现代文：当时有鸦在天上成群地飞，皇上说： 你善射箭，为我射取它们。 
English: At that time, there were flocks of ravens flying in the sky, and the emperor said: You are good at shooting arrows, shoot them for me.

古文：十发俱中，并应丸而落。
现代文：长孙晟十发俱中，鸟都随弹丸落下。
English: In the ten rounds fired by the eldest grandson, the birds all fell with the projectile.

古文：是日百官获赉，晟独居多。
现代文：这天百官得赏，长孙晟最多。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials received awards, with the eldest grandson receiving the most.

古文：寻遣领五万人，于朔州筑大利城以处染干。
现代文：不久派他率领五万人马，在朔州修筑大利城，以让染干居住。
English: Soon, he sent him to lead fifty thousand people to build Dali City in Shuozhou, so that Dyeing and Drying could live there.

古文：安义公主死，持节送义城公主，复以妻之。
现代文：安义公主死了，长孙晟又持节送义城公主嫁给染干。
English: Princess An Yi died, and her eldest grandchild, Yao, sent Princess Yicheng off to marry Zeng Jian on the festival day.

古文：晟又奏： 染干部落归者既众，虽在长城之内，犹被雍闾抄略，往来辛苦，不得宁居。请徙五原，以河为固，于夏、胜两州之间，东西至河，南北四百里，掘为横堑，令处其内，任情放牧，免于抄略，人必自安。 
现代文：长孙晟又上奏说： 染干的部落回来的多了，虽然住在长城之内，仍被雍闾抄略，跑来跑去很辛苦，不得安宁，请让他迁居五原，以黄河为险固，在夏州、胜州之间，从东往西到黄河，从南往北四百里，挖出大沟来，让他住在里头，随意放牧，免得被抄略，他的人马必定会安定下来。 
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, also made a report, saying, "Many of the tribes that were affected by the drought have come back. Although they lived within the Great Wall, they were still omitted by the Yongle. It was very hard to run around, and there was no peace. Please let him move to the Wuhuan, with the Yellow River as a perilous place. Between Xiazhou and Shengzhou, from east to west to the Yellow River, from south to north, four hundred miles, dig a ditch, let him live in it, graze at will, so as not to be omitted. His people and horses will surely settle down.

古文：上并从之。
现代文：皇上都听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：二十年，都蓝大乱，为其部下所杀。
现代文：开皇二十年，都蓝部落大乱，可汗被部下杀死。
English: Twenty years after the emperor's reign, the Du Lan tribe was in turmoil, and the khan was killed by his subordinates.

古文：晟因奏请曰： 今王师临境，战数有功，贼内携离，其主被杀，乘此招诱，必并来降，请遣染干部下分头招慰。 
现代文：长孙晟因此上奏说： 现在王师面临突厥境地作战，屡有功勋，贼人内部离心，主子被杀。乘机招降，必然都来投降。请派染干的部下，分头去招降。 
English: As a result, the eldest grandson, Yao, made a report saying: "Now that Wang Shi is facing the Turkish situation in the war, he has many merits, the thief is internally centrifugal, and his master was killed. Take advantage of the opportunity to offer surrender, and they will inevitably come to surrender. Please send your subordinates who are dyed-in-the-wool to offer surrender.

古文：上许之，果尽来附。
现代文：皇上同意，果然都来降附。
English: The emperor agreed, and they all agreed to surrender.

古文：达头恐怖，又大集兵。
现代文：达头恐怖，又大集兵马。
English: Terrified, they again massed their troops.

古文：诏晟部领降人，为秦川行军总管，取晋王广节度出讨。
现代文：下诏让长孙晟率领投降过来的突厥人，任秦川行军总管，归晋王杨广指挥，出兵讨敌。
English: The following edict ordered the Turks who had surrendered to be led by Nagasunjo, who was appointed as the general manager of the Qin River march, under the command of the Jin king Yang Guang, and sent out troops to fight the enemy.

古文：达头与王相抗，晟进策曰： 突厥饮泉，易可行毒。 
现代文：达头与晋王杨广相抗。长孙晟献计说： 突厥人饮水时，可以下毒。 
English: The eldest grandson, Xuan Xianke, said: "When the Turks drink water, they can poison it.

古文：因取诸药毒水上流，达头人畜饮之多死，于是大惊曰： 天雨恶水，其亡我乎？ 
现代文：因此在水上流下毒，达头的人畜饮水大多死去，于是大惊说： 老天爷下这种毒水，这是要灭亡我吧？ 
English: So he poured poison on the water, and most of the able-bodied people and animals died from drinking the water. He was so shocked that he said, "Oh my God, this poisonous water is going to kill me, isn't it?"

古文：因夜遁。
现代文：因此连夜逃走。
English: So he fled overnight.

古文：晟追之，斩首千馀级，俘百馀口，六畜数千头。
现代文：长孙晟追赶敌人，斩首一千多级，活捉一百多人，得到几千头牲畜。
English: He chased the enemy, beheaded more than a thousand people, captured more than a hundred people alive, and obtained several thousand head of livestock.

古文：王大喜，引晟入内，同宴极欢。
现代文：晋王大喜，带长孙晟到内帐，一起饮酒，极其欢乐。
English: Jin Wang was overjoyed, and took his eldest grandson Zou to the inner tabernacle. They drank alcohol together and were extremely happy.

古文：有突厥达官来降，时亦预坐，说言突厥之内，大畏长孙总管，闻其弓声，谓为霹雳，见其走马，称为闪电。
现代文：有突厥达官来投降，当时也在座，说： 突厥境内，很怕长孙总管，听到他的弓声，说是霹雳；见他跑马，说是闪电。 
English: A Turkic high-ranking official came to surrender and was also present at the time, saying: "In the Turkic territory, they are very afraid of the eldest grandson of the chief. When they hear the sound of his bow, they say it is thunder; when they see his running horse, they say it is lightning.

古文：王笑曰： 将军震怒，威行域外，遂与雷霆为比，一何壮哉！ 
现代文：晋王笑着说： 将军发怒，威风震动域外，于是以雷霆为比，这是多么了不起啊！ 
English: Jin Wang said with a smile, "The general was angry, and his dignity was shaken out of bounds, so he compared it to a thunderbolt. How remarkable is that!"

古文：师旋，授上开府仪同三司，复遣还大利城，安抚新附。
现代文：官军班师，授长孙晟上开府仪同三司，又派人到大利城，安抚那些新近归附的突厥人。
English: He appointed Sun Yat-sen as the commander-in-chief of the imperial army, and sent someone to the capital of Italy to pacify the newly-annexed Turks.

古文：仁寿元年，晟表奏曰： 臣夜登城楼，望见碛北有赤气，长百余里，皆如雨足，下垂被地。谨验兵书，此名洒血，其下之国必且破亡。
现代文：仁寿元年，长孙晟奉表上奏说： 我夜登城楼，望见碛北有赤气，长一百多里，都像雨足下垂于地一样，按验兵书，这叫下血雨，它下面的国家必将破亡。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's life, his eldest grandson, Zou Feng, wrote in his diary: "I went up to the tower at night and saw a red wind to the north of Zou, more than a hundred miles long, hanging like raindrops on the ground. According to the inspection report, this is called bloody rain, and the country below it will surely perish."

古文：欲灭匈奴，宜在今日。 
现代文：想灭匈奴，应在今日。 
English: If you want to exterminate the Huns, today is the day.

古文：诏杨素为行军元帅，晟为受降使者，送染干北伐。
现代文：下诏杨素任行军元帅，长孙晟为受降使者，送染干北伐。
English: In the following edict, Yang Su was appointed as the marching marshal, and his eldest son, Sun Yat-sen, was appointed as the envoy to accept the surrender and lead the Northern Expedition.

古文：二年，军次北河，值贼帅思力俟斤等领兵拒战，晟与大将军梁默击走之，转战六十馀里，贼众多降。
现代文：仁寿二年，官军到北河，适逢贼帅思力俟斤等人领兵抗拒。长孙晟和大将军梁默打跑他们，转战六十多里，贼人大多投降。
English: In the second year of Ren Shou's reign, the government army arrived at the Beihe River, but was met with resistance from the bandits, who were led by the bandits' commander, Si Li, and others. The eldest son, Zou, and the general, Liang Miao, fought them off, and the battle went on for more than sixty miles, and most of the bandits surrendered.

古文：晟又教染干分遣使者，往北方铁勒等部招携取之。
现代文：长孙晟又叫染干分头派遣使者，往北方的铁勒等部落招降。
English: The eldest grandson, Yao, also sent an envoy to Tiele and other tribes in the north to invite them to surrender.

古文：三年，有铁勒、思结、伏利具、浑、斛萨、阿拔、仆骨等十馀部，尽背达头，请来降附。
现代文：仁寿三年，有铁勒、思结、伏利具、浑、斛萨、阿拔、仆骨等十几个部落，都背叛达头，请求投降内附。
English: During the three years of Ren Shou's reign, more than a dozen tribes, including the Tiele, Sijie, Vo Li Gu, Hun, Wuxa, Aba, and Hubei, all rebelled against Tatsuo and requested his surrender.

古文：达头众大溃，西奔吐谷浑。
现代文：达头的部众都溃散了，他往西投奔吐谷浑。
English: The headstrong followers had all scattered, and he ran west to Tugu Hun.

古文：晟送染干安置于碛口。
现代文：长孙晟送染干，把他安置在碛口。
English: The eldest grandson sent Dyeing and Drying, and placed him at the entrance of the gate.

古文：事毕，入朝，遇高祖崩，匿丧未发。
现代文：事情完毕后，长孙晟入朝，遇上高祖去世，朝廷匿丧不发。
English: After the matter was over, the eldest grandson entered the imperial court, and when Gao Zu passed away, the imperial court did not announce the death.

古文：炀帝引晟于大行前委以内衙宿卫，知门禁事，即日拜左领军将军。
现代文：炀帝把长孙晟带到高祖的灵柩前，委托他当内衙宿卫、知门禁事，即日拜授左领军将军。
English: Emperor Xuan took his eldest grandson Yao to Gao Zu's coffin and entrusted him to be the inner palace guard, the gatekeeper, and the general of the left leading army on the same day.

古文：遇杨谅作逆，敕以本官为相州刺史，发山东兵马，与李雄等共经略之。
现代文：遇上杨谅造反，炀帝令长孙晟以本官身份兼任相州刺史，调发华山以东的兵马，与李雄等人一起共同经略相州。
English: In the face of Yang Peng's rebellion, Emperor Qian ordered Sun Yat-sen, the eldest son of Emperor Qian, to assume the post of the governor of Liaoning Province as well as the post of the governor of Liaoning Province. He dispatched soldiers and horses to the east of Mount Huashan and jointly ruled Liaoning Province with Li Xiong and others.

古文：晟辞曰： 有男行布，今在逆地，忽蒙此任，情所不安。 
现代文：长孙晟推辞说： 我有个叫行布的儿子，现在在逆党所在的地方，我忽然承受这一重任，心里感到很不安。 
English: The eldest grandchild said, "I have a son named Xingbu, and now I am in the place where the rebel party is. I suddenly bear this heavy responsibility, and I feel very uneasy in my heart.

古文：帝曰： 公著勤诚，朕之所悉。
现代文：炀帝说： 你的忠诚和勤勉，我很清楚。
English: Hao Di said, "I am well aware of your loyalty and diligence.

古文：今相州之地，本是齐都，人俗浇浮，易可搔扰。
现代文：现在这相州地方，本是齐国故都，人情很薄，容易骚动。
English: Now this Xiangzhou area, originally the ancient capital of Qi, is thinly populated and prone to unrest.

古文：傥生变动，贼势即张，思所以镇之，非公莫可。
现代文：如发生动乱，贼人的势力就大了，我想能镇守那里的，只有你了。
English: In the event of unrest, the power of the thieves will increase, and I think you are the only one who can guard there.

古文：公体国之深，终不可以兒害义，故用相委，公其勿辞。 
现代文：你对国家有深情，不会因儿子而害忠君大义，所以委托你去，你别推辞了。 
English: You have a deep affection for the country, and you will not compromise your loyalty to the king and the country for the sake of your son. Therefore, if you are entrusted with this task, do not refuse.

古文：于是遣捉相州。
现代文：于是派他任相州刺史。
English: Therefore, he was assigned to the post of Sangju sashimi chef.

古文：谅破，追还，转武卫将军。
现代文：杨谅被打败后，让长孙晟还京，转任武卫将军。
English: After Yang Peng was defeated, he allowed Chosunhyun to return to Beijing and was transferred to the post of General Wuwei.

古文：大业三年，炀帝幸榆林，欲出塞外，陈兵耀武，经突厥中，指于涿郡。
现代文：大业三年，炀帝巡幸榆林，欲出塞外，陈兵耀武，经过突厥，到达涿郡。
English: In the third year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong toured Yulin, and when he wanted to go out of the country, Chen Bingyao passed through Turk, and arrived in Yixian.

古文：仍恐染干惊惧，先遣晟往喻旨，称述帝意。
现代文：担心染干惊恐，先派长孙晟往染干处说明此行用意，表达炀帝的意思。
English: Worried about Dyeing and Drying, he first sent his eldest son, Sun Quan, to the Dyeing and Drying Department to explain his plans for the trip and to express the emperor's intentions.

古文：染干听之，因召所部诸国，奚、、室韦等种落数十酋长咸萃。
现代文：染干听了，召来所辖各国，奚、靅、室韦等部落几十个酋长都来集合。
English: After listening to Dye-Dye, he summoned dozens of chiefs from all the countries under his jurisdiction, including the Min, Min, and Murowe tribes.

古文：晟以牙中草秽，欲令染干亲自除之，示诸部落，以明威重，乃指帐前草曰： 此根大香。 
现代文：长孙晟因考虑到牙中草多而脏，想让染干亲自除草，给各部落看，以显示炀帝的威望，于是指着军帐前的草说： 这草根很香。 
English: Taking into account that the grass in his teeth was dirty, the eldest grandson, Yao, wanted to have Dyeing and Drying personally weed the grass and show it to the tribes to show the prestige of Emperor Xuan, so he pointed to the grass in front of the military account and said: This grass root is very fragrant.

古文：染干遽嗅之曰： 殊不香也。 
现代文：染干马上去闻，说： 一点都不香。 
English: Dyed and dried, he immediately went to smell it and said, "It's not fragrant at all."

古文：晟曰： 天子行幸所在，诸侯躬亲洒扫，耘除御路，以表至敬之心。
现代文：长孙晟说： 天子巡幸这里，诸侯应该亲自洒水扫地，清除御路，以表示至敬之心。
English: The eldest grandson Zou said: Here, where the Son of Heaven is on a pilgrimage, the lords should personally sprinkle water and sweep the ground, clearing the path, to show their respect.

古文：今牙中芜秽，谓是留香草耳。 
现代文：如今这牙中芜秽，所以我说是留的香草罢了。 
English: Now the tooth is dirty, so I say it's just leftover vanilla.

古文：染干乃悟曰： 奴罪过。
现代文：染干于是领悟说： 这是我这个奴才的罪过！
English: Dyed dry, he then came to his senses and said, "This is the fault of this lackey of mine!

古文：奴之骨肉，皆天子赐也，得效筋力，岂敢有辞？
现代文：我的骨肉，都是天子赐的，得以出点力气，岂敢推辞？
English: My bones and flesh are all given to me by the Son of Heaven, so that I can have some strength, how dare I refuse?

古文：特以边人不知法耳，赖将军恩泽而教导之。将军之惠，奴之幸也。 
现代文：只因边鄙之人不知法度罢了。幸有将军施恩，教导我，将军的恩惠，是奴才我的大幸啊！ 
English: It's only because the outsiders don't know the law. I'm lucky to have the general's grace to teach me, the general's grace is my great fortune as a slave!

古文：遂拔所佩刀，亲自芟草，其贵人及诸部争放效之。
现代文：于是拔出所佩带的刀，亲自砍除杂草，那些贵人和各部落的酋长，争着仿效。
English: So they drew their swords and cut down the weeds themselves, and the nobles and tribal chiefs tried to follow their example.

古文：乃发榆林北境，至于其牙，又东达于蓟，长三千里，广百步，举国就役而开御道。
现代文：于是调发榆林北部的百姓，一直到其牙地，又东到蓟地，长三千里，宽百步，全国百姓都来割草开御道。
English: As a result, the people from the northern part of Yulin were sent to the cusp and eastward to Yulin, a distance of three thousand miles and a width of one hundred paces. People from all over the country came to cut grass and open the imperial road.

古文：帝闻晟策，乃益嘉焉。
现代文：炀帝听了长孙晟的计策，于是更加赞赏他。
English: Emperor Yao listened to his eldest grandson Yao's strategy and appreciated him even more.

古文：后除淮阳太守，未赴任，复为右骁卫将军。
现代文：后授他为淮阳太守，没有赴任，又改任右骁卫将军。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Huaiyang governor-general, but he did not take up the post, and was reappointed as the general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：五年，卒，时年五十八。
现代文：大业五年，长孙晟去世，时年五十八岁。
English: In the fifth year of Daye's reign, his eldest grandson Zou died at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：帝深悼惜之，赗赠甚厚。
现代文：炀帝十分痛惜，赠予很多东西。
English: Emperor Xuan was very sorry and gave him a lot of things.

古文：后突厥围雁门，帝叹曰： 向使长孙晟在，不令匈奴至此！ 
现代文：后来突厥人围困雁门，炀帝感叹说： 假使长孙晟在，不会让匈奴人猖狂到如此地步！ 
English: Later, the Turks besieged the Wild Goose Gate, and Emperor Gao lamented: "If Emperor Gao's eldest grandson were here, he would not have allowed the Huns to become so rampant!"

古文：晟好奇计，务功名。
现代文：长孙晟爱出奇计，务求功名。
English: The eldest grandson, Zhai, likes to come up with strange plans in order to gain fame.

古文：性至孝，居忧毁瘠，为朝士所称。
现代文：生性孝顺，居丧时身体毁坏，为朝廷人士称赞。
English: Filial piety by nature, the body is destroyed at the time of death, praised by the imperial court.

古文：贞观中，追赠司空、上柱国、齐国公，谥曰献。
现代文：唐贞观中，追赠他为司空、上柱国、齐国公，谥号叫 献 。
English: In the Tang Zhengyuan, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Siku, Shangzhu, and Qi, and his posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：少子无忌嗣。
现代文：小儿子长孙无忌继承爵位。
English: The youngest son and eldest grandson will no doubt inherit the title.

