古文：凡战之道，用寡固，用众治；寡利烦，众利正。
现代文：指挥作战的要领，兵力弱小应力求营阵巩固，兵力强大，应力求严整不乱。
English: Commanding the essentials of combat, weak troops should strive to consolidate the battalion, strong troops should strive to be orderly.

古文：用众进止，用寡进退。
现代文：兵力弱小利于变化莫测出奇制胜，兵力强大利于正规作战。
English: Weak troops are good for unpredictable and unpredictable victories, and strong troops are good for regular operations.

古文：众以合寡，则远裹而阙之；若分而迭击，寡以待众；若众疑之，则自用之。
现代文：兵力强大要能进能止稳重如山，兵力弱小要能进能退出没无常。用优势兵力与劣势敌人交战，应从远处形成包围并留个缺口 让他溃逃 ，或者分批轮番攻击敌人。用弱势兵力对付优势敌人，就要虚张声势迷惑敌人，采用出敌意外的方法争取胜利。
English: A strong army should be able to advance and stop steadily like a mountain, and a weak army should be able to advance and withdraw impermanently. When fighting with superior troops against inferior enemies, it is necessary to form an encirclement from a distance and leave a gap for him to escape, or attack the enemy in batches. When using weak troops to deal with superior enemies, it is necessary to bluff and confuse the enemy and use unexpected methods to achieve victory.

古文：擅利则释旗，迎而反之。
现代文：如果敌人已占据了有利地形，就卷起军旗，假装败退引诱它出来，然后反击它。
English: If the enemy has occupied favorable terrain, roll up the flag, pretend to retreat, lure him out, and then counterattack him.

古文：敌若众，则相众而受裹。
现代文：如果敌人兵力很多，应当察明情况并准备在被围攻的情况下作战。
English: If the enemy has a large number of troops, the situation should be detected and prepared to fight under siege.

古文：敌若寡若畏，则避之开之。
现代文：如果敌人兵少而行动谨慎，就应先退让一步，然后乘隙消灭它。
English: If the enemy is small and acts cautiously, you should first step back and then take advantage of the gap to destroy it.

古文：凡战，背风，背高，右高左险；历沛历圮，兼舍环龟。
现代文：凡是作战，要背着风向背靠高地，右边依托高地左边依靠险要，遇着沼泽地和崩塌地要迅速通过，宿营要选择四面有险可守、中间较高的地形。
English: In all battles, it is necessary to back the wind to the highlands, the right side relies on the highlands, the left side relies on the danger, in the event of swamps and landslides, it is necessary to pass quickly, and the camp should choose the terrain with danger on all sides and higher in the middle.

古文：凡战，设而观其作，视敌而举。
现代文：一般作战，先摆好阵势，不忙于作战，看敌人怎样行动，再采取相应的行动。
English: In general combat, first set up a good position, do not be busy fighting, see how the enemy acts, and then take corresponding actions.

古文：待则循而勿鼓，待众之作；攻则屯而伺之。
现代文：如果发现敌人已准备好圈套，等待我去中它的计，为了适应这种情况，就暂不发起进攻，而等待观察敌人主力的行动。
English: If I find that the enemy has prepared a trap and is waiting for me to catch up with his plan, in order to adapt to this situation, I will not launch an attack for the time being, but wait to observe the actions of the enemy's main force.

古文：凡战，众寡以观其变，进退以观其固，危而观其惧，静而观其怠，动而观其疑，袭而观其治。
现代文：如果敌人进攻，就集中兵力看准敌人的破绽去打击它。一般作战，应使用或多或少的兵力去试探敌人，以观察它的变化。用忽进忽退的行动，以观察它的阵势是否稳固；迫近威胁敌人，看它是否恐惧；按兵不动，看它是否懈怠；进行佯动，看它是否疑惑；突然截击，看它阵容是否整治。
English: If the enemy attacks, concentrate forces on the enemy's weak spot to strike it. In general combat, it is necessary to use more or less forces to probe the enemy to observe its changes. Use the action of advancing and retreating to observe whether its position is stable; approach and threaten the enemy to see if it is afraid; stand still to see if it is slack; carry out prying to see if it is doubtful; sudden interception to see if its lineup is rectified.

古文：击其疑，加其卒，致其屈，袭其规。
现代文：在敌人犹豫不决的时候打击它，乘敌人仓促无备的时候选攻它，使敌人战斗力无法施展。
English: When the enemy hesitates, strike at him, and when the enemy is in a hurry, attack him, so that the enemy's combat effectiveness cannot be exerted.

古文：因其不避，阻其图，夺其虑，乘其惧。
现代文：袭击敌人并打乱它的部署，利用敌人冒险轻进的错误，阻止它实现其企图，粉碎它既定的计划，乘它军心恐惧时歼灭它。
English: Attack the enemy and disrupt its deployment, take advantage of the enemy's mistake of risking light advance, prevent it from realizing its intention, smash its established plan, and take advantage of its fear of war to annihilate it.

古文：凡从奔勿息，敌人或止于路，则虑之。
现代文：凡是追击溃败的敌人，一定不要停息，敌人如果在中途停止，就要慎重考虑它的企图。
English: Whoever pursues a defeated enemy must not stop, and if the enemy stops in the middle of the way, it is necessary to carefully consider its intention.

古文：凡近敌都，必有进路，退必有反虑。
现代文：凡是迫近敌人都城的时候，一定要先研究好进军的道路。退却的时候，也一定要预先考虑好后退的方案。
English: Whenever approaching the enemy's city, we must first study the way to advance. When retreating, we must also consider the plan for retreating in advance.

古文：凡战，先则弊，后则慑；息则怠，不息亦弊，息久亦反。
现代文：凡是作战，行动过早易使兵力疲惫，行动过迟易使军心畏怯，只注意休息会使军队懈怠，总不休息必然使军队疲困，但是休息久了，反而会产生怯战心理。
English: In any war, premature action is likely to make the troops tired, delayed action is likely to make the troops timid, only paying attention to rest will make the army slack, and always not resting will inevitably make the army tired, but if you rest for a long time, it will produce a war-weary mentality.

