古文：威王问于莫敖子华曰： 自从先君文王以至不谷之身，亦有为爵劝，不以禄勉，以忧社稷者乎? 
现代文：楚威王问莫敖子华，说： 从先君文王直到我这一辈，真的有不贪求爵位不贪求俸禄，而忧虑国家安危的大臣吗？ 
English: The king of Chuwei asked Moxie Zihua, saying: From the previous monarch King Wen to my generation, is there really a minister who is not greedy for a title or salary, but is worried about the safety of the country?

古文：莫敖子华对曰： 如华不足知之矣。 
现代文：莫敖子华回答说： 这个问题不是我所能回答的。 
English: "That's not a question I can answer," Ms. Mo replied.

古文：王曰： 不于大夫，无所闻之。 
现代文：楚威王说： 如果不向你请教的话，就更无从知道了。 
English: King Chu Wei said, "If I don't ask you for advice, there's no way I can know."

古文：莫敖子华对曰： 君王将何问者也?
现代文：莫敖子华回答说： 君王您问的是哪一类的大臣呢？
English: Moxing Zihua replied, "Your Majesty, what kind of minister are you asking about?"

古文：彼有廉其爵，贫其身，以忧社稷者；有崇其爵，丰其禄，以忧社稷者；有断脰决腹，壹瞑而万世不视，不知所益，以忧社稷者；有劳其身，愁其志，以忧社稷者；亦有不为爵劝，不为禄勉，以忧社稷者。 
现代文：有廉洁奉公，安于贫困，而忧虑国家安危的；有为了提升他的爵位，增加他的俸禄，而忧虑国家安危的；有不怕断头剖腹，视死如归，不顾个人安危，而忧虑国家安危的；有劳其筋骨，苦其心志，而忧虑国家安危的；也有既不贪求爵位，也不贪求俸禄，而忧虑国家安危的。 
English: There are those who serve the public with integrity and are content with poverty, but are worried about the safety of the country; there are those who are worried about the safety of the country in order to promote his title and increase his salary; there are those who are not afraid of beheading and disembowelment, who see death as inevitable, and do not care about personal safety, but are worried about the safety of the country; there are those who are hardworking and hardworking, but are worried about the safety of the country; and there are those who are neither greedy for a title nor greedy for a salary, but are worried about the safety of the country.

古文：王曰： 大夫此言，将何谓也? 
现代文：楚威王说： 你所说的这几类人，说的都是谁呢？ 
English: King Chu Wei said, "These types of people you mentioned, who are you talking about?"

古文：莫敖子华对曰： 昔令尹子文，缁帛之衣以朝，鹿裘以处；未明而立于朝，日晦而归食；朝不谋夕，无一月之积。
现代文：莫敖子华回答说： 过去有个令尹子文，他上朝的时候身穿简朴的黑丝绸衣服，在家的时候，身穿简朴的鹿皮衣。
English: Mo Han Zihua replied, "In the past, there was a king named Yin Ziwen. When he ascended to the throne, he wore a simple black silk robe. When he was at home, he wore a simple deerskin robe.

古文：故彼廉其爵，贫其身，以忧社稷者，令尹子文是也，
现代文：天还没有亮他就起来等在了朝堂上，太阳落山了才回家去吃饭。
English: He got up and waited in the morning hall before dawn, and only went home to eat when the sun had set.

古文： 昔者叶公子高，身获于表薄，而财于柱国；定白公之祸，宁楚国之事，恢先君以掩方城之外，四封不侵，名不挫于诸侯。
现代文：吃完早饭而顾不上晚饭，连一个月的粮食都没有储存。所以，我说的那个廉洁奉公，安于贫困，而忧虑国家安危的，就是令尹子文。过去楚国有个叶公子高，其貌不扬，但有柱国之才；平定了白公之乱，使楚国得以安定，发扬了先君的遗德，影响到方城之外，四境诸侯都不敢来犯，使楚国的威名在诸侯中没有受到损害。
English: After eating breakfast, I couldn't think about dinner, and I didn't even have a month's worth of grain stored. Therefore, the one I'm talking about, who serves the public with integrity, is content with poverty, but worries about the safety of the country, is Ling Yin Ziwen. In the past, there was a high-ranking Ye Gongzi in Chu, who was not handsome, but had the talent of a pillar state; he quelled the Bai Gong Rebellion, stabilized Chu, and promoted the ancestor's legacy. It affected outside Fangcheng, and all the provinces did not dare to commit crimes, so that the prestige of Chu was not damaged in the provinces.

古文：当此之时也，天下莫敢以兵南乡。叶公子高，食田六百畛。
现代文：在这个时候，诸侯都不敢出兵南侵，叶公子高的封地有六百畛的土地。
English: At this time, the lords did not dare to send troops to invade the south. Ye Gongzi's high fief had six hundred mu of land.

古文：故彼崇其爵，丰其禄，以忧社稷者，叶公子高是也。
现代文：所以，我说的那个为了提升他的爵位，增加他的俸禄，而忧虑国家安危的，就是叶公子高。
English: Therefore, the one I am talking about who is worried about the safety of the country in order to promote his title and increase his salary is Ye Gongzigao.

古文： 昔者吴与楚战于柏举，两御之间夫卒交。
现代文：过去吴、楚两国在柏举交战，双方对垒，士兵已经短兵相接。
English: In the past, the two countries of Wu and Chu fought in Baoji, the two sides opposed each other, and the soldiers were already close to each other.

古文：莫敖大心抚其御之手，顾而大息曰： 嗟乎子乎，楚国亡之月至矣!
现代文：莫敖大心拉着驾车战士的手，望着他们说： 唉！
English: Mo Yan Daishin took the hands of the driving soldiers, looked at them and said: Alas!

古文：吾将深入吴军，若扑一人，若捽一人，以与大心者也，社稷其为庶几乎? 
现代文：唉！楚国亡国的日子就要到了，我要深入吴军，你们如果能打倒一个敌人，助我一臂之力，我们楚国也许还能保存！ 
English: Alas! The day of the fall of Chu is approaching. I want to penetrate the Wu army. If you can defeat an enemy and help me, we may still be able to save Chu!

古文：故断脰决腹，壹瞑而万世不视，不知所益，以忧社稷者，莫敖大心是也。
现代文：所以，我说的那个不怕断头，不怕剖腹，视死如归，不顾个人安危，而忧虑国家安危的，就是莫敖大心。
English: Therefore, I said that the one who is not afraid of beheading, not afraid of disembowelment, sees death as inevitable, does not care about personal safety, but worries about the safety of the country, is careless.

古文： 昔者吴与楚战于柏举，三战入郢。寡君身出，大夫悉属，百姓离散。棼冒勃苏曰： 吾被坚执锐，赴强敌而死，此犹一卒也，不若奔诸侯。 
现代文：从前，吴、楚两国在柏举交战，吴军连攻三次，攻入楚都，楚君逃亡，大夫跟随，百姓流离失所，棼冒勃苏说： 我如果身披铠甲，手执武器与强敌作战，不幸战死，其作用也只像一个普通士卒而已，还不如向诸侯去求援。 
English: Once upon a time, the two countries of Wu and Chu were at war in Baoji. The Wu army attacked three times in succession, entering the capital of Chu, Chu Jun fled, the doctor followed, the people were displaced, and the impostor Bosu said: If I wear armor, hold weapons and fight with a strong enemy, and unfortunately die in battle, my role is only like an ordinary soldier. It would be better to ask the princes for help.

古文：于是赢粮潜行，上峥山，逾深溪，蹠穿膝暴，七日而薄秦王之朝。雀立不转，昼吟宵哭。七日不得告。
现代文：于是，他背着干粮秘密出发，越过高山峻岭，渡过深水溪谷，鞋子穿烂了，脚掌磨破了，裤子破了，露出了膝盖；走了天，到了秦王的朝廷，踮着脚跟翘望，希望得到秦王的帮助；日夜哭泣，希望得到秦王的同情。
English: Therefore, he secretly set out with the dry grain on his back, crossed the high mountains and crossed the deep valleys. His shoes were worn out, the soles of his feet were worn out, his trousers were torn, and his knees were exposed. When he reached the court of King Qin, he stomped on his heels, hoping to get the help of King Qin. He cried day and night, hoping to get the sympathy of King Qin.

古文：水浆无入口，瘨而殚闷，旄不知人。
现代文：经过昼夜，也未能面告秦王。他就这样，滴水不进，以致头昏眼花，气绝晕倒，不省人事。
English: After day and night, he was not able to face King Qin. As a result, he could not drink any water, and became dizzy, faint, and unconscious.

古文：秦王闻而走之，冠带相及，左奉其首，右濡其口，勃苏乃苏。秦王身问之： 子孰谁也? 
现代文：秦王知道后来不及系好衣帽就跑来看他，左手捧着他的头，右手给他灌水，勃苏才慢慢苏醒过来，秦王亲自问他： 你是什么人？ 
English: Qin Wang knew that later he could not fasten his coat and hat, so he ran to see him. He held his head in his left hand and gave him water with his right hand. It was only when he slowly woke up that Qin Wang asked him in person: Who are you?

古文：棼冒勃苏对曰： 臣非异，楚使新造盩棼冒勃苏。
现代文：棼冒勃苏回答说： 我不是别人，是楚王派来的因不死于国难新获罪的棼冒勃苏。
English: The impostor replied, "I am no one else, but the impostor Bosu, who was sent by King Chu and was newly convicted for not dying in the national tragedy.

古文：吴与楚人战于柏举，三战入郢，寡君身出，大夫悉属，百姓离散。
现代文：吴、越两国现在柏举交战，吴国连攻三次，进入楚都，楚君逃亡，大夫跟随，百姓流离失所。
English: The two countries of Wu and Viet Nam are now at war. Wu Guolian attacked three times and entered Chu, Chu Jun fled, the doctor followed, and the people were displaced.

古文：使下臣来告亡，且求救。 
现代文：敝国君王特派我来报告楚国面临的亡国大祸，并且请求援救。 
English: I was sent by the king of Min to report on the great calamity of national ruin facing the state of Chu and to ask for help.

古文：秦王顾令不起： 寡人闻之，万乘之君，得罪一士，社稷其危，今此之谓也。 
现代文：秦王一再要他起身，他一直不起。秦王说： 我听说，万乘大国的君王，如果得罪了志士，国家就会危险，如今就是这样。 
English: King Qin repeatedly asked him to stand up, but he could not. King Qin said, "I have heard that the king of a great country, if he offends the patriots, the country will be in danger. This is how it is now.

古文：遂出革车千乘，卒万人，属之子满与子虎。下塞以东，与吴人战于浊水而大败之，亦闻于遂浦。
现代文：于是，秦王派出战车千辆，兵士万人，让公子满和公子虎带领，出边关，向东挺进，与吴军战于浊水之上，大败吴军，又听说还在遂浦作战。
English: As a result, the King of Qin sent a thousand chariots and ten thousand soldiers, and let the prince Man and the prince Tiger lead them out of the border gate and advance eastward. They fought against the Wu army on the surface of Surabaya, and defeated the Wu army. It is also said that they are still fighting in Sui Pu.

古文：故劳其身，愁其思，以忧社稷者，棼冒勃苏是也。
现代文：所以，我说的那个劳其筋骨，苦其心志，而忧虑国家安危的，就是棼冒勃苏。
English: Therefore, I said that the one who works hard and worries about the safety of the country is the one who betrays Bose.

古文： 吴与楚战于柏举，三战入郢。君王身出，大夫悉属，百姓离散。蒙谷给斗于宫唐之上，舍斗奔郢曰： 若有孤，楚国社稷其庶几乎! 
现代文：吴、楚两国在柏举交战，吴国连攻三关，攻入楚都，楚国国君逃亡，大夫跟随其后，百姓流离失所，楚臣蒙穀在宫唐与吴军遭遇，这时楚王生死未卜，蒙穀撇开吴军跑到楚都，说： 如果有国君的儿子可以继位，楚国大概可以保存。 
English: The two countries of Wu and Chu were at war in Baoji. Wu Guolian attacked the three passes and entered the capital of Chu. The prince of Chu fled, the doctor followed him, and the people were displaced. The prince of Chu, Menggu, encountered the Wu army in the palace of Tang. At this time, the king of Chu was not sure of his life and death. Menggu left the Wu army and ran to the capital of Chu, saying: If there is a son of the prince who can succeed, the state of Chu can probably be preserved.

古文：遂入大宫，负离次之典以浮于江，逃于云梦之中。
现代文：于是，他来到楚宫，背上楚国法律离次大典，乘船浮游于江上，逃到云、梦地区。
English: As a result, he came to the Chu Palace, with the law of the State of Chu on his back, floated on the river by boat, and fled to the cloud and dream regions.

古文：昭王反郢，五官失法，百姓昏乱；蒙谷献典，五官得法，而百姓大治。
现代文：以后楚昭王返回楚都，官员没有法律可以依靠，百姓混乱。蒙穀献出了离次大典，朝中官员便有法可依，因此百姓才得以治理。
English: After King Chu Zhao returned to Chu, the officials had no laws to rely on, and the people were confused. Meng Gu presented a sub-decree, and the officials of the court and the central government had laws to follow, so the people could be governed.

古文：此蒙谷之功，多与存国相若，封之执圭，田六百畛。
现代文：相形之下，蒙穀立了大功，等于使楚国得以保全。于是，楚王封他为执纒，给他封地六百畛。
English: In contrast, Meng Gu made a great contribution, which is equivalent to the preservation of the State of Chu. Therefore, the King of Chu appointed him as the regent and gave him a fief of six hundred baht.

古文：蒙谷怒曰： 谷非人臣，社稷之臣。苟社稷血食，余岂悉无君乎? 
现代文：蒙穀生气地说： 我并不是一般贪图爵禄的大臣，我是忧虑国家安危的大臣；国家平安无事，我难道会去忧虑个人有无官做吗！ 
English: Meng Gu angrily said, "I am not the usual minister who is greedy for peerage, I am a minister who is worried about the safety of the country; if the country is safe and sound, should I be worried about whether individuals have official jobs or not!"

古文：遂自弃于磨山之中，至今无冒。
现代文：于是他隐居磨山之中，到现在仍然没有爵禄。
English: As a result, he lived in seclusion in the middle of a mill hill, and to this day he still has no peerage.

古文：故不为爵劝，不为禄勉，以忧社稷者，蒙谷是也。 
现代文：所以，我说的那个既不追求爵位，也不追求俸禄，而忧虑国家安危的，就是蒙穀啊！ 
English: So, the one I'm talking about, who is not after a title or a salary, but is worried about the safety of the country, is Mengku!

古文：王乃大息曰： 此古之人也。
现代文：楚王叹息道： 这些都是古人，现在还有这样的人吗？ 
English: King Chu sighed, "These are ancient people. Are there still people like this?

古文：今之人，焉能有之耳? 莫敖子华对曰： 昔者先君灵王好小要，楚士约食，冯而能立，式而能起，食之可欲。忍而不入；死之可恶，然而不避。
现代文：莫敖子华回答说： 从前，楚灵王喜欢细腰女子，楚国的人便少吃饭，使自己的腰都细起来，以致要扶着东西才能起立，虽然想吃东西，但总是忍着饿不吃，这样饿下去，就有死的危险，可是人们无所畏惧。
English: Mo Xun Zihua replied, "Once upon a time, King Chu Ling liked women with thin waists. The people of the State of Chu ate less and made their waists thinner, so that they had to hold on to something in order to stand up. Although they wanted to eat, they were always too hungry to eat. If they went hungry in this way, there was a danger of death, but people were fearless.

古文：章闻之，其君好发者，其臣抉拾。
现代文：我听说： 国君喜好射箭，大臣也会去学习射箭。 
English: I have heard that the Emperor likes archery, and the Minister will also learn archery.

古文：君王直不好，若君王诚好贤，此五臣者，皆可得而致之。 
现代文：大王您只是不喜好贤臣而已，如果真是喜好贤臣，上述这五种贤臣，都是可以被大王罗致来的。 
English: Your Majesty, you just don't like wise men. If you really like wise men, the above-mentioned five kinds of wise men can be sent by King Luo.

