古文：明帝高宗明皇帝讳鸾，字景栖，始安贞王道生子也。
现代文：高宗明皇帝萧鸾，字景栖，是始安贞王萧道生的儿子。
English: Emperor Gao Zongming Xiao Yao, also known as Jingsu, was the son of Emperor Xiao Daosheng, the Prince of Anzheng.

古文：小讳玄度。
现代文：小名玄南齐书度。
English: Xiaomei Xuanan Qi Shudu.

古文：少孤，太祖抚育，恩过诸子。
现代文：他从小就没了父亲，太祖萧道成抚育了他，对他的慈爱恩惠往往超过亲生儿子。
English: He grew up without a father. His great-grandfather, Xiao Daocheng, raised him, and his love for him often exceeded that of his own son.

古文：宋泰豫元年，为安吉令，有严能之名。
现代文：宋泰豫元年，任安吉县令，以严能而闻名朝野。
English: In the first year of Song Taiyuan, he served as the Anji County magistrate, and was famous for his strictness.

古文：补武陵王左常侍，不拜。
现代文：补武陵王左常侍，没有接受。
English: He did not accept the offer to become the personal attendant of King Muryeongsa.

古文：元徽二年，为永世令。
现代文：元徽二年，任永世县令。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the Yongsei County Governor.

古文：升明二年，为邵陵王安南记室参军，未拜，仍迁宁朔将军、淮南宣城二郡太守。
现代文：升明二年，任命他为邵陵王安南记室参军。还没上任，又升任宁朔将军。淮南、宣城二郡太守。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was appointed to join the army by the Shao Ling Wang Annan Records Office. Before taking office, he was promoted to Ningshuo General. Huainan, Xuancheng two county governors.

古文：寻进号辅国将军。
现代文：不久进号辅国将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Auxiliary Province.

古文：太祖践阼，迁侍中，封西昌侯，邑千户。
现代文：太祖登基为皇帝，升他为侍中，封为西昌侯，食邑千户。
English: The great-grandfather ascended to the throne as emperor, he was promoted to attendant, he was given the title of Xichang Marquis, and he served thousands of households.

古文：建元二年，为持节、督郢州司州之义阳诸军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史，进号征虏将军。
现代文：建元二年，为持节，都督郢州、司州的义阳诸军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史，进号征虏将军。
English: In the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, on the auspicious day, the governors of Bozhou and Yiyang of Shizhou were promoted to military, champion generals, and the governor of Bozhou was promoted to conscript general.

古文：世祖即位，转度支尚书，领右军将军。
现代文：世祖即位，转任度支尚书，领右军将军。
English: Shizu ascended the throne and was transferred to the post of Doushishangshu, leading the right-wing army as general.

古文：永明元年，迁侍中，领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明元年，迁任侍中、领骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain and the leader of the cavalry.

古文：王子侯旧乘缠帷车，高宗独乘下帷，仪从如素士。
现代文：当时王子侯爵们都按惯例乘坐缠帷车，只有高宗乘坐下帷车，仪仗随从像个普通的无职士人。
English: At that time, the princes and marquesses all rode in the winding carriage according to the usual practice, only Gaozong rode in the descending carriage, and he followed the ceremony like an ordinary layman.

古文：公事混挠，贩食人担火误烧牛鼻，豫章王白世祖，世祖笑焉。
现代文：有一回公事忙乱，有个卖饭的担火误烧了高宗的牛鼻子，豫章王把这事说给世祖听，世祖只是笑。
English: Once, when business was hectic, a rice seller's fire accidentally burned Gao Zong's ox's nose. King Yu Zhang told this to King Sejo, who just laughed.

古文：转为散骑常侍、左卫将军，清道而行，上甚悦。
现代文：后转任散骑常侍、左卫将军，行事清正，很受皇上的欣赏。
English: After that, he was transferred to the position of straggler, general of the left guard. He acted with integrity and was greatly appreciated by the emperor.

古文：二年，出为征虏将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：永明二年，出任征虏将军、吴兴太守。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, Wu Xing became the Conscript General and Empress Dowager.

古文：四年，迁中领军，常侍并如故。
现代文：永明四年，迁任中领军，常侍等职仍兼任不变。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the position of middle leader, but his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：五年，为持节、监豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡军事、右将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：永明五年，为持节、监豫州、郢州的西阳、司州的汝南二郡军事、右将军、豫州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, he was the military commander of two counties in the south of Ryu, the right general, and the historian of Yuzhou, in addition to the military commander of Jisong, the supervisor of Yuzhou, the Xiyang of Zhangzhou, and the military commander of the two counties in the south of Ryu in Zhizhou.

古文：七年，为尚书右仆射。
现代文：永明七年，任尚书右仆射。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu.

古文：八年，加领卫尉。
现代文：永明八年，加领卫尉。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was promoted to the rank of Garrison Lieutenant.

古文：十年，转左仆射。
现代文：永明十年，转为左仆射。
English: In the tenth year of the Yongming era, he switched to left-handed shooting.

古文：十一年，领右卫将军。
现代文：永明十一年，领右卫将军。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, he became the leader of the Right Division.

古文：世祖遗诏为侍中、尚书令，寻加镇军将军，给班剑二十人。
现代文：世祖在遗诏中任命他为侍中、尚书令，不久又加镇军将军，配给班剑仪仗二十人。
English: In his last will and testament, the patriarch appointed him as an attendant and secretary, and soon he was promoted to the rank of general of the town army, and was assigned to a squad of twenty swordsmen.

古文：隆昌元年，即本号为大将军，给鼓吹一部，亲兵五百人。
现代文：隆昌元年，就在本号上即任大将军，配给鼓吹乐队一部，亲兵五百人。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was appointed general on this issue, and assigned a part of the propaganda band, with 500 soldiers.

古文：寻又加中书监、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久又加中书监、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Central Library Supervisor and the post of Keifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：郁林王废，海陵王立，为使持节、都督扬南徐二州军事、骠骑大将军、录尚书事、扬州刺史，开府如故，增班剑为三十人，封宣城郡公，二千户。
现代文：郁林王被废，海陵王立为皇帝，任命他为使持节、都督扬州和南徐州军事、骠骑大将军、录尚书事、扬州刺史，开府仍旧，增加班剑仪仗为三十人，封宣城郡公，食邑二千户。
English: Yu Lin Wang was abolished, and Hailing Wang was established as emperor. He was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Yangzhou and South Xuzhou, the general of the cavalry, the recorder of records, and the historian of Yangzhou. The capital was still the same, the number of swordsmen was increased to thirty, the county seat of Xuancheng was made public, and there were two thousand households in the county.

古文：镇东府城。
现代文：镇守东府城。
English: He was the town guard of Higashi-fucho.

古文：给兵五千人，钱二百万，布千匹。
现代文：配给兵士五千人，钱二百万，布一千匹。
English: Rationed to five thousand soldiers, two million in money, and one thousand in cloth.

古文：九江作难，假黄皞，事宁，表送之。
现代文：九江发生叛乱时，朝廷任命他为假黄钺，事情平息后，他又上表送还。
English: When there was a rebellion in Jiujiang, the imperial court appointed him as a false Huang Qi, and after the situation calmed down, he returned the watch.

古文：寻加黄皞、都督中外诸军事、太傅，领大将军、扬州牧，增班剑为四十人，给幢络三望车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，置左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人，封宣城王，邑五千户，持节、侍中、中书监、录尚书并如故。
现代文：不久便为加黄钺、都督中外诸军事、太傅，领大将军、扬州牧，增加班剑仪仗四十人，配给幢络三望车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，设置左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人，封宣城王，食邑五千户，持节、侍中、中书监、录尚书事都仍旧不变。
English: Soon, forty people were added to the squad of ceremonial swords for Jia Huangqi, the governor of the Middle and Outer Military, Taifu, the leader of the general, and Yangzhou Maki. They were assigned to the three-vehicle car, the front and back of the feathers were preached, the sword was carried to the palace, the emperor did not enter the palace, and the praise was not famous. Four people were assigned to the left and right of the long history, Sima, engaged in the middle, and the eunuch, and belonged to each other. They were proclaimed the king of the city, and there were five thousand households in the food village. The festival,

古文：未拜，太后令废海陵王，以上入纂太祖为第三子，群臣三请，乃受命。
现代文：他没有接受，太后下令废黜海陵王，让高宗作为太祖的三儿子继承其皇位，群臣再三请求敦促，他才接受。
English: He did not accept, and the empress dowager ordered the dethronement of King Hailing, so that Gaozong, as the third son of the great-grandfather, would succeed to the throne. After repeated requests and urging from the ministers, he finally accepted.

古文：建武元年冬，十月，癸亥，即皇帝位。
现代文：建武元年冬十月二十二日，高宗萧鸾即皇帝位。
English: On the 22nd day of October in the winter of the first year of Jianwu, Gaozong Xiaoqi became emperor.

古文：诏曰： 皇齐受终建极，握镜临宸，神武重辉，钦明懿铄，七百攸长，盘石斯固。
现代文：下诏说： 我们大齐自从受禅建国，君临天下，既神且武，光明美好，长治久安，固若磐石。
English: The following edict said: Since the founding of the nation by Zen, we are all great, reigning over the world, both divine and martial, bright and beautiful, long-lasting and stable, solid as a rock.

古文：而王度中蹇，天阶荐阻，嗣命多违，蕃衅孔棘，宏图景历，将坠诸渊。
现代文：不料高层统治中途出现了麻烦，朝廷出现问题，后继的皇上多有失误，各地的祸患时有发生，眼见伟大的事业就要沉没。
English: Unexpectedly, trouble arose in the middle of high-level rule, problems arose in the imperial court, succeeding emperors often made mistakes, and disasters occurred from time to time in various regions. Seeing this, the great cause was about to sink.

古文：宣德皇后远鉴崇替，宪章旧典，畴咨台揆，允定灵策，用集宝命于予一人。
现代文：宣德皇后鉴于历史教训，遵照历来典章，采纳大家意见，制定英明决策，把国家前途放到我一个人肩上。
English: Empress Xuande, in view of the lessons of history, followed the traditional rules, adopted everyone's opinions, made wise decisions, and placed the future of the country on my shoulders alone.

古文：猥以虚薄，缵承大业，仰系鸿丕，顾临兆民，永怀先构，若履春冰，寅忧夕惕，罔识攸济，思与万国播此惟新。
现代文：我这个人能力浅薄，要我来继承大业，上对高天，下对万民，想念前辈，我真是战战兢兢，如履薄冰，日夜忧惧，不知该如何是好，我愿意和普天下人开辟新局面。
English: I am a person with shallow abilities. If I am asked to inherit a great cause, to go up to the heavens and down to the people, and to miss my predecessors, I am really trembling, like walking on thin ice, worried day and night, and I don't know what to do. I am willing to open up a new situation with the people of the world.

古文：大赦天下，改元。宿卫身普转一阶，其余文武，赐位二等。
现代文：特命大赦天下，改元，身为宿卫者普遍提升一级，其他文武官员，赐位二等。
English: The world was amnestied, the era was changed, and those who served as guards were generally promoted to the first grade, while other civil and military officials were promoted to the second grade.

古文：逋租宿责，换负官物，在建武元年以前，悉原除。劫贼余口在台府者，可悉原放。负衅流徙，并还本乡。 
现代文：所有建武元年以前拖欠的旧债和折换所欠的官家东西，一概予以免除。所有被抄没的叛乱者家属，也全部释放。犯罪被流放者，也都放还本乡。 
English: All the old debts that were in arrears before the first year of Jianwu and the things that were owed to the government and the government before the conversion were completely forgiven. All the relatives of the rebels who were confiscated were also released. Those who were exiled for crimes were also returned to their hometowns.

古文：太尉王敬则为大司马，司空陈显达为太尉，尚书令王晏加骠骑大将军，中领军萧谌为领军将军、南徐州刺史，皇子宝义为扬州刺史，中护军王玄邈为南兖州刺史，新除右将军张瑰为右光禄大夫，平北将军王广之为江州刺史。
现代文：任命太尉王敬则为大司马，司空陈显达为太尉，尚书令王晏加骠骑大将军，中领军萧谌为领军将军、南徐州刺史，皇子萧宝义为扬州刺史，中护军王玄邈为南兖州刺史，新任命的右将军张瑰为右光禄大夫，平北将军王广之为江州刺史。
English: Appointed Taijun Wang Jing was the grand steward, Siku Chen Xianda was the Taijun, Shang Shuling Wang Qiaojing was the cavalry general, the middle leader Xiao Qi was the leading general, the south Xuzhou was the history, the prince Xiao Baoyi was the history of Yangzhou, the middle guard Wang Xuanqi was the history of the south Luzhou, the newly appointed right general Zhang Gui was the doctor of the right Guanglu, and the Pingbei general Wang Guang was the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：乙丑，诏断远近上礼。
现代文：二十四日，下诏禁止远近各地上献庆礼。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an edict prohibiting people from far and near from attending the ceremony.

古文：丁卯，诏 自今雕文篆刻，岁时光新，可悉停省。
现代文：二十六日，诏： 从今以后，所有雕文篆刻，岁时光新，全部停止。
English: On the 26th, the edict was issued: From now on, all carvings and engravings, new year and new time, all stopped.

古文：蕃牧守宰，或有荐献，事非任土，严加禁断。 
现代文：地方长官如果搞祭祀，必须是在自己任职的地域里的才行，否则要严加禁绝。 
English: If local governors engage in sacrificial rites, they must do so in the region where they hold office, otherwise it is strictly forbidden.

古文：追赠安陆昭侯缅为安陆王。
现代文：追赠安陆昭侯萧缅为安陆王。
English: As a posthumous gift, Anlu Zhao Hou Xiao Ming was crowned King of Anlu.

古文：己巳，以安陆侯子宝晊为湘州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，任命安陆侯的儿子萧宝日至为湘州刺史。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Baozhi, the son of Anlu Hou, was appointed to be the crown prince of Hunan Province.

古文：诏曰： 顷守职之吏，多违旧典，存私害公，实兴民蠹。
现代文：下诏说： 近来在职官吏，往往违反规定，谋私害公，这将养成危害人民的蠹虫。
English: The next edict said: Recently, officials in office often violate regulations and conspire to harm the public, which will breed maggots that harm the people.

古文：今商旅税石头后渚及夫卤借倩，一皆停息。
现代文：从现在起商旅税，石头、后渚的各项征税以及征派征盐借用民工等等摊派，一概停息。
English: From now on, the business travel tax, the various levies on stones and dung, as well as the levying of salt and the borrowing of migrant workers, etc., will all be suspended.

古文：所在凡厥公宜，可即符断。
现代文：各地对凡属公家应该征收的项目，要立刻明文规定。
English: All regions should immediately stipulate in writing the items that should be levied on all public entities.

古文：主曹详为其制，宪司明加听察。 
现代文：主管部门要详细制定要求内容，有关法律部门要明下监察。 
English: The competent departments should formulate the requirements in detail, and the relevant legal departments should supervise them.

古文：十一月，癸酉，以西中郎长史始安王遥光为扬州刺史，晋寿太守王洪范为青、冀二州刺史，尚书令王晏领太子少傅。
现代文：十一月初三，任命西中郎长史始安王萧遥光为扬州刺史，晋寿太守王洪范为青、冀二州刺史，尚书令王晏领太子少傅。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Xi Zhonglang appointed Wang Xiaoyaoguang, the first prince of An, as Yangzhou prince, Wang Hongfan, the second prince of Jinshou and the second prince of Hebei, as Yangzhou prince, and Wang Shuling, the second prince of Jinshou, as Yangzhou prince.

古文：甲戌，大司马寻阳公王敬则等十三人进爵邑各有差。
现代文：四日，给大司马寻阳公王敬则等十三人各晋封爵位和食邑不一。
English: On the fourth day, thirteen people, including the grand steward Ma Xiangyang and Prince Keiji, were given various ranks and food.

古文：诏省新林苑，先是民地，悉以还主，原责本直。
现代文：下诏取消新林苑，土地皆还原主，原欠债务作价抵销。
English: The new forest garden will be cancelled, the land will be returned to the original owner, and the original debt will be offset against the price.

古文：庚辰，立皇子宝义为晋安王，宝玄为江夏王，宝源为庐陵王，宝夤为建安王，宝融为随郡王，宝攸为南平王。
现代文：十日，立皇子萧宝义为晋安王，萧宝玄为江夏王，萧宝源为庐陵王，萧宝寅为建安王，萧宝融为随郡王，萧宝攸为南平王。
English: On the 10th, Xiao Baoyi, the son of Xiao Baoyi, was appointed as the King of Jinan, Xiao Baoxuan as the King of Jiangxia, Xiao Baoyuan as the King of Fuling, Xiao Baoying as the King of Jian'an, Xiao Baorong as the King of Su County, and Xiao Baoyu as the King of Nanping.

古文：甲申，诏曰： 邑宰禄薄俸微，不足代耕，虽任土恒贡，亦为劳费，自今悉断。 
现代文：十四日，下诏说： 乡镇负责人俸禄微薄，不够代替种田，虽然当地经常有所供给，也很劳费，从现在起全都取消。 
English: On the 14th, the next edict said: The salary of the head of the township is meager, not enough to replace the farmland, although there is often local supply, it is also very labor-intensive, and from now on it is all canceled.

古文：又诏 宣城国五品以上，悉与满叙。
现代文：又下诏 宣城国五品以上官员都按优等政绩予以晋升奖励。
English: It also decreed that all officials above grade five in Xuancheng would be promoted according to their outstanding performance.

古文：自此以下，皆听解遣。
现代文：五品以下，都可随便自寻去处。
English: For five items or less, you can easily find your way around.

古文：其欲仕，适所乐。 
现代文：有愿意做官的，可根据其兴趣作适当安排。 
English: For those who are willing to work as officials, appropriate arrangements can be made according to their interests.

古文：乙酉，追尊始安贞王为景皇，妃为懿后。
现代文：十五日，追尊始安贞王为景皇，妃为懿后。
English: According to acetylene, the Ming Emperor chased the venerated King Anzhen for the Emperor Jing, and his concubine for the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙戌，以辅国将军闻喜公遥欣为荆州刺史，宁朔将军丰城公遥昌为豫州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命辅国将军闻喜公萧遥欣为荆州刺史，宁朔将军丰城公萧遥昌为豫州刺史。
English: On the 16th, Wen Xigong Xiao Yaoxin, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, and Ningshuo General Fengcheng Xiao Yaochang was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：丁亥，诏 细作中署、材官、车府，凡诸工，可悉开番假，递令休息 。
现代文：十七日，下诏： 中署、材官、车府等处的精巧工匠，允许分期分批交替放假休息。 
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Skilled craftsmen at the Central Station, Material Officer, Chefu, etc. were allowed to take alternate holidays in installments.

古文：戊子，立皇太子宝卷，赐天下为父后者爵一级，孝子顺孙、义夫节妇，普加甄赐明扬。
现代文：十八日，立萧宝卷为皇太子，赐天下为父后的人爵一级，孝子顺孙义夫节妇，普遍予以奖励和表彰。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Baowan was established as the crown prince, his father was given a first-class peerage, and his son and son-in-law were awarded with awards and commendations.

古文：表其衡闾，赉以束帛。
现代文：住宅贴上光荣榜，并赐给南齐书束帛。 
English: The house was put on the honor roll, and Nanqi was given a bunch of books.

古文：己丑，诏 东宫肇建，远近或有庆礼，可悉断之。 
现代文：十九日，下诏： 太子初立，各地有的送来庆礼，应该一律停止。 
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Since the crown prince was enthroned for the first time, some celebrations from various regions should be stopped.

古文：壬辰，以新除征虏将军江夏王宝玄为郢州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，任命新上任的征虏将军江夏王萧宝玄为郢州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, the newly appointed conscript general Jiangxia Wang Xiao Baoxuan was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：永明中，御史中丞沈渊表百官年登七十，皆令致仕，并穷困私门。
现代文：永明年间，御史中丞沈渊曾上表反映百官年龄一到七十岁，都令他们退休了，他们在家里很穷困。
English: In the middle of the eternal year, Grand Historian Chujo Shen Yuan once made a table reflecting the ages of one hundred officials from one to seventy years old, and retired them all. They were very poor at home.

古文：庚子，诏曰： 日者百司耆齿，许以自陈，东西二省，犹沾微俸，辞事私庭，荣禄兼谢，兴言爱老，实有矜怀。自缙绅年及，可一遵永明七年以前铨叙之科。 
现代文：三十日，下诏说： 近日允许各部门老年官员自己提出要求，东西二省的官员，还有些俸禄，一旦退休了，便荣誉和收入都没有了，为了体现爱老的精神和同情的心情，对到达退休年龄的官员，一律按照永明七年以前的晋升奖赏办法办理。 
English: On the 30th, the next edict said: Recently, elderly officials in various departments have been allowed to make their own requests. Officials in the two eastern and western provinces, as well as some salaries, once retired, will have no honor and income. In order to reflect the spirit of love and sympathy for the elderly, for officials who have reached the retirement age, they will all be promoted according to the promotion reward method seven years ago.

古文：上辅政所诛诸王，是月复属籍，各封子为侯。
现代文：对皇上在辅政期间诛杀的各位宗王，都在这个月里恢复了地位，并封他们的儿子为侯。
English: This month, all of the kings who fought and killed the emperor during his ancillary administration regained their positions, and their sons were made princes.

古文：十二月，壬子，诏曰： 上览易遗，下情难达，是以甘棠见美，肺石流咏。
现代文：十二月十二日，下诏说： 光凭在上层观察政治难免有遗漏，而处在下层的不容易把意见反映上来。所以古人歌颂《甘棠》诗是赞美体察民情，咏赞肺石是希望能允许提意见。
English: On December 12th, the next edict said: Just by observing politics at the upper level, it is inevitable that there will be omissions, and it is not easy to reflect opinions at the lower level. Therefore, the ancient people's praise of the "Sweet Pea" poem is to praise the people's feelings, and to praise the stone is to hope to allow opinions.

古文：自月一视黄辞，如有含枉不申、怀直未举者，莅民之司，并任厥失。 
现代文：以后我每月要看一次有关报告，如有含冤者未予申平的，正直者没被举荐的，有关部门要承担责任。 
English: In the future, I will read the relevant report once a month. If there are wrongdoers who have not been leveled, and those who are honest have not been recommended, the relevant departments must take responsibility.

古文：二年春，正月，辛未，诏 京师系囚殊死，可降为五岁刑，三署见徒五岁以下，悉原散。
现代文：建武二年春正月初一，下诏 京师在押囚犯，已判死刑的，降为五年徒刑。三署在押囚徒已判五年以下徒刑的，全都释放。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second spring of the second year of Jianwu, the following edict was issued to the prisoners in custody of the Beijing Division: those who had been sentenced to death were reduced to five years of imprisonment, and those who had been sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment were all released.

古文：王公以下，各举所知。
现代文：王公以下官员，都要推荐人才。
English: Officials below Wang Gong must recommend talents.

古文：随王公卿士，内外群僚，各举朕违，肆心极谏。 
现代文：并和王公卿士内外群僚一起，指出我的缺点错误，可以肆无忌惮地提意见。 
English: And together with Wang Gongningshi and his colleagues at home and abroad, he pointed out my shortcomings and mistakes, and could make comments without fear.

古文：索虏寇司、豫、徐、梁四州。
现代文：索虏寇掠司、豫、徐、梁四州。
English: The four states of Soruko, Zhaoji, Yu, Xu, and Liang.

古文：壬申，遣镇南将军王广之督司州征讨，右卫将军萧坦之督徐州征讨，尚书右仆射沈文季督豫州征讨。
现代文：初二，派遣镇南将军王广之督师司州征讨，右卫将军萧坦之督师徐州征讨，尚书右仆射沈文季督师豫州征讨。
English: On the second day of the first semester, he dispatched Zhenan General Wang Guang's superintendent, Sizhou Enquiry, Right Guard General Xiaotan's superintendent, Xuzhou Enquiry, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Shen Wenzhi's superintendent, Yuzhou Enquiry.

古文：己卯，诏京师二县有毁发坟垅，随宜修理。
现代文：初九，下诏对京师两县被毁被挖的坟垅进行适当修理。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the destroyed and dug graves in the two counties of Beijing Division should be properly repaired.

古文：又诏曰： 食惟民天，义高姬载，蚕实生本，教重轩经。前哲盛范，后王茂则，布令审端，咸必由之。
现代文：又下诏说： 民以食为天，蚕是生活之本，这是古代圣王极为重视的，前哲的典范便是后王的准则，这是我们一切工作的出发点。
English: The following edict also said: People regard food as heaven, and silkworms are the basis of life. This is what the ancient holy kings attached great importance to. The former philosopher's model is the queen's standard. This is the starting point of all our work.

古文：朕肃扆岩廊，思弘风训，深务八政，永鉴在勤，静言日昃，无忘寝兴。
现代文：我身居皇位，心怀天下，日理万机，不暇休息，早晚考虑，坐卧不忘。
English: I am on the imperial throne, I have the whole world in my heart, I am a day-to-day machine, I do not have time to rest, I think about it morning and night, I do not forget to lie down.

古文：守宰亲民之主，牧伯调俗之司，宜严课农桑，罔令游惰，揆景肆力，必穷地利，固修堤防，考校殿最。
现代文：各地长官是百姓的主人，负有调理风俗的职责，应该严格对待农桑生产，不要让百姓懈怠懒惰，而应努力生产，发挥地利，加固堤防，考核成绩。
English: The governors of various regions are the masters of the people and have the responsibility of regulating customs. They should strictly deal with the production of agricultural mulberry. They should not let the people slack off and be lazy, but should work hard to produce, give full play to the geographical location, strengthen the dike, and evaluate the results.

古文：若耕蚕殊众，具以名闻；游怠害业，即便列奏。主者详为条格。 
现代文：如果粮蚕生产上去了，就要把成绩上报，对那些游闲荒怠生产的人，也要揭发检举，有关负责部门要详细核实处理。 
English: If the production of grain and silkworms goes up, it is necessary to report the results, and those who are idle and lazy in production should also be reported, and the relevant responsible departments should verify and deal with them in detail.

古文：乙未，虏攻钟离，徐州刺史萧惠休破之。
现代文：二十五日，索虏攻打钟离，被徐州刺史萧惠休击败。
English: On the 25th, Sorup attacked Zhongli and was defeated by Xuzhou assassin Xiao Huixiu.

古文：丙申，加太尉陈显达使持节、都督西北征讨诸军事。
现代文：二十六日，加太尉陈显达使持节、都督西北征讨诸军事。
English: On the 26th, Lieutenant Chen Xianda, the governor of Northwest China, sent an envoy to the military.

古文：丁酉，内外纂严。
现代文：二十七日，内外戒严。
English: On the 27th, martial law was imposed at home and abroad.

古文：三月，戊申，诏 南徐州侨旧民丁，多充戎旅，蠲今年三课。 
现代文：三月戊申日，下诏 由于南徐州侨旧民丁，很多人都到军队服役去了，特免除今年的各种赋税徭役。 
English: In March, on the day of Wushen, the following edict was issued: Due to the old people in southern Xuzhou, many people went to serve in the army, and they were specially exempted from all kinds of taxes and duties this year.

古文：己未，司州刺史萧诞与众军击虏，破之。
现代文：已未日，司州刺史萧谌配合众军，击破敌虏。
English: The day before yesterday, Xiao Wei, the governor of Shizhou Province, cooperated with the army to defeat the enemy.

古文：诏 雍、豫、司、南兖、徐五州遇寇之家，悉停今年税调。
现代文：下诏 雍、豫、司、南兖、徐五州受到寇掠的人家，都免交今年的税调。
English: The following edict: People whose homes were plundered in the five prefectures of Yong, Yu, Si, Nan and Xu are exempt from this year's tax increase.

古文：其与虏交通，不问往罪。 
现代文：有与敌虏勾结者，一概免予追究以前的罪过。 
English: Those who have colluded with the enemy will be completely exempted from prosecution for their previous crimes.

古文：丙寅，停青州麦租。
现代文：丙寅日，免去青州的麦租。
English: The wheat rent in Qingzhou will be waived on Hsinchu Day.

古文：虏自寿春退走。
现代文：敌虏从寿春退去。
English: The enemy retreated from Shuchun.

古文：甲申，解严。
现代文：十五日，撤销戒严。
English: As the Northern Wei army had already retreated, martial law was lifted in Nanqi.

古文：夏，四月，己亥朔，诏 三百里内狱讼，同集京师，克日听览。
现代文：夏四月初一，下诏 京城三百里境内的官司案件，都集中到京师来，即日听候阅处。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, all the court cases within the 300-mile territory of Beijing were concentrated in the Beijing Division, waiting for the reading room on the same day.

古文：此以外委州郡讯察。
现代文：此外各地的官司案件由州郡长官审讯处理。
English: In addition, court cases in various regions are handled by state and county magistrates.

古文：三署徒隶，原遣有差。 
现代文：三署的囚徒奴隶，适当减刑或释放。 
English: Prisoners and slaves of the three departments shall have their sentences appropriately reduced or be released.

古文：索虏围汉中，梁州刺史萧懿拒退之。
现代文：索虏包围汉中，被梁州刺史萧懿打退了。
English: Hanzhong besieged by the Sorru, was repulsed by the Liangzhou stabbing Shi Xiaohui.

古文：己未，以新除黄门郎裴叔业为徐州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命新上任的黄门郎裴叔业为徐州刺史。
English: On the 21st, the newly appointed Huangmen Lang Pei Shuhei was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：五月，甲午，寝庙成，诏 监作长帅，可赐位一等，役身遣假一年，非役者蠲租同假限。 
现代文：五月二十六日，寝庙落成，下诏 监作长帅人员，赐给职位一等，在役人员放假休息一年，非在役人员放假期间免征租税。 
English: On May 26th, the sleeping temple was completed, and the next edict was issued to supervise the work of the superintendent and give the position to the first grade, the active personnel had a holiday break for one year, and the non-active personnel were exempted from tax during the holiday.

古文：六月，壬戌，诛领军将军萧谌、西阳王子明、南海王子罕、邵陵王子贞。
现代文：六月二十五日，诛杀领军将军萧谌、西阳王萧子明、南海王萧子罕、邵陵王萧子贞。
English: On June 25th, he killed the leading generals Xiao Zhen, Xiyang Wang Xiao Ziming, Nanhai Wang Xiao Zihan, and Shaoling Wang Xiao Zizhen.

古文：乙丑，以右卫将军萧坦之为领军将军。
现代文：二十八日，任命右卫将军萧坦之为领军将军。
English: In the second ugly, Nanzhi appointed the right guard general Xiao Tan as the leading general.

古文：秋，七月，辛未，以右将军晋安王宝义为南徐州刺史。
现代文：秋七月初四，任命右将军晋安王萧宝义为南徐州刺史。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the right general Jin An Wang Xiao Baoyi was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：壬申，以冠军将军梁王为司州刺史。
现代文：初五，任命冠军将军梁王为司州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the champion general Liang Wang was appointed as the secretary of state.

古文：辛卯，以氐杨馥之为北秦州刺史、仇池公。
现代文：二十四日，任命氐人杨馥之为北秦州刺史并封他为仇池公。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he appointed Yang Xuanqin as the governor of North Qin Province and made him the prince of Quchi.

古文：八月，丁未，以右卫将军庐陵王宝源为南兖州刺史。
现代文：八月十一日，任命右卫将军庐陵王萧宝源为南兖州刺史。
English: On August 11th, Xiao Baoyuan, the general of the Right Division of the Guards, was appointed as the prefect of South Luzhou.

古文：庚戌，以新除辅国将军申希祖为兖州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命才提拔为辅国将军的申希祖为兖州刺史。
English: On the 14th, Shen Xizu, who was only appointed and promoted as an auxiliary general, became the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：九月，己丑，改封南平王宝攸为邵陵王，蜀郡王子文为西阳王，广汉王子峻为衡阳王，临海王昭秀为巴陵王，永嘉王昭粲为桂阳王。
现代文：九月二十三日，改封南平王萧宝攸为邵陵王，蜀郡王萧子文为西阳王，广汉王萧子峻为衡阳王，临海王萧昭秀为巴陵王，永嘉王萧昭粲为桂阳王。
English: On September 23, Xiao Baoyu, the king of Nanping, was renamed as the king of Shaoling, Xiao Ziwen, the king of Shu County, as the king of Xiyang, Xiao Zijun, the king of Guanghan, as the king of Hengyang, Xiao Zhaoxiu, the king of Linhai, as the king of Baling, and Xiao Zhaojun, the king of Yongjia, as the king of Guiyang.

古文：冬，十一月，丁卯，诏曰： 轨世去奢，事殷哲后，训物以俭，理镜前王。
现代文：冬十月初八，下诏说： 反对浪费，提倡节约，是前代圣王的一贯作风。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month in winter, the following edict was issued: "Opposing waste and advocating thrift is the consistent style of the previous emperor.

古文：朕属流弊之末，袭浇浮之季，虽恭已弘化，刻意隆平，而礼让未兴，侈华犹竞。
现代文：我的执政恰处于流弊之末，民风浅浮之世，虽然本人严格要求自己，但社会上仍然没能养成礼让的风气，俗间仍然竞相侈比。
English: My administration is just at the end of the stream of evils, and the world of folk customs is shallow. Although I am strict with myself, society has still not been able to develop a culture of comity, and the vulgar are still competing for luxury.

古文：永览玄风，兢言集愧，思所以还淳改俗，反古移民。可罢东田，毁兴光楼。 
现代文：看到这样的局面，我不免心中生愧，为了使风俗返朴归淳，现要求撤销东田，毁掉兴光楼。 
English: Seeing such a situation, I cannot help but feel ashamed. In order to return the customs to simplicity, I am now demanding the revocation of Higashida and the destruction of Xingguanglou.

古文：并诏水衡量省御乘。
现代文：并指示有关计量部门适当节缩车轿等交通工具。
English: and instruct the relevant measurement departments to appropriately reduce the size of cars and other means of transportation.

古文：王公已下，班赐各有差。
现代文：二十日，为皇太子娶妃褚氏，大赦天下。对王公以下官员都给予数量不一的赏赐。
English: On the 20th, there was a general amnesty for the crown prince's marriage to Himeji. A number of rewards were given to officials below the crown prince.

古文：断四方上礼。
现代文：禁止各地送礼。
English: Gift-giving is prohibited in all regions.

古文：十二月，丁酉，诏曰： 旧国都邑，望之怅然。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏说： 旧国城镇看着不免怅然。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the following edict was issued: "The towns and cities of the old country are inevitably dazzling.

古文：况乃自经南面，负扆宸居，或功济当时，德覃一世，而茔垅欑秽，封树不修，岂直嗟深牧竖、悲甚信陵而已哉？
现代文：何况自当皇帝以后，整天身居宫殿里，有的人当年功高济时，德泽当世，而死后坟茔荒芜，封树杂乱，这实足引起悲凉和感叹啊！
English: What's more, since he became emperor, he has been living in the palace all day long. Some people had great achievements in the past, but when they died, their tombs were desolate, and the trees were in disarray. This really caused sadness and sighing!

古文：昔中京沦覆，鼎玉东迁，晋元缔构之始，简文遗咏在民，而松门夷替，埏路榛芜。
现代文：当初中京沦落，朝廷东迁，晋元帝缔造在前，简文帝中兴于后，他们的功绩深入民心，但他们的陵墓一派荒凉。
English: At that time, the central capital fell, the imperial court moved to the east, Emperor Jin Yuan was created, and Emperor Jianwen was ascended. Their achievements were deeply rooted in the hearts of the people, but their mausoleums were desolate.

古文：虽年代殊往，抚事兴怀。
现代文：虽然年代已经久远了，但每想起来心中仍不能平静。
English: Although it was a long time ago, I still can't calm down whenever I think about it.

古文：晋帝诸陵，悉加修理，并增守卫。
现代文：晋帝的各个陵墓要好好加以修理，并增加守卫人员。
English: The various mausoleums of Emperor Jin should be well repaired and the number of guards should be increased.

古文：吴、晋陵二郡失稔之乡，蠲三调有差。 
现代文：吴、晋陵二郡，要适当减免赋税徭役。 
English: In the two counties of Wu and Jinling, it is necessary to appropriately reduce and exempt taxes and duties.

古文：三年春，正月，丁卯，以阴平王杨炅子崇祖为沙州刺史，封阴平王。
现代文：建武三年春正月初三，任命阴平王杨炅的儿子杨崇祖为沙州刺史，封阴平王。
English: On the third day of the first month of the third year of the third month of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year

古文：北中郎将建安王宝夤为江州刺史。
现代文：任命北中郎将建安王萧宝寅为江州刺史。
English: The appointment of the Northern Middle Ages will make the Jianan King Xiao Baoying the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：己巳，诏申明守长六周之制。
现代文：初五，下诏申明守长六周之制。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the following edict affirmed the six-week system for the governor.

古文：乙酉，诏 去岁索虏寇边，缘边诸州郡将士有临阵及疾病死亡者，并送还本土。 
现代文：二十一日，下诏 去年索虏寇掠边境，边境一带各州郡将士有阵亡或疾病死亡的，都要送还其故乡。 
English: On the 21st, it was decreed that all soldiers who died in battle or died of disease in the counties and prefectures along the border area should be sent back to their hometowns.

古文：三月，壬午，诏 车府乘舆有金银饰校者，皆剔除。 
现代文：三月十九日，下诏 住宅和交南齐书通工具上凡用金银作装饰加固的，一律剔除。 
English: On March 19th, the following edict was issued: Any gold and silver used for decoration and reinforcement on residences and tools shall be eliminated.

古文：夏，四月，虏寇司州，戍兵击破之。
现代文：夏四月，敌虏寇掠司州，被守军击败。
English: In the summer of April, the enemy raided Zhouzhou and was defeated by the defenders.

古文：五月，己巳，以征虏将军萧懿为益州刺史，前军将军阴广宗为梁、南秦二州刺史，前新除宁州刺史李庆宗为宁州刺史。
现代文：五月初七，任命征虏将军萧懿为益州刺史，前军将军阴广宗为梁、南秦二州刺史，前新授职的宁州刺史李庆宗为宁州刺史。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Conscript General Xiao Jiong was appointed as the prefectural historian of Yizhou, former army general Yin Guangzong was appointed as the prefectural historian of Liang, Southern Qin as the prefectural historian of Erzhou, and the newly appointed prefectural historian of Ningzhou, Li Qingzong, was appointed as the prefectural historian of Ningzhou.

古文：秋，九月，辛酉，以冠军将军徐玄庆为兖州刺史。
现代文：秋九月初一，任命冠军将军徐玄庆为兖州刺史。
English: On the first day of September in autumn, the champion general Xu Xuanqing was appointed as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月，以辅国将军申希祖为司州刺史。
现代文：闰十二月二十日，为皇太子举行加冠礼，赐王公以下官员帛数量不一，为父后都赐爵一级。
English: On the 20th day of leap December, the crowning ceremony was held for the crown prince, and the number of officials below the crown prince was different, and both father and mother were given a first-class knighthood.

古文：闰十二月，戊寅，皇太子冠，赐王公以下帛各有差，为父后者赐爵一级。断远近上礼。
现代文：禁止各地送礼。
English: Gift-giving is prohibited in all regions.

古文：又诏 今岁不须光新，可以见钱为百官供给。 
现代文：又下诏 今年不必光新，可以用现钱发给百官。 
English: It was also decreed that there was no need for a new light this year, and that the money could be used to pay the officials.

古文：四年春，正月，庚午，大赦。
现代文：建武四年春正月初六，大赦天下。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Kenmu era, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：诏曰： 嘉肴停俎，定方旨于必甘；良玉在攻，表圭璋于既就。是以陶钧万品，务本为先；经纬九区，学斅为大。
现代文：下诏说： 佳肴祭祀，必须用最甘美的才行，佩戴王圭璋，也必须用最好的玉石制作才行，因此不论制造何物，首先要从根本上做起，治理国家，也要以教育为重。
English: The next edict said: The sweetest food must be used for the sacrificial rites, and the best jade must be used to make the king's robe. Therefore, no matter what you make, you must first start from the basics, and the governance of the country should also focus on education.

古文：往因时康，崇建庠序，屯虞荐有，权从省废，讴诵寂寥，倏移年稔，永言古昔，无忘旰昃。
现代文：过去国家康宁时，建了不少学校，后来遇到艰难，便暂时省废了，转眼之间，已是多年没听到读书声了。思古虑今，日夜难忘。
English: In the past, when the country was prosperous, many schools were built, but later, when it encountered difficulties, they were temporarily abandoned. In the blink of an eye, I haven't heard the sound of reading for many years. Thinking about it now, it is unforgettable day and night.

古文：今华夏鳷安，要荒慕向，缔修东序，实允适时。
现代文：如今天下安宁，人心思治，正是兴学施教的好时候。
English: If today is a day of peace and tranquility, it is a good time to study and teach.

古文：便可式依旧章，广延国胄，弘敷景业，光被后昆。 
现代文：应按照已有的规定，广泛招收贵族子弟，入学接受培养，发扬大业，光被后世。 
English: According to the existing regulations, the sons and daughters of aristocrats should be widely recruited, receive education, carry forward the great cause, and be cherished by future generations.

古文：壬寅，诏 民产子者，蠲其父母调役一年，又赐米十斛。
现代文：壬寅日，下诏 对那些生了儿子的父母，免除其徭役一年，并赐给米十斛。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, it was decreed that parents who gave birth to a son should be exempted from corvee service for one year and be given ten mu of rice.

古文：新婚者，蠲夫役一年 。
现代文：新婚夫妇，免其服役一年。 
English: Newlyweds are exempt from military service for one year.

古文：丙辰，尚书令王晏伏诛。
现代文：丙辰日，诛杀尚书令王晏。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15

古文：二月，甲子，以左仆射徐孝嗣为尚书令，征虏将军萧季敞为广州刺史。
现代文：二月初七，任命左仆射徐孝嗣为尚书令，征虏将军萧季敞为广州刺史。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, he appointed his left-hand man, Xu Xiaozhi, as Shang Shuling, and the conscript general, Xiao Qidang, as Guangzhou Shuling.

古文：三月，乙未，右仆射沈文季领护军将军。
现代文：三月初八，任命右仆射沈文季领护军将军。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, he appointed his right-hand man, General Shen Wenzhi, as the leader of the escorting army.

古文：秋，八月，追尊景皇所生王氏为恭太后。
现代文：秋八月，追尊景皇生母为恭太后。索虏寇掠沔北。
English: In the autumn and August, the birth mother of Emperor Chongzheng became Empress Dowager Gong. Soruko raided the north of Yunnan.

古文：索虏寇沔北。冬，十月，又寇司州。甲戌，遣太子中庶子梁王、右军司马张稷讨之。十一月，丙辰，以氐杨灵珍为北秦州刺史、仇池公、武都王。
现代文：冬十月，索虏又寇掠司州，二十日，派遣太子中庶子梁王、右军司马张稷征讨。十一月丙辰日，任命氐人杨灵珍为北秦州刺史，并封他为仇池公，武都王。
English: In the winter of October, Sorru also invaded and plundered Shizhou, and on the 20th, dispatched Prince Liang Wang, the middle child of the prince, and the right-hand army secretary Ma Zhangye to conquer. On the day of November, Yang Lingzhen was appointed as the governor of North Qin Province, and he was given the title of Quchigong, King of Wudu.

古文：丁亥，诏 所在结课屋宅田桑，可详减旧价。 
现代文：初四，下诏： 各地有在愿意让出屋宅种田植桑的，可适当减少旧价。 
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: If there are people in various regions who are willing to give up their houses to plant mulberry trees, the old price can be appropriately reduced.

古文：十二月，甲子，以冠军将军裴叔业为豫州刺史，冠军将军徐玄庆为徐州刺史，宁朔将军左兴盛为兖州刺史。
现代文：十二月十一日，任命冠军将军裴叔业为豫州刺史，冠军将军徐玄庆为徐州刺史，宁朔将军左兴盛为兖州刺史。
English: On December 11, champion general Pei Shuhei was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, champion general Xu Xuanqing as the historian of Xuzhou, and Ningshuo general Zuo Xingsheng as the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁丑，遣度支尚书崔慧景率众救雍州。
现代文：二十四日，派遣度支尚书崔慧景率众援救雍州。
English: On the 24th, Cui Huiqing, a scholar of Du Shi, led the crowd to rescue Yongzhou.

古文：永泰元年春，正月，癸未朔，大赦。
现代文：永泰元年春正月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of Yongtai, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：逋租宿债在四年之前，皆悉原除。
现代文：免除建武四年以前所拖欠的租税债务。
English: to waive the tax debt that Jianwu owed four years ago.

古文：中军大将军徐孝嗣即本号，开府仪同三司。
现代文：命中军大将军徐孝嗣在本官之上开府仪同三司。
English: The general of the army, Xu Xiaozhi, who was hit, opened the ceremony and the three departments on top of his post.

古文：沔北诸郡为虏所侵，相继败没。
现代文：沔北各郡遭索虏侵掠、相继失陷。
English: The counties in northern Anhui Province were invaded and plundered by Soryu and successively lost their power.

古文：乙巳，遣太尉陈显达持节救雍州。
现代文：二十三日，派遣太尉陈显达持节援救雍州。
English: On the 23rd, Lieutenant Chen Xianda was dispatched to rescue Yongzhou.

古文：丁未，诛河东王铉、临贺王子岳、西阳王子文、衡阳王子峻、南康王子珉、永阳王子珉、湘东王子建、南郡王子夏、桂阳王昭粲、巴陵王昭秀。
现代文：二十五日，诛杀河东王萧铉、临贺王萧子岳、西阳王萧子文、衡阳王萧子峻、南康王萧子琳、永阳王萧子珉、湘东王萧子建、南郡王萧子夏、桂阳王萧昭粲、巴陵王萧昭秀。
English: On the 25th, he killed King Xiaojuan of Hedong, King Xiaozihue of Linhe, King Xiaozifeng of Xiyang, King Xiaozirong of Hengyang, King Xiaozirong of Nankang, King Xiaozirong of Yongyang, King Xiaozijian of Hunan, King Xiaozixia of Nangun, King Xiaochao of Guiyang, and King Xiao Zhaoxiu of Baling.

古文：二月，癸丑，遣左卫将军萧惠休假节援寿阳。
现代文：二月初一，派遣左卫将军萧惠休假节援救寿阳。
English: On the first day of February, General of the Left Division Xiao Hui was sent to rescue Shouyang during the holiday.

古文：辛未，豫州刺史裴叔业击虏于淮北，破之。
现代文：十九日，豫州刺史裴叔业在淮北击破索虏。
English: On the 19th, Yu Zhou stabbed Shi Pei Shuye in Huaibei to break the rope.

古文：辛巳，平西将军萧遥欣领雍州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命平西将军萧遥欣领雍州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Pingxi General Xiao Yaoxin was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：三月，丙午，蠲雍州遇虏之县租布。
现代文：三月二十五日，免除雍州受虏侵害各县的租布。
English: On March 25th, Yongzhou exempted the captives from infringing the leased cloth of each county.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 仲尼明圣在躬，允光上哲，弘厥雅道，大训生民，师范百王，轨仪千载。立人斯仰，忠孝攸出，玄功潜被，至德弥阐。
现代文：二十七日，下诏说： 孔子是光辉伟大的圣贤哲人，他弘扬雅道，教导生民，是帝王们的师表，是千秋万代的轨仪，万众敬仰，忠孝所出，他的功德泽被天下。
English: On the 27th, the next edict said: Confucius was a brilliant and great sage and philosopher. He promoted the noble way and taught the people. He was a teacher for emperors and a role model for thousands of generations. He was revered by all and was the source of loyalty and filial piety. His merits were praised by the world.

古文：虽反袂遐旷，而祧荐靡阙，时祭旧品，秩比诸侯。
现代文：虽然年代已经久远，但人们对他的敬祭仍然不断。而且他享受的规格，和诸侯一样。
English: Although he has been dead for a long time, people still pay homage to him, and he enjoys the same privileges as princes.

古文：顷岁以来，祀典陵替，俎豆寂寥，牲奠莫举，岂所以克昭盛烈，永隆风教者哉！可式循旧典，详复祭秩，使牢饩备礼，钦飨兼申。 夏，四月，甲寅，改元，赦三署囚系原除各有差。
现代文：近年来对孔子的祭祀制度被破坏了，弄得他的庙堂里经常没有享品，这怎么能光扬道德、兴隆教化呢？应该依照原有制度，恢复祭祀规格，适时举行祭礼。 夏四月初三，改元，对三署在押囚犯都有不同程度的赦免。
English: In recent years, the sacrificial system for Confucius has been destroyed, so that there are often no luxury goods in his temple, how can this glorify morality, prosperity and enlightenment? It is necessary to restore the sacrificial specifications in accordance with the original system and hold the festival in a timely manner. On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the yuan was changed, and the prisoners in custody of the three departments were pardoned to varying degrees.

古文：文武赐位二等。
现代文：文武官员赐位三等。
English: Civil and military officials were awarded the second-class official rank.

古文：丙戌，以镇军将军萧坦之为侍中、中领军。
现代文：丙戌日，任命镇军将军萧坦之为侍中、中领军。
English: On the same day, Xiao Tan, the general of the town army, was appointed as the leader of the army.

古文：己未，立武陵昭王子子坦为衡阳王。
现代文：初八，立武陵昭王儿子萧子坦为衡阳王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xiao Zitan, the son of King Wuling Zhao, was appointed King of Hengyang.

古文：丙寅，以西中郎长史刘暄为郢州刺史。
现代文：十五日，任命西中郎长史刘暄为郢州刺史。
English: On the fifteenth day, appointed the West Vice Chancellor Liu Wei as the Vice Chancellor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，大司马会稽太守王敬则举兵反。
现代文：十六日，大司马会稽太守王敬则举兵反叛。
English: On the 16th, the grand steward of the Horse Association, Wang Jing, raised an army and rebelled.

古文：五月，壬午，遣辅国将军刘山阳率军东讨。
现代文：五月初二，派遣辅国将军刘山阳率军东讨。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Liu Shanyang, the general of the auxiliary state, was dispatched to lead the army to the east.

古文：乙酉，斩敬则，传首。曲赦浙东、吴、晋陵七郡。
现代文：初五，斩杀王敬则传首示众，权且赦免浙东、吴、晋陵七郡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Jing's beheading was publicized, and seven counties in East Zhejiang, Wuxi, and Jinling were pardoned.

古文：以后军长史萧颖胄为南兖州刺史。
现代文：任命后军长史萧颖胄为南兖州刺史。
English: After the appointment, the military commander Shi Xiao Yingqi became the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：丁酉，以北中郎将司马元和为兖州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命北中郎将司马元和为兖州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Kitanakura appointed Sima Yuanwa as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，以辅国将军王珍国为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：秋七月，任命辅国将军王珍国为青、冀二州刺史。
English: In autumn and July, Wang Zhenguo, the general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the leader of the Qing Dynasty and the ruler of the two states of Hebei.

古文：癸卯，以太子中庶子梁王为雍州刺史，太尉陈显达为江州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，任命太子中庶子梁王为雍州刺史，太尉陈显达为江州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Liang Wang, the prince's illegitimate son, was appointed as Yongzhou's secretary of state, and Chen Xianda, the first lieutenant, was appointed as the secretary of state of Jiangzhou.

古文：己酉，帝崩于正福殿，年四十七。
现代文：三十日，皇帝在正福殿逝世，终年四十七岁。
English: On the 30th, the emperor died in Zhengfu Hall, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：遗诏曰： 徐令可重申八命。中书监本官悉如故，沈文季可左仆射，常侍护军如故，江祏可右仆射，江祀可侍中，刘暄可卫尉。
现代文：遗诏说： 徐令要重申八命，中书监本官皆仍旧，沈文季可任左仆射，常侍、护军仍旧，江纏可任右仆射，江祀可任侍中，刘暄可任卫尉。
English: The will said: Xu Ling would like to reiterate the eight lives, all the Chinese censors would still be the same, Shen Wenzhi could be the left attendant, the regular attendant and the escort would still be the same, Jiang Ting could be the right attendant, Jiang Shi could be the attendant, and Liu Wei could be the guard.

古文：军政大事委陈太尉。
现代文：军政大事交给陈太尉主持。
English: The military and political affairs were handed over to Lieutenant Chen to preside over.

古文：内外众事，无大小委徐孝嗣、遥光、坦之、江祏，其大事与沈文季、江祀、刘暄参怀。
现代文：内外事务不论大小都交给徐孝嗣、萧遥光、萧坦之、江纏处理，重大事情要和沈文季、江祀、刘暄商议决定。
English: Xu Xiaozhi, Xiao Yaoguang, Xiao Tan Zhi, and Jiang Wanli will be in charge of domestic and foreign affairs, no matter how big or small. Major matters should be discussed and decided with Shen Wenzhi, Jiang Zhi, and Liu Bei.

古文：心膂之任可委刘悛、萧惠休、崔惠景。 
现代文：特别重大而机要的任务，可交给刘悛、萧惠休、崔惠景去完成。 
English: Particularly important and important tasks can be entrusted to Liu Wei, Xiao Huixiu and Cui Huijing to complete.

古文：葬兴安陵。
现代文：葬在兴安陵。
English: He was buried in the Xing'an Mausoleum.

古文：帝明审有吏才，持法无所借。制御亲幸，臣下肃清。
现代文：皇帝为人清醒精明，有办事才能，坚持法律无所谘借，控驭亲戚幸臣，臣下不敢胡作非为。
English: The emperor is a sober and shrewd person, has the ability to do things, adheres to the law without any consultation, controls relatives and courtiers, and his subjects dare not do anything wrong.

古文：驱使寒人不得用四幅伞，大存俭约。
现代文：驱使寒人不得用四幅伞，非常注重俭约。
English: Four umbrellas are not allowed to be used to drive the cold people, and great attention is paid to frugality.

古文：罢世祖所起新林苑，以地还百姓；废文帝所起太子东田，斥卖之；永明中舆辇舟乘，悉剔取金银还主衣库。
现代文：拆除世祖所建的新林苑，把土地还给老百姓。废除文帝所起的太子东田，拆除变卖掉。永明年间下令舟车舆辇上的所有金银饰物全都剔除下来，收还主衣库。
English: He dismantled the New Forest Garden built by his ancestors and returned the land to the common people. He abolished Prince Higashida, who was appointed by Emperor Wen, and dismantled and sold it. In the middle of the year, he ordered all the gold and silver ornaments on the chariot to be removed and the main wardrobe to be returned.

古文：太官进御食，有裹蒸，帝曰： 我食此不尽，可四片破之，余充晚食。 
现代文：太官送饭来，有大馅饼，皇帝说： 我吃不完，可以一开四半，剩下的晚上吃。 
English: The emperor said, "I can't eat all of it. I can eat half of it and the rest in the evening."

古文：而世祖掖庭中宫殿服御，一无所改。
现代文：但对世祖嫔妃居处中的宫殿服饰及用具，一点也没改变。
English: However, the palace clothing and utensils in the residence of the Empress Dowager Cixi have not changed at all.

古文：性猜忌多虑，故亟行诛戮。
现代文：皇帝生性猜忌多虑，所以大行诛戮。
English: The emperor was naturally suspicious and hesitant, so he went on a killing spree.

古文：潜信道术，用计数，出行幸，先占利害，南出则唱云西行，东游则唱云北幸。
现代文：暗中相信道术，用以计数，出门时，要先占卜利害，往南去则说是往西去，往东去则说往北去。
English: They secretly believe in Taoism and use it to count. When they go out, they must first divinize the stakes. If they go south, they say they are going west, and if they go east, they say they are going north.

古文：简于出入，竟不南郊。
现代文：很少出入，竟从来不到南郊祭祖。
English: He rarely went out and actually never came to the southern suburbs to worship the ancestors.

古文：上初有疾，无辍听览，秘而不传。
现代文：南齐书生病初期，还不放下政务，对外保密。
English: At the beginning of Nan Qishu's illness, he did not give up government affairs and kept it secret from the outside.

古文：及寝疾甚久，敕台省府署文簿求白鱼以为治，外始知之。
现代文：到了病倒很长时间，才命令有关部门行文寻求白鱼治病，外边才知道。
English: After he had been ill for a long time, he ordered the relevant departments to write a letter to seek a cure for the whitefish, and only then did the outside world know.

古文：身衣绛衣，服饰皆赤，以为厌胜。
现代文：喜欢穿深红色衣服，服饰都是赤色，用来诅咒制胜。
English: He likes to wear crimson clothes, and all the costumes are red, which is used to curse victory.

古文：巫觋云： 后湖水头经过宫内，致帝有疾。 
现代文：巫觋说： 后湖水头经过宫内，造成皇帝生病。 
English: Wushan said: After the lake water passed through the palace, causing the emperor to fall ill.

古文：帝乃自至太官行水沟。左右启： 太官若无此水则不立。 
现代文：皇帝便自己跑到太官处要求开水沟，身边的人对他说： 太官如果没有这水就要关门了。 
English: The emperor himself ran to the eunuch's office to ask for a ditch. The people around him said to him: "If the eunuch does not have this water, he will close the door."

古文：帝决意塞之，欲南引淮流。
现代文：但皇帝仍决意要填塞后湖，打算南引淮水入京。
English: However, the emperor was still determined to fill up Lake Hou and planned to divert water from the Huai River to the south to enter Beijing.

古文：会崩，事寝。
现代文：只是由于去世了，这事才作罢。
English: It was only because of his death that the matter was dropped.

古文：史臣曰：高宗以支庶纂历，据犹子而为论，一朝到此，诚非素心，遗寄所当，谅不获免。
现代文：本史作者认为：高宗为皇家的庶支当上了皇帝，从他作为犹子说来，弄到后来的局面，也不是他的本意，而他的继承者，恐怕也难免厄运。
English: The author of this history believes that: Gaozong became the emperor as an offshoot of the royal family, and from his point of view as a legitimate son, it was not his intention to bring about the subsequent situation, and his successor, I am afraid, will also be doomed.

古文：夫戕夷之事，怀抱多端，或出自雄忍，或生乎畏慑。
现代文：然而他大行诛戮，动机是多方面的，有的是出于性格的残忍，有的是由于畏慑。
English: However, he went on a killing spree, motivated by many factors, some due to the cruelty of his character, some due to deterrence.

古文：令同财之亲，在我而先弃；进引之爱，量物其必违。
现代文：导致同一统治集团的亲族被他抛弃，亲手提拔的心腹，也不能信任使用为自己效力。
English: Relatives of the same ruling group, who were abandoned by him and promoted by his own hands, cannot be trusted to work for him.

古文：疑怯既深，猜似外入，流涕行诛，非云义举，事苟求安，能无内愧？
现代文：既深怀疑怯，再加上猜忌，虽然他施行诛杀时往往流泪不忍，但也不能说他的行为合乎仁义，但要他苟且求安，恐怕他又心有不甘。
English: Both deep suspicion and fear, coupled with suspicion, although he often tears up when he kills, but it can not be said that his behavior is humane, but he should seek peace, I am afraid he is not willing.

古文：既而自树本根，枝胤孤弱，贻厥不昌，终覆宗社。
现代文：既而大臣们自己培养势力，使得皇室后代孤立虚弱，造成皇权不能巩固，终于覆灭社稷。
English: Even though the ministers cultivated their own power, the descendants of the imperial family became isolated and weak, and the imperial power could not be consolidated, and the social order was finally destroyed.

古文：若令压纽之徵，必委天命，盘庚之祀，亦继阳甲，杖运推公，夫何讥尔！
现代文：如果他能信从天命，让皇位给具有这种征兆的人，像盘庚继承其兄阳甲帝位那样，推诚布公处理天下大事，大约便不会招致讥笑了吧！
English: If he could believe in the providence of heaven and let the throne go to someone with such a sign, like Pan Geng inheriting his brother Yang Jia's throne, and deal with the world's major events in a sincere and open manner, it would probably not cause ridicule!

古文：赞曰：高宗傍起，宗国之庆。
现代文：赞语：高宗虽说是出自旁支，他能接管政权也是很值得庆幸。
English: Praise: Although Gaozong is from a side branch, it is very fortunate that he can take over the power.

古文：慕名俭德，垂文法令。
现代文：他向往着俭约德行，也制定过不少法令。
English: He aspired to be frugal and virtuous, and also enacted many laws.

古文：兢兢小心，察察吏政。
现代文：执政期间小心谨慎，处理事务透彻严明。
English: During his time in office, he was careful and thorough in handling affairs.

古文：沔阳失土，南风不竞。
现代文：可惜自从沔阳失陷，他的美政愿望终于无成。
English: Unfortunately, since the fall of Shenyang, his dream of becoming a U.S. politician has finally come to nothing.

