古文：维王三祀，王在酆，谋言告闻。
现代文：武王三年，王在丰邑。有人将商谋伐周相告，武王见周公旦说： 啊呀!
English: In the third year of King Wu's reign, the king was in Fengyi. Someone told Zhou that they were going to make a deal. When King Wu saw Zhou, he said, "Wow!

古文：望着可周公旦曰： 呜呼，商其咸辜，维日望谋建功，言多信，今如其何？ 
现代文：商纣已经成为罪孽，他们天天盼望伐周建功。商纣之谋多是可靠的，现今当怎么办? 周公说： 时机到了! 
English: Negotiating has become a sin, and they look forward to Zhou's success every day. Zhou's strategy is more reliable, what should we do now? Zhou Gong said: The time has come!

古文：周公曰： 时至矣，乃兴师循故。初用三同：一戚取同，二任用能，三矢无声。
现代文：就起兵依原计划进行战备。开始采用三同：一，亲近人步调一致；二，任用能人为官；三，发誓保密不声张。
English: According to the original plan, preparations were made for the start of the war, and the following three principles were adopted: First, get close to people at the same pace; Second, appoint capable people as officials; Third, swear to keep secrets.

古文：三让：一近市，二贱粥，三施资。
现代文：三让是：一，使市场靠近民居；二，降低物价；三，给商贾施舍资本。
English: The three concessions are: one, to make the market closer to people's homes; two, to lower prices; three, to give merchants more capital.

古文：三虞：一边不侵内，二道不驱牧，三郊不留人。 
现代文：三虞是：一，边民不迁入内地；二，道路上不驱赶牛羊；三，城邑以外不住人。
English: The three risks are: First, the border people will not move inland; Second, the cattle and sheep will not be driven on the road; Third, people will not live outside the cities.

古文：王曰： 呜呼，允从三，三无咈，基征可因。
现代文：武王说： 啊呀!
English: King Wu said: Ah!

古文：与周同爱，爱微无疾，疾取不取，疾至致备。
现代文：帮助我周人，共同爱我周人。即使不爱也要不恶我周人。这样，商纣虽恨我，想取我，则不能取。商欲伐周使我有所防备。
English: Help me Zhou Ren, love me Zhou Ren together. Even if you don't love me, don't hate me Zhou Ren. In this way, although the merchants hate me and want to take me, they can't. The merchants want to cut Zhou Ren, so let me be prepared.

古文：又祷不德，不德不成，害不在小，终维实大，悔后乃无。
现代文：不防范而临时祈祷，神灵不会佑助。神灵不助则大事不成。祸事不在乎开始很小，最终实在要变大，后悔就无及了。
English: If you don't take precautions and pray in time, the gods won't help you. If the gods don't help you, great things won't happen. No matter how small the calamity is at the beginning, it will eventually get bigger, and there will be no regrets.

古文：帝命不謟，应时作谋，不敏殆哉。 
现代文：天命不要怀疑，要顺应时机先做谋画。不尽快行动，就危险了。 
English: Don't doubt God's will, but plan ahead of time. If you don't act soon, you'll be in danger.

古文：周公曰： 言斯允格，谁从己出，出而不允，乃灾；往而不往，乃弱。
现代文：周公说： 这些话允当至极，只有由你们自己说出才好。如果说得不允当，就会有灾祸；说得好而不实行，就削弱了自己。
English: Zhou Gong said: These words are extremely appropriate, and it is best to say them by yourself. If you say them inappropriately, there will be disaster; if you say them well and do not practice them, you will weaken yourself.

古文：士卒咸若，周一心。 
现代文：要教士兵们与我们周人一条心！ 
English: We must teach the soldiers to have the same heart as us Zhou people!

