古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝，姓石氏，讳敬瑭，太原人也。
现代文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝，姓石，讳名敬瑭，太原人。
English: Gao Zu Sheng's article, Emperor Wu Ming De Xiao, surnamed Shi, alias Jing Yi, Taiyuan people.

古文：本卫大夫碏、汉丞相奋之后，汉衰，关辅乱，子孙流泛西裔，故有居甘州者焉。
现代文：本是春秋时卫国大夫石石昔、西汉丞相石奋的后裔，汉朝衰亡，关中京城动乱，其子孙后代流浪漂泊西部边远地区，所以有定居在甘州的。
English: Originally, they were the descendants of Dr. Shi Shiqian, a doctor of the imperial guard in the Spring and Autumn Period, and Shi Fen, the Western Han chancellor. When the Han Dynasty fell, there was turmoil in the capital city of Guanzhong, and their children and grandchildren wandered in the remote western regions, so they settled in Ganzhou.

古文：四代祖璟，以唐元和中与沙陀军都督硃耶氏自灵武入附，宪宗嘉之，隶为河东阴山府裨校，以边功累官至朔州刺史。
现代文：高祖的第四代祖父石瞡，在唐宪宗元和年间，和沙陀军都督朱耶氏从灵武入关归附唐朝，唐宪宗李纯嘉奖他，把他派到河东阴山府任副校，因守边有功历官至朔州刺史。
English: Gao Zu's fourth-generation grandfather Shijie, during the reign of Emperor Zong Yuan of the Tang Dynasty, and the governor of the Shatou Army, Zhu Ye, from Lingwu passed into the Tang Dynasty. Emperor Zong Zong of the Tang Dynasty Li Chun commended him and sent him to the Yinshan Prefecture of Hedong Province to serve as a deputy schoolmaster. Because of his military service, he was appointed as a meritorious officer to record the history of Shuozhou.

古文：天福二年，追尊为孝安皇帝，庙号靖祖，陵曰义陵。祖妣秦氏，追谥为孝安元皇后。
现代文：后晋天福二年，追封为孝安皇帝，庙号靖祖，陵墓称作义陵；高祖的第四代祖母秦氏，追封谥号为孝安元皇后。
English: Two years after the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Tianfu was enthroned as Emperor Xiao'an. His temple name was Jing Zu, and his mausoleum was called Yiling. Gao Zu's fourth-generation grandmother, Qin, was enthroned as Empress Xiao'an Yuan.

古文：三代祖郴，早薨，赠左散骑常侍，追尊为孝简皇帝，庙号肃祖，陵曰惠陵。祖妣安氏，追谥孝简恭皇后。
现代文：第三代祖父石郴，早逝，追封左散骑常侍，尊奉为孝简皇帝，庙号为肃祖，陵墓称作惠陵；三代祖母安氏，追封谥号为孝简恭皇后。
English: The third-generation grandfather Shi Yan, who died at an early age, was posthumously awarded the title of Zuo Sanzhijishi, revered as Emperor Xiao Jian, his temple name was Su Zu, and his mausoleum was called Huiling; the third-generation grandmother An Shi, posthumously awarded the title of Empress Xiao Jian Gong.

古文：皇祖讳翌，任振武防御使，赠尚书右仆射，追尊孝平皇帝，庙号睿祖，陵曰康陵。祖妣米氏，追谥孝平献皇后。
现代文：祖父讳名翌，曾任振武军防御史，追封尚书右仆射，尊奉为孝平皇帝，庙号睿祖，墓寝称作康陵；祖母米氏，追封谥号为孝平献皇后。
English: According to the name of his grandfather, he was once the defense history of the Zhenwu Army, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu Yujubei (尚書右仆射) and honored as Emperor Xiaoping. His temple name was Ruizhu (睿祖) and his tomb was called Kangling (康陵). His grandmother, Mi, was posthumously awarded the posthumous name of Xiaoping Xianqian (孝平献皇后).

古文：皇考讳绍雍，番字臬捩鸡，善骑射，有经远大略，事后唐武皇及庄宗，累立战功，与周德威相亚，历平、洺二州刺史，薨于任，赠太傅，追尊为孝元皇帝，庙号宪祖，陵曰昌陵。皇妣何氏，追谥孝元懿皇后。
现代文：父亲讳名绍雍，按蕃族读音写作臬捩鸡，善于骑马射箭，胸怀长远大志，服侍后唐武皇和庄宗二代，多次创立战功，仅次于周德威，历任平、氵名两州刺史，死在任上，追封为太傅，尊奉为孝元皇帝，庙号宪祖，墓寝称作昌陵；高祖母亲何氏，追封谥号为孝元懿皇后。
English: His father was named Shao Yong, according to the pronunciation of the Yi people, he was good at riding a horse and archery, with a long-term ambition, he served the Tang Emperor Wu and the second generation of Zhuangzong, he repeatedly created military exploits, second only to Zhou Dewei, he was appointed to Ping and Yan in the history of the two states, he died in office, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu, he was honored as Emperor Xiaoyuan, the temple was named Genshu, and the tomb was called Changling; Gao's mother, He, was posthumously awarded the title of Empress Xiaoyuan.

古文：帝即孝元之第二子也，以唐景福元年二月二十八日生于太原汾阳里，时有白气充庭，人甚异焉。
现代文：高祖是孝元皇帝的第二个儿子，唐昭宗景福元年二月二十八日出生在太原汾阳里，当时有白气充溢厅堂，人们对此都很惊异。
English: Gao Zu is the second son of Emperor Xiaoyuan. Tang Zhaozong Jingfu was born on February 28th in the first year of the year in Taiyuan Shiyang. At that time, there was a hall full of white gas. People were surprised by this.

古文：及长，性沈淡，寡言笑，读兵法，重李牧、周亚夫行事。
现代文：等到长大成人，性情沉稳恬淡，很少言语笑谈，研读兵法，看重李牧、周亚夫的品行业绩。
English: When they grow up to be adults, their temperament will be calm, stable and light, they will rarely talk and laugh, study the art of war, and attach importance to the performance of Li Mu and Zhou Yafu.

古文：唐明宗为代州刺史，每深心器之，因妻以爱女。
现代文：后唐明宗做代州刺史时，常从内心器重他，因此把爱女嫁给了他。
English: Later, when Emperor Mingzong of the Tang Dynasty was making history in Daizhou, he often respected him from the bottom of his heart, so he married his beloved daughter to him.

古文：唐庄宗闻其善射，擢居左右，明宗请隶大军，从之。
现代文：后唐庄宗听说他善于骑射，把他提拔到自己身边，明宗请求将他调往军中，庄宗答应了。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Zhuangzong heard that he was good at horseback archery and promoted him to his side. Mingzong requested that he be transferred to the army, and Zhuangzong agreed.

古文：后明宗从庄宗征行，命帝领亲骑，号 三讨军 ，倚以心腹。
现代文：后来，明宗跟随庄宗出征远行，命令高祖统率亲卫骑兵，号称 三讨军 ，把他当作心腹。
English: Later, Mingzong followed Zhuangzong on an expedition, and ordered Gao Zuotong to lead a bodyguard cavalry, known as the Three Crusaders, and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：天祐十二年，庄宗并有河北之地，开府于鄴，梁遣上将刘鄩以兵五万营于莘。
现代文：唐天祐十二年，后唐庄宗兼并了黄河以北地区；在邺州设置了府衙，后梁派遣上将刘寻阝率领五万兵力在莘地扎营。
English: In the twelfth year of Tang Tianyu, the late Tang Zhuangzong annexed the area north of the Yellow River; he set up a capital in Zhangzhou, and later Liang sent Admiral Liu Xuanqian to lead 50,000 troops to camp in Zhangjiakou.

古文：十三年二月，鄩引兵突至清平，薄于城下。庄宗至自甘陵，兵未阵，多为鄩所掩。
现代文：十三年二月，刘寻阝率兵突击清平，迫近城下，庄宗从甘陵赶来，军队还没摆开阵势，大多就被刘寻阝军掩杀。
English: In February of the 13th year, Liu Huan and his soldiers stormed Qingping, approaching the city, Zhuangzong arrived from Ganling, the army had not yet set up a position, and most of them were covered up by Liu Huan's army.

古文：帝领十余骑，横槊深入，东西驰突，无敢当者，卒全部伍而还。庄宗壮之，拊其背曰： 将门出将，言不谬尔。 
现代文：高祖带领十几个骑兵，横戈深入敌阵，东西冲驰突击，无人敢挡，终于保全部下回归，庄宗称赞他勇猛威武，抚摩着他的背脊说： 大将门下出强将，这话不错啊。 
English: Gaozu led more than a dozen cavalrymen, rode deep into the enemy's lines, dashed east and west to attack, no one dared to stop, and finally returned safely. Zhuangzong praised him for his bravery and power, stroked his back and said: "A strong general comes out of the general's gate. That's a good saying."

古文：因颁以器帛，复亲为啖酥，当时以为异恩，由是知名。
现代文：于是颁赐给他财物，又亲自送给他酥食。当时，人们认为这是异常的恩典，因而闻名于时。
English: So they gave him money, and he himself gave them cakes, which at the time was considered an extraordinary act of generosity, and became famous.

古文：明年，鄩兵阵于莘之西北，明宗从庄宗酣战。
现代文：第二年，刘寻阝部队在莘城的西北列阵，明宗跟随庄宗激战。
English: In the second year, Liu Huanqian's troops lined up in the northwest of Handan City, and Mingzong followed Zhuangzong in a fierce battle.

古文：久之，尘埃四合，帝与明宗俱陷阵内，帝挺身跃剑，反复转斗，行数十里，逐鄩于故元城之东。
现代文：久后，灰尘四起，高祖与明宗都陷在阵中，高祖挺身挥剑，来回辗转苦斗，奔跑数十里，一直把刘寻阝追赶到故元城的东边。
English: After a long time, the dust was everywhere, Gaozu and Mingzong were caught in the middle, Gaozu stood up, waved his sword, fought back and forth, ran dozens of miles, and chased Liu Xingyao to the east of the former Yuancheng.

古文：是日，鄩军杀伤过半。
现代文：这一天，刘寻阝的军队被杀伤过半。
English: On this day, more than half of Liu Xingyao's army was killed or wounded.

古文：十五年，唐军拔杨刘镇，梁将贺瑰设伏于无石山，明宗为瑰所迫，帝为后殿，破梁军五百余骑，按辔而还。
现代文：天祐十五年，后唐军队攻占了杨刘镇，后梁将领贺瑰埋伏在天石山，明宗被贺瑰追杀，高祖为明宗殿后，杀败五百多梁军骑兵，才勒紧马缰，慢步而回。
English: In the fifteenth year of Tianyu, the Later Tang army captured Yang Liu Town, the Later Liang general led by He Gui ambushed in Tianshi Mountain, the Ming Dynasty was chased and killed by He Gui, and Gao Zu, after being the son of the Ming Dynasty, defeated more than five hundred Liang cavalry soldiers, before he tightened his horse's bridle and slowly walked back.

古文：十二月，庄宗与梁军大战于胡柳陂，众号十万。总管周德威将左军，杂以燕人，前锋不利，德威死之。
现代文：十二月，庄宗与后梁军队在胡柳陂大战，军队号称十万，总管周德威率领的左军，杂有燕人，因前锋失利，周德威阵亡。
English: In December, Zhuang Zong and Hou Liang's army fought in the Battle of Hu Liuzhang. The army was reputed to be 100,000 strong. The left-wing army led by the commander-in-chief Zhou Dewi, including Yanren, was defeated and Zhou Dewi was killed.

古文：庄宗率步众五千，固守高陵以避敌之锐。
现代文：庄宗率领五千步兵，坚守在高丘上，以避免敌军精锐的攻击。
English: Zhuang Zong led five thousand infantrymen and stood firm on the hill to avoid the attack of the enemy elite.

古文：明宗独完右广，伏于土山之下，顾谓帝曰： 梁人首获其利，旌旗甚整，何计可以挫之？ 
现代文：明宗只保全了右军，隐伏在土山下面，回头对高祖说： 梁军首先获利，旗帜摆布严整，用什么计策可以挫败他们？ 
English: Mingzong only preserved the right army, hiding under the earthen mound, and turned back to Gao Zu and said: Liang's army is the first to make a profit, the flags are neatly arranged, what strategy can be used to defeat them?

古文：帝曰： 腊后寒如此，出手堕指，彼多步众，易进难退，莫若啜Я饮水，徐而困之。
现代文：高祖说 ：腊月到后这样寒冷，伸出手就冻掉手指，他们步兵众多，易进难退，不如吃干粮喝清水，慢慢把他们拖疲困。
English: Gao Zu said: It is so cold after the arrival of the waxing gibbous moon. If you stretch out your hand, your fingers will freeze. They have many foot soldiers, and it is difficult to advance and retreat. It is better to eat dry food and drink clear water, and slowly exhaust them.

古文：且超乘徒行，其势不等，一击而破，期在必胜。 明宗曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：再说他们步兵超过骑兵，不能整齐合一，一举就可击破，胜必在望。 明宗说： 这也是我的意思。 
English: Moreover, their infantry outnumbered their cavalry, and they could not be brought together in an orderly manner. They could be defeated in one fell swoop, and victory was surely in sight. Mingzong said, "This is what I meant."

古文：会日暮，梁军列于平野，五六万人为一方阵，麾游骑以迫唐军，帝曰： 敌将遁矣！ 
现代文：这时，太阳落山，梁军在平野列阵。五六万人组成一个方阵，指挥机动骑兵逼近唐军，高祖说 ：敌人将要逃跑了。 
English: At this time, the sun was setting, and Liang's army was lined up on the plain. Fifty or sixty thousand people formed a square array, and the commander of the mobile cavalry approached the Tang army. Gao Zu said, "The enemy is about to flee."

古文：乃请明宗令士整胄，宽而罗之，命左射军三百人鸣矢驰转，渐束其势，以数千骑合之。
现代文：于是请求明宗让士兵带好头盔拉开阵势包围敌军。命令左射军三百人奔跑发箭射击，逐渐收束包围圈，再用几千骑兵配合行动。
English: He then asked Emperor Mingzong to have his soldiers take off their helmets and encircle the enemy. He ordered 300 soldiers of the Left-Arrow Army to run and shoot arrows, gradually closing the encirclement, and then using several thousand cavalry to coordinate the action.

古文：迨夜，旌旗皆靡，而一角先溃，三面踵之，其牙竿相击，若火爆之声，横尸积甲，不可胜计。
现代文：到了夜晚，敌军旗帜倒下，一个角落首先溃败，其他三面也随之溃败，兵仗撞击，像火炮的声音连绵不断，尸横遍野，甲胄满地，不可胜数。
English: In the evening, the enemy's flag fell, one corner was first defeated, and the other three sides were also defeated, the battle collided, the sound of artillery was continuous, the corpses were all over the field, the armor was all over the ground, countless.

古文：由是梁人势削，庄宗进营德胜渡。
现代文：由此后梁势力削弱，庄宗进兵在德胜渡扎营。
English: As a result, Liang's power weakened, and Zhuangzong's soldiers encamped at Deshengduo.

古文：十八年十月，又从明宗战梁人于德胜渡，败其将戴思远，杀二万余人。
现代文：天祐十八年十月，高祖又跟随明宗在德胜渡与梁军作战，打败梁军将领戴思远，杀死两万多人。
English: In October of the 18th year of Tenyu, Gaozu followed Mingzong and fought against Liang's army in Deshengdu, defeating Liang's general Dai Siyuan and killing more than 20,000 people.

古文：十九年，战胡卢套，唐军稍却，帝睹其敌锐，拔剑辟道，肩护明宗而退，敌人望之，无敢袭者。
现代文：十九年在胡卢套作战，后唐军队逐渐败退，高祖迎着敌军精锐，拔出长剑，杀开血道，用身体保护明宗撤退，敌人干望着他，无人敢上前阻击。
English: Nineteen years of fighting in Hulutai, the post-Tang army was gradually defeated and retreated. Gaozu faced the elite of the enemy army, pulled out a long sword, opened the bloodstream, and used his body to protect Mingzong's retreat. The enemy was watching him, and no one dared to go forward to block the attack.

古文：二十年十月，从明宗观梁人之杨村寨，部曲皆不擐甲，俄而敌出不意，以兵掩明宗，刃将及背，帝挟战戟而进，一击而凶酋落马者数辈，明宗遂解其难。
现代文：天祐二十年十月，跟随明宗观察梁军阵地杨村寨，部下都没有披甲，突然敌军出其不意，用武器掩袭明宗，兵刃将要刺到明宗背部，高祖手持战戟冲上前，用力一击，几个凶悍的敌人从马上滚落下来，明宗才免于一死。
English: In October of the 20th year of heaven, he followed Mingzong to observe Yangcunzhai, the position of Liang's army. His subordinates were not wearing armor. Suddenly, the enemy army took him by surprise and covered Mingzong with weapons. The blade was about to pierce Mingzong's back. Gaozu rushed forward with a war club in his hand. With a strong blow, several fierce enemies rolled down from the horse, and Mingzong was spared from death.

古文：是岁，庄宗即位于鄴，改元同光，遣明宗越河，悬军深入以取郓。
现代文：这一年，庄宗在邺城继承皇位，改年号叫同光。派明宗越过黄河，孤军深入以袭取郓州。
English: That year, Zhuangzong succeeded to the imperial throne in Handan, and changed his name to Tongguang. He sent Mingzong across the Yellow River, and his lone army penetrated deep into Handan to attack Handan.

古文：郓人始不之觉，帝以五十骑从明宗涉济，突东门而入。郓兵来拒，帝中刃，翼明宗，罗兵通衢，嶷然不动。会后骑继至，遂拔中城以据之。
现代文：郓人开始没有发觉他们，高祖率领五十个骑兵跟随明宗渡过济水，突袭东门进到了城内，郓兵前来阻击，高祖被刀刺中，仍像羽翼那样保护明宗，把士兵部署在大道上，坚守不移，等到后续骑兵接连不断地到来，才攻取了郓城的中心地带，而占据了郓城。
English: The people of Handan did not notice them at first. Gaozu led fifty horsemen to follow Mingzong across Jishui, stormed the east gate and entered the city. The soldiers of Handan came to resist. Gaozu was stabbed with a knife, but still protected Mingzong like a wing. He deployed the soldiers on the avenue and stood firm. It was not until the subsequent cavalry came one after another that they captured the center of Handan and occupied Handan.

古文：既而平汴水，灭梁室，致庄宗一统，集明宗大勋，帝与唐末帝功居最，庄宗朝官未显者，以帝不好矜伐故也，唯明宗心知之。
现代文：接着平定汴水，灭掉了后梁宗室，成就了庄宗一统天下的局面，促成明宗建立不朽的功绩，其中高祖与后唐末帝功劳最大，庄宗时高祖官位不显赫是因为高祖不喜欢自我夸赞的原因，这只有明宗心里明白。
English: Next, he pacified Surabaya, eliminated Houliang's family, achieved the situation of Zhuangzong's one-world rule, and contributed to the establishment of Mingzong's immortal achievements. Among them, Gao Zu and the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty made the greatest contribution. When Zhuangzong, Gao Zu's official rank was not prominent because Gao Zu did not like self-praise. This is only clear to Mingzong.

古文：同光四年二月，赵在礼据鄴为乱，朝廷遣元行钦招之不下，群议纷然，以为非明宗不可，庄宗乃以明宗为统帅。
现代文：同光四年二月，赵在礼凭借邺州作乱，朝廷派遣元行钦去招降而未成功，大家议论纷纷，认为非明宗不能招降赵在礼，庄宗于是任明宗为统帅。
English: In February of the same year, Zhao Zaili caused a disturbance in Bozhou with the help of Zhuangzong. The imperial court sent Yuan Xingqin to invite Zhao Zaili to abdicate, but he was unsuccessful. Everyone argued that Zhao Zaili could not be invited to abdicate without Mingzong, so Zhuangzong appointed Mingzong as commander-in-chief.

古文：时帝从行，至魏，诸军有变，叩马请明宗帝河北。
现代文：当时，高祖跟随前去，到了魏地，各军发生变故，拉住马缰请求明宗在河北称帝。
English: At that time, Gao Zu followed, and when he arrived in Wei, there was a change in the armies, and he asked Mingsong to claim the throne in Hebei.

古文：明宗受霍彦威劝，将自诉于天子，遂佯诺。诸军亦恐事不果，而散者甚众，明宗所全者，唯常山一军而已。
现代文：明宗接受了霍彦威的劝谏，准备亲自向庄宗陈述，于是假装答应下来，各军也担心事情不成而散逃的非常多，明宗所保全完整的，只有常山一路军队罢了。
English: Mingzong accepted the advice of Huo Yanwei and prepared to personally make a statement to Zhuangzong, so he pretended to agree. The armies were also worried that things would not work out and fled in large numbers. Only the army of Changshan Road was preserved intact by Mingzong.

古文：西次魏县，帝密言于明宗曰： 犹豫者兵家大忌，必若求诉，宜决其行。
现代文：向西进发驻扎在魏县，高祖私下秘密对明宗说 ：迟疑不决是用兵的一大忌讳，如果一定要去，应果敢地行动。
English: Gaozu marched westward and was stationed in Wei County. He secretly said to Mingzong: Hesitating is a big taboo for soldiers. If you must go, you should act decisively.

古文：某愿率三百骑先趋汴水，以探虎口，如遂其志，请大军速进。
现代文：我愿率领三百骑兵先赴汴水，去虎口探听，如能实现愿望，请你率大军迅速前进。
English: I am willing to lead three hundred cavalrymen to Surabaya first and go to the tiger's mouth to listen. If you can realize your wish, please lead the army to advance quickly.

古文：夷门者，天下之要害也，据之可以自雪。
现代文：夷门这地方，是全国的要害位置，凭借它可以洗刷自己的耻辱。
English: This place, Yimen, is a key location for the whole country, with which it can wash its own shame.

古文：安有上将与三军言变，他日有平手乎！
现代文：哪能让大将和三军变乱，其后谁来平定呢！
English: How can the general and the three armies be allowed to become disorderly, and who will then pacify them?

古文：危在顷刻，不宜恬然。 
现代文：危险将在片刻发生，不能无动于衷。 
English: The danger will occur in a moment, we cannot remain indifferent.

古文：明宗至相州，遂分骁骑三百付之，遣帝由黎阳济河，自汴西门而入，因据其城。
现代文：明宗到了相州，就分给高祖三百名骁勇善战的骑兵，派遣高祖在黎阳渡过黄河，从汴城西门进城，接着占据了它。
English: When Mingzong arrived in Xiangzhou, he assigned Gaozu three hundred brave and skillful cavalrymen and sent Gaozu to cross the Yellow River in Liyang, enter the city from the west gate of Licheng, and then occupy it.

古文：及明宗入汴，庄宗亲统师亦至城之西北五里，登高叹曰： 吾不济矣！ 
现代文：等到明宗进入汴城，庄宗也亲自率领军队到达离汴城五里路的西北部，庄宗登上高城叹息说： 我不能成就大事了！ 
English: When Mingzong entered Lucheng, Zhuangzong also personally led the army to the northwest of the five-mile road from Lucheng. Zhuangzong ascended the high city and sighed and said: I can't achieve great things!

古文：由此庄宗从兵大溃，来归明宗。
现代文：因此跟随庄宗的士兵大量溃散，前来归顺明宗。
English: As a result, a large number of soldiers who had followed Zhuangzong dispersed and came to submit to Mingzong.

古文：明宗寻遣帝令率兵为前锋，趋汜水关。俄而庄宗遇内难而崩。
现代文：明宗马上派遣高祖率领士兵担任前锋，奔赴汜水关，不多久，庄宗遇内乱而亡。
English: Mingzong immediately dispatched Gaozu to lead the soldiers as the vanguard and rushed to Surabaya. Not long after, Zhuangzong was killed in a civil war.

古文：是月，明宗入洛，嘉帝之功，自总管府都校署陕府兵马留后。
现代文：同月，明宗进入了洛阳，嘉奖高祖的功劳，从总管府都校暂任陕州府兵马留后。
English: In the same month, Mingzong entered Luoyang to commend Gao Zu's merits, after being temporarily appointed as the general manager of the capital school of Shaanxi Province.

古文：明宗即位，改元天成，五月，加帝光禄大夫、检校司徒，充陕州保义军节度使，岁未期而军民之政大治焉。
现代文：明宗继承皇位，改年号为天成，五月，加封高祖为光禄大夫、检校司徒，担任陕州保义军节度使，不到一年，那里的军事民政都得到了很好的治理。
English: In May, Gao Zu of Gafeng Province was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and the inspector of schools, and served as the festival envoy of the Shaanxi People's Liberation Army. In less than a year, the military and civil affairs there were well managed.

古文：二年二月，加检校太傅兼六军诸卫副使，进封开国伯，增食邑四百户。
现代文：天成二年二月，加封检校太傅兼六军诸卫副使，进爵位封为开国伯，增食邑四百户。
English: In February of the second year of Tiancheng, he was awarded the title of Jiankui Taifu and Vice-Envoy of the Six Armies of the Wei Dynasty. He was knighted and appointed as the founding count, increasing the number of households in the county by 400.

古文：是月，帝赴阙，以倅六军诸卫事故也。
现代文：同月，高祖进京，是因为兼任了六军诸卫副使的缘故。
English: In the same month, Gaozu entered Beijing, because he also served as the deputy envoy of the Six Army Guards.

古文：八月，加食邑八百户，实封一百户，旌为政之效也。
现代文：八月，又增食邑八百户，实封一百户，以表彰他治理政务的成效。
English: In August, another 800 households in food townships were added, and 100 households were sealed, in recognition of his effectiveness in governing government affairs.

古文：十月，明宗幸汴，以帝为御营使。
现代文：十月，明宗驾临汴州，以高祖担任御营使。
English: In October, the Ming Dynasty arrived in Bozhou, with Gao Zu serving as the imperial envoy.

古文：车驾次京水，飞报汴州节度使硃守殷叛，明宗命帝董亲军倍道星行，信宿及浚城，一战而拔之。
现代文：御驾到京水，有飞骑报告汴州节度使朱守殷叛乱，明宗命高祖率亲军兼程夜行，两天两夜就到了浚城，一次进攻就夺取了浚城。
English: He drove to Jingshui, and there was a report that the Zhangzhou Festival had caused Zhu Shouyin to rebel. Mingzong's leader Gao Zu led his troops on a night march. They arrived in Jiancheng in two days and two nights, and captured Jiancheng in one attack.

古文：寻以帝为宣武军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使兼六军诸卫副使，进封开国公，加食邑五百户，赐耀忠匡定保节功臣。
现代文：接着任命高祖为宣武军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军总指挥使兼六军诸卫副使，加封爵位为开国公，增食邑五百户，赐耀忠匡定保节功臣名号。
English: Next, Gao Zu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army, the commander-in-chief of the Horse and Foot Guards and the deputy envoy of the Six Armies, and was awarded a knighthood as the founding father of the country, increased the number of households by 500, and was given the title of the hero of the festival.

古文：四月，车驾还洛，制加检校太傅、同中书门下平章事、兴唐尹、鄴都留守、天雄军节度使。
现代文：天成三年四月，明宗回到洛阳，又诏令加封高祖为检校太傅、同中书门下平章事、兴唐尹、邺都留守、天雄军节度使。
English: In April of the third year of Tiancheng, Mingzong returned to Luoyang, and also issued an edict to appoint Gaozu Jafeng as the inspector of the school, Ping Zhangji under the school gate, Xing Tangyin, Yu Du to stay behind, and Tianxiong Jun's envoy to the festival.

古文：五月丁未，加驸马都尉。
现代文：五月三日加封驸马都尉。
English: On May 3rd, he was awarded the additional rank of lieutenant.

古文：长兴元年二月，明宗南郊礼毕，加检校太尉，增食邑五百户，寻诏归任。
现代文：长兴元年二月，明宗到南郊圆丘祭天行礼完毕，加封高祖为检校太尉，增食邑五百户，随即令高祖回去就任。
English: In February of the first year of Changxing, after Mingzong had finished performing the rites at the Southern Suburbs Round Hill Festival, Gaozu was given the title of inspecting officer, and 500 households in Changxing were increased, and Gaozu was immediately sent back to take office.

古文：时鄴都繁富为天下之冠，而土俗犷悍，民多争讼，帝令投函府门，一一览之，及逾年，盈积几案，滞于狱者甚众，时论以此减之。
现代文：当时邺都是全国最繁荣富庶的地方，而当地的风俗粗犷剽悍，老百姓多有纠纷诉讼，高祖令他们到官府衙门投诉，逐件阅览，一年后，案宗堆满了几案，收审在狱中的人非常多，当时的舆论因此不满。
English: At that time, Yunnan was the most prosperous and affluent place in the country, but the local customs were rough and tough, and the common people often had disputes and lawsuits. Gao Zu ordered them to go to the government office to file complaints and read them one by one. A year later, the case files were full of several cases, and there were many people in prison for trial, so the public opinion at that time was dissatisfied.

古文：九月，东川董璋叛，朝廷命帝为东川行营都招讨使，兼知东川行府事。
现代文：九月，东川董璋叛乱，朝廷令高祖为东川行营都招讨使，兼理东川行府事务。
English: In September, when Dongchuan's Dongcheng rebelled, the imperial court ordered Gaozu to invite envoys to Dongchuan to handle the affairs of the capital.

古文：十月，至自魏博，董众西征。
现代文：十月，高祖从魏博到任，率军西征。
English: In October, Gaozu arrived from Weibo and led the army to the West.

古文：二年春，以川路险艰，粮运不继，诏班师。
现代文：第二年春天，因蜀道险要艰难，粮食运输不能供上，明宗下令班师回朝。
English: In the spring of the second year, because the Shu Road Insurance was difficult and grain transportation could not be provided, Mingzong ordered the teachers to return to the North.

古文：四月，复兼六军诸卫副使。
现代文：四月，又兼任六军诸卫副使。
English: In April, he also served as the deputy envoy of the Six Armies.

古文：六月，改河阳节度使，仍兼兵柄。
现代文：六月，改任河阳节度使，仍兼握兵权。
English: In June, he was transferred to the post of Heyang Festival envoy, still holding the military power.

古文：是时，秦王从荣奏： 伏见北面频奏报，契丹族移帐近塞，吐浑、突厥已侵边地，戍兵虽多，未有统帅，早宜命大将一人，以安云、朔。 
现代文：当时，秦王从荣上奏： 我见北方频频报告，契丹族移帐边塞，吐浑、突厥已侵犯我边陲，戍守的士兵虽多，但没有统帅，应尽早任命一员大将，以安定云州、朔州。 
English: At that time, Qin King Rongzheng said: I have seen frequent reports from the north that the Khitan people have moved their border posts, and the Tuhun and Turks have invaded our borderlands. Although there are many soldiers, there is no commander. A general should be appointed as soon as possible to stabilize Yunnan and Shuozhou.

古文：明宗曰： 卿等商量。 
现代文：明宗说 ：你们商讨决定。 
English: Myongjong said, "You should discuss and decide."

古文：从荣与诸大臣奏曰： 将校之中，唯石敬瑭、康义诚二人可行。 
现代文：从荣又同各位大臣上奏： 将帅校官里面，只有石敬瑭、康义诚二人可以担负这一重任。 
English: From Rong Rong and the ministers: Among the general superintendents, only Shi Jinglian and Kang Yicheng can shoulder this heavy responsibility.

古文：帝素不欲为禁军之副，即奏曰： 臣愿北行。 
现代文：高祖本来就不愿做禁军副帅，就便上奏 ：我愿北上担任此职。 
English: Gaozu originally did not want to be the vice-commander of the Imperial Army, so he said: I am willing to go north to take this position.

古文：明宗曰： 卿为吾行，事无不济。 
现代文：明宗说 ：你为我出征，没有办不成的事。 
English: Mingzong said, "If you go to war for me, there is nothing you cannot accomplish."

古文：及受诏，不落六军副使，帝复迁延辞避。
现代文：到接受诏令，仍不免去他六军副使职务，高祖拖延托辞回避。
English: Even after receiving the imperial edict, Gaozu was not exempted from his duties as vice-envoy of the Six Armies, and he delayed his resignation to avoid it.

古文：十一月乙酉，明宗复谓侍臣曰： 云州奏，契丹自幽州移帐，言就放牧，终冬不退，其患深矣。 
现代文：十一月二日，明宗又对侍臣说 ：云州报告，契丹从幽州移帐南下，说是就草放牧，冬天完了也不退回，其祸患严重了。 
English: On November 2nd, Emperor Mingzong also said to his courtier: Yunnan reported that the Khitan moved south from Yuzhou, saying that they would graze on grass, and would not return after the winter was over. The disaster was serious.

古文：枢密使范延光奏曰： 已议石敬瑭与康义诚北行，然其定夺，即在宸旨。 
现代文：枢密使范延光上奏说 ：已经商议由石敬瑭与康义诚北征，然而这件事要决定下来，还得等皇上下旨。 
English: The confidential envoy Fan Yanguang made a report, saying that the Northern Expedition by Shi Jingjun and Kang Yicheng had been discussed, but the matter had to be decided and had to wait for the Emperor's order.

古文：帝奏曰： 臣虽不才，争敢避事，但进退惟命。 
现代文：高祖上奏说 ：我虽然不才，但怎敢回避事情，进退唯命是听。 
English: Gao Zu said: Although I am not talented, how dare I evade things, advance and retreat, and obey orders.

古文：明宗曰： 卿为吾行，甚叶众议。 
现代文：明宗说： 您替我前去，很切合大家的商议。 
English: Mingzong said, "You should go in my place, it's very appropriate for everyone's discussion."

古文：由是遂定。
现代文：因此就定下来了。
English: It's been settled ever since.

古文：丁亥，加兼侍中、太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，兼大同、振武、彰国、威塞等军蕃汉马步军总管，改赐竭忠匡运宁国功臣。
现代文：十一月四日，加封兼任侍中、太原尹、北京留守、河东节度使，另兼职大同、振武、彰国、威塞等地军队蕃汉马步军总管，改赐竭忠匡运宁国功臣名号。
English: On November 4, Jafeng concurrently served as an aide-de-camp, Taiyuan Yin, Beijing left-behind, and Hedong Festival envoy, and also concurrently served as the commander-in-chief of the Han horse-marching army of the armies of Datong, Zhenwu, Zhangguo, Wuxi and other places, and was awarded the title of the most loyal and successful Ning national hero.

古文：翌日，宴于中兴殿，帝捧觞上寿，因奏曰： 臣虽微怯，惟边事敢不尽其忠力，但臣远违玉阶，无以时申补报。 
现代文：第二天，在中兴殿宴饮，高祖捧杯为明宗祝寿，趁便上奏说 ：我虽微小怯懦，想到边陲大事，岂能不竭力尽忠，只是我远离京都，长久见不到皇上，不能随时申报。 
English: The next day, at a banquet in the Zhongxing Hall, Gao Zu held a cup to celebrate the birthday of the Ming Dynasty, and took the opportunity to say: Although I am a tiny coward, when I think of important events, I can't help but try my best to be loyal, but I am far from Kyoto, I can't see the emperor for a long time, and I can't declare it at any time.

古文：帝因再拜告辞，明宗泣下沾衿。左右怪其过伤，果与帝因此为诀，不复相见矣。
现代文：高祖再拜告辞，明宗流泪打湿了衣襟，左右近臣奇怪皇上过度悲伤，后来果然从此与高祖永诀，没能再度相见了。
English: Gaozu bade farewell again. Mingzong's collar was wet with tears, and the courtiers on both sides were surprised at the emperor's excessive sadness. Later, he and Gaozu had an eternal rift, and were unable to meet again.

古文：十二月，明宗晏驾，帝闻之，长恸若丧考妣。
现代文：十二月，明宗去世，高祖听到消息，像丧失父母一样悲痛不止。
English: In December, Mingzong passed away. Hearing the news, Gaozu was as grief-stricken as if he had lost his parents.

古文：应顺元年正月，闵帝即位，加中书令，及增食邑。
现代文：应顺元年一月，闵帝继承王位，加封高祖为中书令，又增食邑领地。
English: In January of the first year of the Shun era, Emperor Qian succeeded to the throne, and Gaozu was given the title of Zhongshuling, and the territory of the county was increased.

古文：帝性简俭，未尝以声色滋味辄自燕乐，每公退，必召幕客论民间利害及刑政得失，明而难犯，事多亲决。
现代文：高祖性情俭朴，不曾经常享受声乐美色甘味，每次从官府回家，必召集幕僚宾客讨论民间利害和刑律政治上的得失，明了而难犯过错，事情大多亲自裁决。
English: Gaozu had a frugal nature and did not often enjoy the beauty and sweetness of vocal music. Every time he came home from the government office, he would gather his staff guests to discuss the civil interests and the political gains and losses of criminal law. He was clear and difficult to make mistakes, and most of the cases were adjudicated personally.

古文：有店妇与军士讼，云 曝粟于门，为马所食 。
现代文：曾经有一店铺妇人与一士兵打官司，妇人说： 我在门口曝晒的粟米，被他的马吃掉了。 
English: There was once a case in which a shopkeeper sued a soldier. The woman said: "His horse ate my corn that was exposed at the gate.

古文：而军士恳诉，无以自明。
现代文：然而那士兵则恳切申辩，但没有办法使自己清白。
English: The soldier, however, pleaded his case earnestly, but could not clear his name.

古文：帝谓鞫吏曰： 两讼未分，何以为断？
现代文：高祖对审问的官吏说 ：两人讼词不能分辨，凭什么裁决？
English: Gaozu said to the official who interrogated him, "You can't tell the difference between the two people's pleadings. What's the basis for the ruling?"

古文：可杀马刳肠而视其粟，有则军士诛，无则妇人死。 
现代文：可以杀掉马剖开马肠，看里面有没有粟米，如果有，则诛杀兵士，如果没有，则处死妇人。 
English: You can kill a horse and cut open its intestines to see if there is corn in it. If there is, the soldier is killed, if not, the woman is executed.

古文：遂杀马，马肠无粟，因戮其妇人。
现代文：于是杀马剖肠，马肠里没有粟米，因此杀了那妇人。
English: So he killed the horse and cut open its intestines. There was no corn in the horse's intestines, so he killed the woman.

古文：境内肃然，莫敢以欺事言者。
现代文：治区内人民因此肃然，没有谁敢欺骗诈坑人了。
English: As a result, the people in the administrative region were awestruck, and no one dared to deceive the people of the pit.

古文：三月，移镇常山。所历方镇，以孝治为急，见民间父母在昆弟分索者，必绳而杀之。
现代文：三月，调任镇守常山，经他治理的方镇，都以孝道为先，看到民间有父母在世而兄弟分居的人，必依法处死。
English: In March, he was transferred to the town of Changshan as the town watchman, and all the towns under his administration are guided by the principle of filial piety. According to the law, people who have parents alive but live apart from their brothers and sisters must be executed.

古文：勤于吏事，廷无滞讼。
现代文：勤于政事，官衙没有滞留的诉讼案子。
English: He was diligent in politics, and the government did not delay the litigation case.

古文：常山属邑曰九门，有人鬻地与异居兄，议价不定，乃移于他人。
现代文：常山的属邑九门，有人把土地卖给分居了的兄长，价格谈不好，于是转卖给他人。
English: Some people sold their land to their estranged brother, but the price was hard to negotiate, so they resold it to others.

古文：他人须兄立券，兄固抑之，因诉于令。令以弟兄俱不义，送府。
现代文：那人要他兄长帮助订立契约，兄长坚持压低土地价格，因而诉讼到县令那里，县令认为弟兄都不仁义，送到了府衙。
English: The man asked his brother to help him sign a contract. The brother insisted on lowering the land price, so the lawsuit went to the county magistrate. The county magistrate thought the brothers were being unfair and sent them to the prefectural government.

古文：帝监之曰： 人之不义，由牧长新至，教化所未能及，吾甚愧焉。
现代文：高祖督察此案说 ：人的不仁义，是由于州里长官我才到，教化还没有达到，我很是惭愧啊。
English: Inspector Gao Zu said of the case: "People are so unkind. It is because of the prefect of the prefecture that I have come here. Enlightenment has not yet been achieved. I am very ashamed."

古文：若以至理言之，兄利良田，弟求善价，顺之则是，沮之则非，其兄不义之甚也，宜重笞焉。市田以高价者取之。 
现代文：如从大道理上讲，兄长要良田，弟弟求好价，顺应弟弟是正确的，阻止弟弟是错误的。兄长更不仁义，应该重重地鞭笞他，用高价买田的人应得到那块土地。 
English: For example, according to the principle, the elder brother wants a good field, the younger brother asks for a good price, it is right to obey the younger brother, and it is wrong to stop the younger brother. The elder brother is even more uncharitable, he should be severely whipped, and the person who buys the field at a high price should get the land.

古文：上下服其明。
现代文：官吏百姓都佩服他的明察。
English: Officials and ordinary people alike admire his clear-sightedness.

古文：及岐阳兵乱，推潞王为天子，闵帝急诏帝赴阙，欲以社稷为托。
现代文：到岐阳发生兵变，推举潞王为天子，闵帝急令高祖奔赴京都，打算将国家命运托付与他。
English: A mutiny occurred in Qiyang, and Emperor Wu proclaimed Emperor Gaozong as the Son of Heaven. Emperor Gaozong urgently ordered Emperor Gaozong to go to Kyoto, intending to entrust the fate of the country to him.

古文：闵帝自洛阳出奔于卫，相遇于途，遂与闵帝回入卫州。
现代文：闵帝从洛阳逃往卫州，与高祖在途中相遇，于是一起进入卫州。
English: Emperor Qian fled from Luoyang to Weizhou, and met Gaozu on the way, so they entered Weizhou together.

古文：时闵帝左右将不利于帝，帝觉之，因擒其从骑百余人。
现代文：当时闵帝近臣将对高祖采取不利行动，高祖察觉到了，因而抓获了随从闵帝的一百多骑兵。
English: At that time, Emperor Shun's vassals would take adverse actions against Gaozu. Gaozu noticed this and captured more than a hundred cavalrymen who followed Emperor Shun.

古文：闵帝知事不济，与帝长恸而别，帝遣刺史王宏贽安置闵帝于公舍而去，寻为潞王所害，帝后长以此愧心焉。
现代文：闵帝知道事情不能成功，与高祖长恸而别，高祖派刺史王弘贽安置闵帝在公家的房舍后就离去了，不久，闵帝被潞王杀害，高祖后来为此长期感到内疚。
English: Emperor Xuan knew that the matter could not succeed, and parted ways with Emperor Gaozhu. Emperor Gaozhu sent a messenger to Wang Hongyi to install Emperor Xuan in the official residence, after which Emperor Xuan left. Soon after, Emperor Xuan was killed by King Xuan. Emperor Gaozhu felt guilty about this for a long time.

古文：清泰元年五月，复授太原节度使、北京留守，充大同、振武、彰国、威塞等军蕃汉马步总管。
现代文：末帝清泰元年五月，又任高祖为太原节度使、北京留守，充大同、振武、彰国、威塞等军蕃汉马步总管。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of the last emperor of the Qing Dynasty, Gao Zu was appointed as the Taiyuan Festival envoy and stayed in Beijing. He was the general manager of the military districts of Datong, Zhenwu, Zhangguo and Wessai.

古文：二年夏，帝屯军于忻州，朝廷遣使送夏衣，传诏抚谕，后军人遽呼万岁者数四，帝惧，斩挟马将李晖以下三十余人以徇，乃止。
现代文：清泰二年夏天，高祖把军队驻扎在忻州，朝廷派遣使者送来夏季服装，传达了抚慰三军的诏谕，军人立即多次山呼万岁，高祖恐惧，诛杀挟马将李晖以下三十多人示众，才制止下来。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Gaozu stationed his army in Zhangzhou. The imperial court sent an envoy to bring summer clothing and conveyed an edict to comfort the three armies. The soldiers immediately shouted "long live the mountain" many times. Gaozu was afraid, and only after more than 30 people, including the general Li Xi, had shown up to demonstrate, did he stop them.

古文：三年五月，移授郓州节度使，进封赵国公，仍改扶天启运中正功臣。
现代文：三年五月，改任郓州节度使，进封赵国公，又改赐扶天启运中正功臣名号。
English: In May of the third year, he was reappointed as an envoy of the Bozhou Festival, was given the title of Zhao Guogong, and was also given the title of Zhongzheng meritorious subject of the Futen Shipping Company.

古文：寻降诏促帝赴任。帝心疑之，乃召僚佐议曰： 孤再受太原之日，主上面宣云： 与卿北门，一生无议除改。 
现代文：接着降诏催促高祖前往郓州就任，高祖怀疑这件事，于是召集幕僚们商议说： 我第二次接受太原节度使的那天，皇上当面宣布说： 让你掌管北方边塞大门，一生不再除官改任。 
English: Gaozu doubted the matter, so he called together his staff to discuss it and said: On the day I accepted Taiyuan's second envoy, the emperor declared in person: Let you take charge of the northern border gate, and never be dismissed or reassigned.

古文：今忽降此命，莫是以去年忻州乱兵见迫，过相猜乎？
现代文：现在忽然下达这道命令，莫不是因为去年忻州被乱军逼迫，事后相猜疑吗？
English: Now, suddenly issuing this order, isn't it because Luzhou was persecuted by the rebels last year, and they are suspicious afterwards?

古文：又今年千春节，公主入觐，当辞时，谓公主曰： 尔归心甚急，欲与石郎反耶？ 
现代文：又今年千寿节，公主入宫觐见皇上，当告辞时，皇上对公主说： 你归心如此之急，想与石郎谋反吗？ 
English: Also this year, on the 1000th anniversary of her birth, the princess entered the palace to see the emperor. When saying goodbye, the emperor said to the princess: Are you so eager to return to your heart that you want to rebel against Ishiro?

古文：此疑我之状固且明矣。
现代文：怀疑我的迹象，确凿而明显了。
English: The signs of doubt concerning Us have become manifest and clear.

古文：今天子用后族，委邪臣，沈湎荒惑，万机停壅，失刑失赏，不亡何待！
现代文：如今皇上任用妻党，委权邪僻之臣，沉湎于荒淫惑乱之中，各种政务停废堆积，既不处罚奸佞，也不奖赏功臣，不灭亡还等待什么！
English: Nowadays, the emperor appoints his wife's party, entrusts power to perverse ministers, indulges in wild debauchery and chaos, suspends all kinds of government affairs and piles up waste, neither punishes traitors nor rewards meritorous ministers, and what awaits us if we do not perish!

古文：吾自应顺中少主出奔之日，睹人情大去，不能扶危持颠，愤愤于方寸者三年矣。
现代文：我从顺应年间少主出奔那天起，就看出人心已去，不能扶正危难挽住倾覆，心中的烦闷已有三年了。
English: Since the day I ran away from the young master in my junior year, I have seen that my heart has gone, I can't straighten it out, I can't hold back the danger, I can't overturn it. It's been three years of boredom in my heart.

古文：今我无异志，朝廷自启祸机，不可安然死于道路。
现代文：如今我没有异心，而朝廷自启祸端，我不能安然死在路途中。
English: Now that I have no ill will, and the imperial court has made itself known, I cannot die peacefully on the road.

古文：是年冬，果有鼎革之事。盖晋祖怀不轨之志久矣，故托梦以惑众也。
现代文：况且太原是个险要坚固的地方，储积的粮食又非常多，如果还能宽容我，我自当尊奉朝廷，如果一定要以兵相逼，我就向外告诉邻邦，向北联合强敌，谁胜谁败，昭然如同天日。现我想上表推说有病，以此等候朝廷的意见，大家认为怎么样？ 
English: Moreover, Taiyuan is a place that is almost solid, and there is a lot of grain stored. If I can still be tolerated, I will respect myself and serve the imperial court. If I must use troops to force the enemy, I will tell the neighbors outside. To the north, I will unite with the strong enemy. Who wins and who loses is as clear as day. Now I would like to wait for the opinion of the imperial court by saying that I have a disease. What do you think?

古文：掌书记桑维翰、都押衙刘知远赞成密计，遂拒末帝之命。朝廷以帝不奉诏，降旨削夺官爵，即诏晋州刺史、北面副招讨使张敬达领兵围帝于晋阳。
现代文：掌管文书的桑维翰、都押衙刘知远赞成密计，于是拒绝了末帝的命令，朝廷以高祖不奉命行事，传下圣旨削除官职、爵位，立即诏令晋州刺史、北面副招讨使张敬达率军把高祖围困在晋阳。
English: Sang Weihang, who was in charge of the documents, and Liu Zhiyuan, who was in charge of the documents, approved of the secret plan, so they refused the order of the last emperor. The imperial court ordered Gao Zu not to act as ordered, passed down the sacred edict to remove the official position and title, and immediately ordered Jinzhou to assassinate Gao Zu, and ordered Zhang Jingda and his army to besiege Gao Zu in Jinyang.

古文：八月庚午，自将以援敬瑭。
现代文：高祖马上命令桑维翰到各地请求援救，契丹派人回信答应他，约定在中秋赶来救助。
English: Gaozhu immediately ordered Sanveehan to go to various places to request assistance. The Khitan sent a letter back to him, promising to come to his aid by mid-autumn.

古文：六月，北面招收指挥使安重荣以部曲数千人入城。
现代文：六月，北方招收指挥使安重荣率领他的部曲几千人进入晋阳城。
English: In June, the North recruited several thousand people into Jinyang City, led by the conductor An Chongrong.

古文：七月，代州屯将安元信率一军，与西北面先锋指挥使安审信引五百骑俱至。
现代文：七月，代州屯将安元信率领一支军队与西北面先锋指挥使安审信率领的五百骑兵一起到达。
English: In July, an army led by An Yuanxin, the governor of Daizhou, arrived together with five hundred cavalrymen led by An Qianxin, the vanguard commander in the northwest.

古文：八月，怀州彰圣军使张万迪等各率千余骑来降。
现代文：八月，怀州彰德军派张万迪等人分别率领一千多骑兵来投降。
English: In August, the Waizhou Changde Army sent Zhang Wandi and others to lead more than a thousand cavalry to surrender.

古文：戊戌，次忻州。己亥，次太原。先使人报帝云： 吾欲今日便破贼，可乎？ 
现代文：这个月里，城外围军进攻得非常激烈，高祖亲自抵挡飞箭流石，人心虽然坚定，但仓里的粮食却逐渐匮乏。九月十五日，契丹国主率领大军从雁门入关向南进发，旌旗骑兵连延不断长达五十余里，先派人向高祖报告说： 我想今天就攻破敌寇，可以吗？ 
English: In this month, the attack of the army outside the city was very fierce. Gaozhu personally resisted the flying arrows. Although his heart was firm, the grain in the warehouse was gradually running out. On September 15, the Khitan sovereign led a large army from the gate of the wild goose to the south. The cavalry with flags stretched continuously for more than fifty miles. The first person to send a report to Gaozhu said: I want to break through the enemy today, is it possible?

古文：帝使人驰告曰： 皇帝赴难，比要成功，贼势至厚，可明旦稳审议战，未为晚也。 
现代文：高祖派人急驰禀告契丹国主 ：皇帝亲自奔赴拯救危难，马上就要成功，敌寇的势力非常强大，可等到明天早晨沉着审慎地商讨战事，还不算迟。 
English: Gao Zu sent people to rush to tell the Khitan sovereign: the emperor personally rushed to save the danger, success was imminent, the enemy's forces were very strong, but it would not be too late to calmly and prudently discuss the war until tomorrow morning.

古文：使未达，契丹已与南军骑将高行周、符彦卿等合战。
现代文：高祖使者没有到达，契丹已与南军骑将高行周、符彦卿等交战。
English: Gaozhu's envoy did not arrive, and Khitan had already fought with the cavalry of the Southern Army, including Gao Xingzhou and Fu Yanqing.

古文：明日，帝与契丹围敬达营寨，南军不复出矣。帝与契丹本无结好，自末帝见迫之后，遣腹心何福，以刀错为信，一言亲赴其难，迅若流电，信天意耶！己酉，唐末帝率亲军步骑三万出次河桥。
现代文：当时，张敬达、杨光远在西山下摆开阵势，士兵没来得及排列成行，而高行周、符彦卿就被埋伏的军队切断，他们丢下军队往后撤退，张敬达等的步兵被打得大败，战死的有一万多人。当夜，高祖出北门与契丹国主会见，契丹国主握住高祖的手说 ：相见恨晚。 于是议定了契丹国主为义父、高祖为义子的名份。第二天，高祖与契丹军队包围张敬达营寨，南方后唐的军队不能再出击了。高祖与契丹国原本没有结盟友善，自从唐末帝强加威逼之后，高祖才派心腹何福前往通好，以刀错为凭证，契丹国主不说二话，亲自奔赴救援，快捷有如奔电，真是天意啊！二十三日，唐末帝率领三万步、骑亲军出征驻扎在河桥。
English: At that time, Zhang Jingda and Yang Guangyuan set up a position at the foot of the West Mountain. The soldiers did not have time to line up, and Gao Xingzhou and Fu Yanqing were cut off by the ambushed army. They left the army behind and retreated. Zhang Jingda's infantrymen were defeated, and more than 10,000 people died in the battle. That night, Gaozu went out of the North Gate to meet with the Khitan sovereign. The Khitan sovereign held Gaozu's hand and said, "See you later." So they agreed on the names of the Khitan sovereign as the godfather and Gaozu as the godson. The next day,

古文：辛亥，末帝诏枢密使赵延寿分众二万为北面招讨使，又诏魏博节度使范延光统本军二万人屯辽州。
现代文：二十五日，末帝诏命枢密使赵延寿分率二万士兵担任北面招讨使，又诏令魏博节度使范延光率领所辖二万士兵驻守辽州。
English: On the 25th, the late emperor issued an imperial edict instructing Zhao Yanzhou to dispatch 20,000 soldiers to the north as a recruiting envoy. He also issued an imperial edict instructing Wei Bo to dispatch 20,000 soldiers under the command of Fan Yanguang to garrison Liaozhou.

古文：十月，幽州节度使赵德钧领所部万余人自上党吴兒谷合延寿兵屯团柏谷，与敬达寨相去百里，弥月竟不能相通。
现代文：十月，幽州节度使赵德钧率领所辖一万多人从上党吴儿谷会合赵延寿军队驻守团谷口，此地与张敬达营寨相隔百里，一个月竟然不能打通。
English: In October, the Yuzhou Festival made more than ten thousand people under the jurisdiction of Zhao Deyu led by Zhao Deyu from the Upper Party Wu'er Valley Association Zhao Yanshou Army Garrison Valley Mouth. This place is a hundred miles away from Zhang Jingda's encampment, and it can't be opened for a month.

古文：十一月，契丹主会帝于营中，曰： 我三千里赴义，事须必成。观尔体貌恢廓，识量深远，真国主也。
现代文：十一月，契丹国主与高祖在营帐相会时，对高祖说： 我远奔三千里救援，大事必期成功，看你体魄仪容健壮魁伟，见识深刻，气量宏大，实是一国的君主啊。
English: In November, when the Khitan sovereign and Gaozu met at the camp, he said to Gaozu: "I have traveled three thousand miles to rescue you, and the great event will surely succeed. Look at your physique, your robust appearance, your profound insight, and your grandeur. You are truly the monarch of a country."

古文：礼毕，帝鼓吹道从而归。
现代文：天命有所属托，时机不可丧失，我想顺从蕃汉诸将的建议，册封你为天子。 
English: Heaven's destiny has been entrusted to you, and the opportunity must not be lost. I want to follow the advice of the generals of the Han Dynasty and anoint you as the Son of Heaven.

古文：始梁开国之岁，即前唐天祐四年也，潞州行营使李思安奏： 壶关县庶穰乡乡人伐树，树倒自分两片，内有六字如左书，云 天十四载石进 。 
现代文：高祖回避推让了好久。接着，各路军队不断劝说请求，才下令在晋阳城的南面修筑祭坛，册立为大晋皇帝，契丹国主解下自己的衣冠授给高祖。当初后梁建国的那一年，就是唐哀帝天祐四年，潞州行营使李思安上奏 ：壶关县庶穰乡的人砍伐树木，树倒下时自己分成两片，其中有以下六个字 天十四载石进 。 
English: Gao Zu evaded and delayed for a long time. Then, after continuous persuasion and requests from various armies, he ordered the construction of an altar on the south side of Jinyang City, and was proclaimed the Emperor of Jinyang. The Khitan sovereign took off his crown and bestowed it on Gao Zu. The year after Liang founded the country was the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tianyu of the Tang Dynasty, and Li Sian was sent to the camp in Zhangzhou to recite the following: The people of the village of Shifang in Juguan County cut down trees, and when the tree fell, they split into two pieces. Among them, there are the following six

古文：梁祖令藏于武库，然莫详其义。至帝即位，识者曰：  天 字取 四 字中两画加之于旁，则 丙 字也； 四 字去中之两画，加 十 字，则 申 字也。 
现代文：后梁太祖下令藏在武库，然而没有谁能弄清它的意思，到高祖即位为皇帝时，知道那件事的人说： 拿 四 字中的两画加在 天 字上，就是 丙 字 ，四 字除去中间的两画，再加上 十 字，就是 申 字。 
English: Emperor Houliang ordered it to be hidden in the arsenal, but no one could figure out what it meant. When Emperor Gaozhu ascended to the throne, people who knew the matter said: Take two of the four characters and add them to the heavenly character, that is, the C character, remove the middle two characters from the four characters, and add ten characters, that is, the Shen character.

古文：帝即位之年乃丙申也。又，《易》云： 晋者，进也。 
现代文：高祖称帝的时间正好是丙申年。另外，《易经》上说： 晋，就是 进 的意思。 
English: The time of Emperor Gaozu's enthronement coincided with the Year of Yin. In addition, "I Ching" said: "Jin" means "to enter."

古文：国号大晋，皆符契焉。
现代文：国号叫 大晋 ，都像符契一样相合。
English: The country's name is Dajin, and they all fit together like a charm.

古文：又，帝即位之前一年，岁在乙未，鄴西有栅曰李固，清、淇合流在其侧。栅有桥，桥下大鼠与蛇斗，斗及日之申，蛇不胜而死。行人观者数百，识者志之。
现代文：又，高祖即位前一年，是乙未年，邺郡西部有个被称作李固的栅地，清河、淇水在它的旁边合为一流，栅地有桥，桥下有大老鼠与蛇搏斗，斗到下午申时，蛇斗败后死去，行人停下观看的有几百人，了解这件事的人记下了它。
English: In addition, the year before Gao Zu's accession to the throne was the year of the rooster. In the western part of the county, there was a grate called Li Gu. The Qinghe River and the Qishui River merged into the first class next to it. There was a bridge on the grate. Under the bridge, there was a big rat fighting with a snake. The fight lasted until the afternoon, and the snake died after losing the fight. Hundreds of pedestrians stopped to watch. People who knew about this incident recorded it.

古文：后唐末帝果灭于申。
现代文：后唐末帝果然灭亡在申年。
English: The last emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty died in the year of the Monkey.

古文：又，末帝，真定常山人也，有先人旧庐，其侧有古佛刹，刹有石像，忽摇动不已，人皆异之。
现代文：又，唐末帝是真定常山人，有他的祖先留下的旧房舍，房舍旁边古代的佛教塔刹，中有石像，有一天突然不停地摇动，人们都感到很奇怪。
English: In addition, Emperor Tangmu was from Zhending Mountain, and there was an old house left by his ancestors, and an ancient Buddhist pagoda next to the house, with stone statues. One day, it suddenly kept shaking, and people felt very strange.

古文：未浃旬，唐石敬瑭反于河东，为后唐张敬达所败，亟遣赵莹持表重赂，许割燕云，求兵为援，契丹主曰： 我非为石郎兴师，乃奉天帝敕使也。 
现代文：等到被重重包围在晋阳时，高祖派心腹何福乘快马向北蕃契丹请求援救。契丹国主亲自率领各部前来援救，不用丝绸绢帛，不用珠宝金玉，像回声响应一样。契丹国主对何福说 ：我已经从梦中得到了征兆，都是上天命我如此，不是我的意思。 
English: When he was besieged in Jinyang, Gao Zu sent his henchman, He Fu, on a fast horse to Beilun Qidan to ask for help. The ruler of Qidan personally led all the ministries to come to the rescue, without silk cocoons, without jewelry and gold, like an echo response. The ruler of Qidan said to He Fu: I have got the signs from the dream, it is God's will for me to be like this, not my will.

古文：时援兵未至，伪将张敬达引军逼城设栅，栅将成，忽有大风暴雨，栅无以立。
现代文：当救援的军队没有到达，伪将张敬达率领大军迫近城墙设立栅栏，围城栅栏将要建成的时候，忽然刮起大风，下起暴雨，栅栏无法建成。
English: When the rescue army did not arrive, the false general Zhang Jingda led a large army to approach the city wall to set up a fence. When the fence was about to be built, a strong wind suddenly blew and a heavy rain fell. The fence could not be built.

古文：后筑长城，城就，又为水潦所坏，城终不能合。
现代文：后来，又修筑长长的城墙，城墙虽已修成，但又被积雨毁坏，城墙最终还是没有完全合拢。
English: Later, a long city wall was built. Although the city wall was completed, it was destroyed by rain, and the city wall was not completely closed.

古文：晋阳有北宫，宫城之上有祠曰毗沙门天王，帝曾焚修默而祷之。
现代文：晋阳有个北宫，宫城的上面有个叫作毗沙门天王的祠庙，高祖曾经焚香修建并默默地向它祈祷。
English: There is a Bei Gong in Jinyang, and an ancestral temple called Bishamontengwang on the top of Miyagi. Gaozu once burned incense to build it and silently prayed to it.

古文：经数日，城西北闉正受敌处，军候报称，夜来有一人长丈余，介金执殳，行于城上，久方不见。帝心异之。
现代文：过了几天，城的西北门外的曲墙正好是受到敌人攻击的地方，军队值哨的人报告说，夜晚有一个长一丈多的人，披金甲执长枪，在城楼上行走，过了很久才消失，高祖心里对此感到奇怪。
English: A few days later, the curved wall outside the northwest gate of the city happened to be the place where it was attacked by the enemy. The military sentries reported that at night, a tall man, wearing gold armor and holding a long gun, walked on the castle tower and disappeared after a long time. Gaozu felt strange about this.

古文：又，牙城有僧坊曰崇福，坊之庑下西北隅有泥神，神之首忽一日有烟生，其腾郁如曲突之状。
现代文：又，高祖住宅的第三重城有个叫作崇福的佛教寺院，寺院厢房下面的西北角有个泥做的神像，忽然有一天，神像的头部有烟升起，那烟腾跃上升有如烟囱的形状。
English: In addition, there is a Buddhist temple called Chongfu in the third city of Gao Zu's residence. In the northwest corner below the temple hall, there is a statue of a god made of mud. Suddenly, one day, there is smoke rising from the head of the statue of the god. The smoke rises like a chimney.

古文：坊僧奔赴，以为人火所延，及俯而视之，无所有焉。事寻达帝，帝召僧之腊高者问焉，僧曰： 贫道见庄宗将得天下，曾有此烟。观此喷涌，甚于当时，兆可知矣。 
现代文：寺院的僧侣奔跑前去救火，以为是人为的火种蔓延过来的，等到仔细察看，又什么也没有，这事马上传到了高祖那里，高祖召唤僧侣中佛性高超的人询问这件事。僧人说 ：贫僧我看见庄宗将要夺取天下的时候，曾经出现过这种烟气，观察这次烟气的喷发涌吐，比庄宗当时的还要厉害，征兆自然可以理解了。 
English: The monks of the temple ran forward to put out the fire, thinking that it was a man-made fire that had spread. When they examined it carefully, there was nothing, and the matter was immediately reported to Gaozu. Gaozu summoned a monk with superior Buddhist qualities to inquire about the matter. The monk said, "Poor monk, I saw that when Zhuangzong was about to conquer the world, this kind of smoke once appeared. Observing the eruption of smoke, it was even more powerful than Zhuangzong at that time. The signs can naturally be understood."

古文：自此，日旁多有五色云气，如莲芰之状。
现代文：从这天起，太阳的旁边拥集众多的五色云气，像莲花的形状。
English: Since that day, the sun has been surrounded by a multitude of five-colored clouds, shaped like lotus flowers.

古文：帝召占者视之，谓曰： 此验应谁？ 
现代文：高祖召唤占卜的人来观察天象，对占卜的人说： 这个效验对应的是谁呢？ 
English: Gao Zu summoned a diviner to observe the celestial phenomenon, and said to the diviner: "To whom does this effect correspond?

古文：占者曰： 见处为瑞，更应何人！ 
现代文：占卜的人说： 看见这种天象的地方是吉祥的，还能应谁呢？ 
English: The soothsayer said, "The place where such an angel is seen is auspicious, who else could it be?"

古文：又，帝每诘旦使慰抚守陴者，率以为常。忽一夕已暝，城上有号令之声，声不绝者三。帝使人问之，将吏云： 从上传来者。 
现代文：又，高祖每天早晨派人慰问安抚防守城墙的士兵，习以为常，忽然一天晚上天已经黑了，城墙上方有发号司令的声音，声音不停地叫了三次，高祖使人询问这件事，将官说： 是从天上传来的。 
English: In addition, Gaozu sent people every morning to comfort and pacify the soldiers defending the city wall. He was used to it. Suddenly, one evening, it was already dark. Above the city wall, there was the sound of a commander giving the signal. The sound rang out three times incessantly. Gaozu had people inquire about it. The commander said, "It came from the sky."

古文：皆知神助。
现代文：都知道这是神灵在暗中帮助。
English: Everyone knows that it is the gods who are secretly helping.

古文：时城中复有数家井泉，暴溢不止。
现代文：当时城里又有几户人家的井水泉眼猛涨，外溢不停。
English: At that time, the wells of several other households in the city were overflowing.

古文：及蕃军大至，合势破之，末帝之众，似拉朽焉。斯天运使然，非人力也。
现代文：等到蕃军大部队到来，联合各部武装攻击后唐军队，末帝的军队就像被摧拉的朽木一样，这是天意使它那样，不是人的力量。
English: When the large force of the Wei army arrived and attacked the Tang army after the joint armed attack, the last emperor's army was like a dead tree that had been destroyed. It was God's will that made it like that, not human power.

古文：是日，帝言于契丹主，愿以雁门已北及幽州之地为寿，仍约岁输帛三十万，契丹主许之。
现代文：这一天，高祖对契丹国主说，愿将雁门以北到幽州的地盘敬献给契丹国主祝寿，又约定每年输送丝帛三十万匹，契丹国主答应了。
English: On this day, Gaozu said to the ruler of Khitan that he would like to dedicate the area north of the Wild Goose Gate to Yuzhou to the ruler of Khitan to wish him a happy birthday, and agreed to transport 300,000 silk reeds every year. The ruler of Khitan agreed.

