古文：◎伶官
现代文：伶，官职中之卑微者。
English: , a lowly official.

古文：○罗衣轻伶，官之微者也。
现代文：《五代史》将镜新磨编入列传之中，必定是其人有可取之处。
English: "History of the Five Dynasties" included Jinshinma in the list of legends, which must be someone's merit.

古文：《五代史》列镜新磨于《传》，是必有所取矣。辽之伶官当时固多，然能因诙谐示谏，以消未形之乱，惟罗衣轻耳。孔子曰： 君子不以人废言。 
现代文：辽朝之伶官当时固然很多，但是能够借助诙谐之语以表达劝谏，从而消泯无形之祸乱的，只有罗衣轻一人。孔子说 ：君子不因人而废其言。 
English: Of course, there were many eunuchs in the Liao Dynasty at that time, but only Luo Jiye was able to use witty words to express persuasion and thus eliminate the invisible calamity. Confucius said: A gentleman does not abandon his words because of people.

古文：是宜传。
现代文：因此应为他做传。
English: Therefore, he should be immortalized.

古文：罗衣轻，不知其乡里。
现代文：罗衣轻，不知其籍贯。
English: He is lightly dressed, and I don't know where he is from.

古文：滑稽通变，一时谐谑，多所规讽。
现代文：滑稽，善逗人笑，善于变通，一世之诙谐大师，对皇上多有规讽劝谏。
English: Funny, good at making people laugh, good at being flexible, the wittiest master of all time, he often advised the emperor with sarcasm.

古文：兴宗败于李元昊也，单骑突出，几不得脱。
现代文：兴宗被李元昊打败，单骑冲出，几乎未能脱身。
English: Xingzong was defeated by Li Yuanhao and rode out alone, barely managing to escape.

古文：先是，元昊获辽人，辄劓其鼻，有奔北者惟恐追及。
现代文：先前，元昊抓住辽人，动辄割去鼻子，如果有人逃出，惟恐被夏人追上。
English: Earlier, Yuan Hao grabbed Liao Ren and cut off his nose. If anyone escaped, he feared that Xia Ren would catch up with him.

古文：故罗衣轻止之曰： 且观鼻在否？ 
现代文：所以罗衣轻模仿兴宗的容态举止说道 ：且看我的鼻子还在不在？ 
English: So Luo Yi lightly imitated Xingzong's demeanor and said: And see if my nose is still there?

古文：上怒，以毳索系帐后，将杀之。
现代文：皇上发怒，用毛绳将他捆绑在帐幕之后，准备杀了他。
English: The emperor was so angry that he tied him up with cords behind the tent and prepared to kill him.

古文：太子笑曰： 打诨底不是黄幡绰！ 
现代文：太子笑道 ：打诨的不是黄幡绰！ 
English: The prince laughed and said, "It's not Huang Banzhuo who is snoring!

古文：罗衣轻应声曰： 行兵底亦不是唐太宗！ 
现代文：罗衣轻应声答道： 行兵的也不是唐太宗！ 
English: Luo Yi lightly replied: It is not Tang Taizong who is marching!

古文：上闻而释之。
现代文：皇上听到之后便放了他。
English: On hearing this, the Emperor released him.

古文：上尝与太弟重元狎昵，宴酣，许以千秋万岁后传位。
现代文：皇上曾经与太弟重元十分亲近，宴饮至尽兴，皇上允诺在自己过世之后传位于他。
English: The Emperor used to be very close to his great-uncle Chogen and enjoyed banquets to the full. The Emperor promised to bequeath the throne to him after his death.

古文：重元喜甚，骄纵不法。
现代文：重元欢喜至极，骄傲放纵不遵法纪。
English: Chongyuan was overjoyed. He was proud, indulgent and disobeyed the law.

古文：又因双陆，赌以居民城邑。
现代文：又通过下双陆来以居民城邑为赌注。
English: They also bet on the residents of the city to win by going down the double land.

古文：帝屡不竞，前后已偿数城。
现代文：皇上一次又一次不敌，前后已赔出好几座城。
English: The last emperor was defeated again and again and lost several cities.

古文：重元既恃梁孝王之宠，又多郑叔段之过，朝臣无敢言者，道路以目。
现代文：重元一方面倚仗像西汉梁孝王一般的受宠幸，又有超出郑国之段叔那样的过恶，朝臣无人敢于言事，人们在路上相逢也只好互相以目示意。
English: On the one hand, Chongyuan was favored like the Western Han Dynasty's Liang Xiaowang, and on the other hand, he was more evil than Zheng Guo's Uncle Duan. No courtier dared to say anything, and people had to make eye contact with each other when they met on the road.

古文：一日复博，罗衣轻指其局曰： 双陆休痴，和你都输去也！ 
现代文：一日又赌，罗衣轻指着双陆棋盘说： 双陆你休要痴了，早晚连你也输出去了！ 
English: On the second day of betting, Luo Yi lightly pointed at the Shuanglu chessboard and said: Shuanglu, you're out of your mind. Sooner or later, even you will lose!

古文：帝始悟，不复戏。
现代文：皇上醒悟，不再玩这种游戏。
English: The emperor came to his senses and stopped playing this game.

古文：清宁间，以疾卒。
现代文：清宁年间因病去世。
English: He died of illness during the Qing Dynasty.

古文：◎宦官○王继恩赵安仁
现代文：《周礼》上说，宦者是掌管皇宫之中门的门卫。
English: "Weekly Rituals" said that the eunuch was the doorkeeper in charge of the middle gate of the imperial palace.

古文：《周礼》，寺人掌中门之禁。至巷伯诗列于《雅》，勃貂功著于晋，虽忠于所事，而非其职矣。
现代文：至于阉人被写进《诗经》之《雅》篇，宦者勃貂功标于晋国，尽管他们能忠于所侍奉的君王，但已经超出职分了。
English: As for the eunuchs who were written into the "Elegant" section of the "Song of Songs," the eunuchs of Burgundy merited in Jin, although they could be loyal to the king they served, but they had exceeded their duties.

古文：汉、唐中世，窃权蠹政，有不忍言者，是皆宠遇之过。
现代文：到了中世的汉、唐，宦官窃取大权为害国政，说出来都令人寒心，这都是因为宠幸恩遇太过分所致。
English: In the Middle Ages, the Han and Tang Dynasties, eunuchs stole great power to harm national politics, and it is chilling to say it. This is all due to being favored and favored too much.

古文：辽宦者二人，其贤不肖皆可为后世鉴，故传焉。
现代文：辽代宦者二人，其贤德与不肖都值得后世借鉴，所以为之做传。
English: The two people who died in the Liao Dynasty, their virtues and vices are worthy of reference for future generations, so it is best to pass them down.

古文：王继恩，棣州人。
现代文：王继恩，棣州人。
English: Wang Jian, from Zhangzhou.

古文：睿智皇后南征，继恩被俘。
现代文：睿智皇后南征时，继恩被俘入辽。
English: During Empress Rui Zhi's Southern Expedition, Ji En was captured and taken to Liao.

古文：初，皇后以公私所获十岁已下儿容貌可观者近百人，载赴凉陉，并使阉为竖，继恩在焉。
现代文：当初，皇后带着公家和私人所俘获的十岁以下儿童中容貌较好的近百人，用车载至凉陉，并派人将他们割为宦者，继恩就在其中。
English: At first, the empress took nearly a hundred of the better-looking children under the age of ten who had been captured by public and private persons, transported them by car to the cooler, and sent someone to cut them into cocoons. Shien was among them.

古文：聪慧，通书及辽语。
现代文：继恩生性聪明，通晓书文及辽语。
English: Sui En was born with an intelligent nature and was familiar with literature and the Liao language.

古文：擢内谒者、内侍左厢押班。
现代文：提升为谒者、内侍左厢押班。
English: The person promoted to the position of eunuch and the inner chambermaid left the compartment to escort the class.

古文：圣宗亲政，累迁尚衣库使、左承宣、监门卫大将军、灵州观察使、内库都提点。
现代文：圣宗亲政，继恩累迁为尚衣库使、左承宣、监门卫大将军、灵州观察使、内库都提点。
English: Shengzong was a close political ally, and his successors were Shang Ying Kuo, Zuo Cheng Xuan, Jian Menwei Da Gen, Lingzhou Observation Envoy, and Nai Kuo.

古文：继恩好清谈，不喜权利，每得赐赉，市书至万卷，载以自随，诵读不倦。
现代文：继恩喜好清谈，不喜权位利欲，每每得到赏赐，便买书上万卷，以车载回，诵读起来毫不倦怠。
English: Succession favors clear talk, dislikes power and greed, and every time he gets a reward, he buys tens of thousands of books and brings them back by car. He never gets tired of reading.

古文：每宋使来聘，继恩多充宣赐使。
现代文：每当宋朝使者来访，继恩往往充任宣赐使。
English: Whenever the envoys of the Song Dynasty visited, Sui En often served as the envoy.

古文：后不知所终。
现代文：后不知所终。
English: I don't know what will happen next.

古文：赵安仁，字小喜，深州乐寿人，自幼被俘。
现代文：赵安仁，字小喜，深州乐寿人。从小被俘。
English: Zhao Anren, also known as Xiaoxi, was from Shenzhou Le Shou. He was captured at a young age.

古文：统和中，为黄门令、秦晋国王府祗候。
现代文：统和年间，任黄门令、秦晋国王府祗候。
English: During the years of unification, he served as Huangmenling and Qin Jin King's Palace.

古文：王薨，授内侍省押班、御院通进。
现代文：秦晋王逝世后，皇上授安仁为内侍省押班、御院通进。
English: After the death of King Qin Jin, the emperor assigned Anren to be the overseer of the Inner Court and the head of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：开泰八年，与李胜哥谋奔南土，为游兵所擒。
现代文：开泰八年，安仁与李胜哥图谋逃奔宋国，被游兵抓获。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Keitai, Anren and Li Shengge plotted to flee to the Song Dynasty, but were caught by wandering soldiers.

古文：初，仁德皇后与钦哀有隙，钦哀密令安仁伺皇后动静，无不知者。
现代文：当初，仁德皇后与钦哀后不和，钦哀暗中命令安仁窥探仁德后之动静，于是对她的行踪了如指掌。
English: At first, Empress Rende was not on good terms with Qin Pei. Qin Pei secretly ordered Anren to spy on Rende's movements, so he knew her whereabouts like the back of his hand.

古文：仁德皇后威权既重，安仁惧祸，复谋亡归。
现代文：仁德后威势和权力加重之后，安仁害怕遭祸，又图谋逃回宋国。
English: After Rende's ascendency and power increased, Anren was afraid of disaster and tried to escape back to Song.

古文：仁德欲诛之，钦哀以言营救。
现代文：仁德后想杀他，钦哀进言营救。
English: Rendez-vous wanted to kill him, but Kinsai came to the rescue.

古文：圣宗曰： 小喜言父母兄弟俱在南朝，每一念，神魂陨越。
现代文：圣宗说 ：小喜曾说父母兄弟都在南朝，每当想起，魂魄都恨不能飞过去相会。
English: Shenzong said: Xiaoxi once said that his parents and brothers were all in the Southern Dynasty, and whenever he thought about it, his soul longed to fly over and meet them.

古文：今为思亲，冒死而亡，亦孝子用心，实可怜悯。 
现代文：如今因为思亲，所以冒死而逃，也是孝子的用心，实在值得怜悯。 
English: Now, because he misses his relatives, he risks his life to escape, which is also the intention of a filial son, and is truly worthy of pity.

古文：赦之。
现代文：便赦免了他。
English: and pardoned him.

古文：重熙初，钦哀摄政，欲废帝，立少子重元。
现代文：重熙初年，钦哀暂摄国政，想废掉兴宗，改立少子重元。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, Qinyi temporarily regained control of state affairs, and wanted to abolish Xingzong and re-establish Shoshi Chung Yuan.

古文：帝与安仁谋，迁太后庆州守陵，授安仁左承宣、监门卫大将军，充契丹汉人渤海内侍都知，兼都提点。
现代文：兴宗与安仁商议将钦哀太后迁至庆州守陵，授安仁为左承宣、监门卫大将军，充任契丹汉人渤海内侍都知，兼都提点。
English: Xingzong and Anren discussed moving the Empress Dowager Qin to Gyeongju to guard the mausoleum, and Anren was awarded the title of Zuo Chengxuan, the general of the prison guards, and served as the attendant of the Han people in the Bohai Sea.

古文：会上思太后，亲驭奉迎，太后责曰： 汝负万死，我尝营救。
现代文：适逢皇上思念太后，亲自驾车迎接，太后责骂安仁说： 你曾经必死无疑，我着力营救。
English: When it was time for the emperor to miss the empress dowager, he drove to meet her in person. The empress dowager scolded Anren, saying, "You were certain to die, and I made every effort to rescue you."

古文：不望汝报，何为离间我母子耶！ 
现代文：不指望你报恩，怎么反而离间我们母子呢！ 
English: I don't expect you to return the favor, but how can you separate our mother and son!

古文：安仁无答。
现代文：安仁无言以对。
English: Yasuhito was speechless.

古文：后不知所终。
现代文：后不知所终。
English: I don't know what will happen next.

