古文：硃瑾，瑄从父弟。
现代文：朱瑾，是朱王宣的堂弟。
English: Zhu Xi is the cousin of Zhu Wangxuan.

古文：雄武绝伦，性颇残忍。
现代文：雄壮勇猛非凡，性情颇为残忍。
English: Magnificent, brave and extraordinary, his temperament is quite cruel.

古文：光启中，瑾与兗州节度使齐克让婚，瑾自郓盛饰车服，私藏兵甲，以赴礼会。
现代文：光启年间，朱瑾与兖州节度使齐克让成婚，朱瑾从郓州装饰华丽的车子衣服，私藏兵器甲士，以赴婚礼宴会。
English: During the Guangqi era, Zhu Xi and Zhangzhou Festival made Zikezhang get married. Zhu Xi decorated gorgeous car clothes from Zhangzhou, and hid weapons and armor to go to the wedding banquet.

古文：亲迎之夜，甲士窃发，掳克让，自称留后。
现代文：成亲之夜，甲士偷偷出击，俘获了齐克让，朱瑾自封为兖州留后。
English: On the night of the betrothal, the knights sneaked out and captured Zikzhan, and Zhu Xi declared himself the ruler of Zhangzhou.

古文：及蔡贼鸱张，瑾与太祖连衡，同讨宗权，前后屡捷，以功正授兗州节度使。
现代文：当蔡州贼寇嚣张时，朱瑾与太祖联手，共同征讨秦宗权，先后屡次获胜，因功正式被授与兖州节度使。
English: When the Caizhou banditry was rampant, Zhu Xi and Taizu joined hands to jointly fight for the Qin suzerainty. They won many times in succession and were officially awarded the Zhangzhou Festival Envoy for their efforts.

古文：既得士心，有兼并天下之意，太祖亦忌之。
现代文：在得到士兵拥护后，便有兼并天下的意图，连太祖都顾忌他。
English: After being supported by soldiers, he had the intention of annexing the whole world. Even the great-grandfather was wary of him.

古文：瑾以厚利招诱太祖军士，以为间谍。
现代文：朱瑾用厚利招诱太祖的军士，作为间谍。
English: Zhu Xi used the fat profit to lure the great-grandfather's sergeant as a spy.

古文：及太祖攻郓，瑾出师来援，累与太祖接战。
现代文：到太祖进攻郓州时，朱瑾出兵援救郓州，多次与太祖交战。
English: When Emperor Taizu attacked Zhangzhou, Zhu Xi sent troops to rescue Zhangzhou and fought with Emperor Taizu many times.

古文：乾宁二年春，太祖令大将硃友恭攻瑾，掘堑栅以环之。
现代文：乾宁二年春天，太祖命大将朱友恭进攻朱瑾，挖掘堑壕包围他。
English: In the spring of the second year of Qianning, Grand Ancestor Zhu Youqiong attacked Zhu Xi, digging trenches to surround him.

古文：硃瑄遣将贺瑰及蕃将何怀宝赴援，为友恭所擒。
现代文：朱王宣派将领贺瑰以及蕃族将领何怀宝奔赴支援朱瑾，被朱友恭擒获。
English: Zhu Wangxuan sent the general He Gui and the Yi general He Huai Bao to support Zhu Xi, but they were captured by Zhu Youqun.

古文：十一月，瑾从兄齐州刺史琼以州降。太祖令执贺瑰、怀宝及琼以徇于城下，语曰： 卿兄已败，早宜效顺。 
现代文：十一月，朱瑾的堂兄齐州刺史朱琼献州投降，太祖下令捆着贺瑰、何怀宝以及朱琼在城下示众，对朱瑾说： 你哥哥已败，你要及早效仿投降。 
English: In November, Zhu Xi's cousin Zhi Shi Zhu Qiong of Qizhou surrendered. Grandfather ordered that He Gui, He Huai Bao and Zhu Qiong be tied up and paraded in front of the city. He said to Zhu Xi, "Your brother has been defeated. You should follow his example and surrender as soon as possible."

古文：瑾伪遣牙将瑚兒持书币送降，太祖自至延寿门外，与瑾交语。
现代文：朱瑾假装派牙将瑚儿带着书信、钱币送给太祖请求投降。太祖亲自到延寿门外，与朱瑾交谈。
English: Zhu Xi pretended to send Hu Er with a letter and money to the great-grandfather to request his surrender. The great-grandfather himself went to Yanju Gate to talk with Zhu Xi.

古文：瑾谓太祖曰： 欲令大将送符印，愿得兄琼来押领，所贵骨肉，尽布腹心也。 太祖遣琼与客将刘捍取符笥，瑾单马立于桥上，挥手谓捍曰： 可令兄来，余有密款。 
现代文：朱瑾对太祖说： 我想让大将送上符印，希望让堂兄朱琼来领取。 太祖派朱琼与客将刘捍前往领取印信匣子，朱瑾单马立于桥上，挥手对刘捍说 ：可让我堂兄前来，我有私话相告。 
English: Zhu Xi said to the great-grandfather: I want the general to send the seal, and I hope that cousin Zhu Qiong will come to receive it. The great-grandfather sent Zhu Qiong and guest Liu Han to receive the letter box. Zhu Xi stood on the bridge and waved to Liu Han, saying: Let my cousin come, I have a secret message.

古文：即令琼往。
现代文：太祖即令朱琼前往。
English: Grandfather immediately ordered Zhu Qiong to go.

古文：瑾先令骑士董怀进伏于桥下，及琼至，怀进突出，擒琼而入，俄而斩琼首投于城外，太祖乃班师。
现代文：朱瑾先让骑士董怀进埋伏在桥下，当朱琼一到，董怀进突然奔出，抓获朱琼回城，接着朱瑾砍下朱琼脑袋丢到城外，太祖才绝望回师。
English: Zhu Xi first asked the knight, Dong Huaijin, to lie in wait under the bridge. When Zhu Qiong arrived, Dong Huaijin suddenly ran out, captured Zhu Qiong and returned to the city. Zhu Xi then cut off Zhu Qiong's head and threw it outside the city. It was only in desperation that Zhu Xi returned to his master.

古文：及郓州陷，庞师古乘胜攻兗，瑾与李承嗣方出兵求刍粟于丰沛间，瑾之二子及大将康怀英、判官辛绾、小校阎宝以城降师古。
现代文：到郓州陷落，庞师古乘胜进攻兖州，朱瑾与李承嗣正出兵到丰、沛一带搜括马料军粮，朱瑾的两个儿子以及大将康怀英、判官辛绾、小校阎宝献出兖州城投降庞师古。
English: After the fall of Bozhou, Pang Shigu took advantage of the victory to attack Bozhou. Zhu Di and Li Chengzhi were sending troops to the Feng and Pei regions to collect horse rations and army rations. Zhu Di's two sons, as well as the general Kang Huaiying, the judge Xin Qi, and the schoolboy Yan Bao, surrendered Bozhou City to Pang Shigu.

古文：瑾无归，即与承嗣将麾下士将保沂州，刺史尹处宾拒关不纳，乃保海州。
现代文：朱瑾没有了归路，便与李承嗣率领部下士卒准备退守沂州，沂州刺史尹处宾闭门不让进，朱瑾等于是退守海州。
English: Zhu Xi had no way back, so he and Li Chengzhe led the officers and men to prepare to retreat to Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou's governor, Shi Yin, closed the door and would not let them enter. Zhu Xi was about to retreat to Haizhou.

古文：为师古所迫，遂拥州民渡淮依杨行密。行密表瑾领徐州节度使。
现代文：又被庞师古进逼，于是带着州民渡过淮水依附吴国杨行密，杨行密以朱瑾遥领徐州节度使。
English: He was also forced to advance by Pang Shigu, so he took the state people across Huai Shui to adhere to Yang Xingmi of Wu, and Yang Xingmi led the Xuzhou Festival with Zhu Rongyao.

古文：庞师古渡淮，行密令瑾率师以御之，清口之败，瑾有力焉。
现代文：庞师古渡过淮河进攻淮南时，杨行密令朱瑾领兵抵御，清口战役中庞师古大败，朱瑾在其中出了大力。
English: When Pang Shigu crossed the Huai River to attack Huainan, Yang Xingmi ordered Zhu Xi to lead the troops to resist. In the Battle of Qingkou, Pang Shigu suffered a major defeat, in which Zhu Xi made great efforts.

古文：自是瑾率淮军连岁北寇徐、宿，大为东南之患。
现代文：从此朱瑾率领吴国军队连年北上进犯徐州、宿州，成为东南的大患。
English: From then on, Zhu Xi led the army of the State of Wu to invade Xuzhou and Suzhou in the north year after year, becoming a major threat to the southeast.

古文：及行密卒，子渭继立，以徐温子知训为行军副使，宠遇颇深。
现代文：到杨行密去世，儿子杨渭即位，以徐温的儿子徐知训为行军副使，对朱瑾恩宠颇深。
English: After Yang Xingmi's death, his son Yang Hui ascended to the throne, with Xu Wen's son Xu Zhixun as his deputy envoy. Zhu Xi was deeply favored.

古文：后杨溥僭号，知训为枢密使，知政事，以瑾为同平章事，仍督亲军。
现代文：后来杨溥伪称王号，徐知训任枢密使，管理政事，以朱瑾为同平章事，仍然督察亲军。
English: Later, Yang Xuan assumed the title of king, and Xu Zhixun was appointed as a privy councilor to manage political affairs, and Zhu Xi as a peer of the realm to supervise pro-army affairs.

古文：后与瑾有隙，夜遣壮士杀瑾，瑾手刃数人，埋于舍后。贞明四年六月，出瑾为淮宁军节度使。
现代文：这时徐温父子恃宠专掌政权，担心朱瑾不亲附自己，在贞明四年六月，派朱瑾到地方上任淮宁军节度使。
English: At this time, Xu Wen and his son Zou Ji were in charge of the political power, and they were worried that Zhu Xi would not attach himself. In June of the 4th year of Zhengming, they sent Zhu Xi to the local area to take up the post of the Huaining Army's envoy.

古文：知训设家宴以饯瑾，瑾事之逾逊。
现代文：徐知训设家宴为朱瑾送行，朱瑾侍奉他更加谦逊。
English: Xu Zhixun held a family banquet to see Zhu Xi off, and Zhu Xi served him more humbly.

古文：翼日，诣知训第谢，留门久之，知训家僮私谓瑾曰： 政事相公此夕在白牡丹妓院，侍者无得往。 
现代文：第二天，朱瑾到徐知训家告辞，呆在徐家门前很久，徐知训的家僮私下对朱瑾说 ：徐相公今晚在白牡丹妓院，侍者不准前往。 
English: The next day, Zhu Xi went to Xu Zhitong's house to say goodbye. He stayed in front of Xu Zhitong's door for a long time. Xu Zhitong's housekeeper said to Zhu Xi in private: "Xu Sangong is at the White Peony Brothel tonight. Waiters are not allowed to go there."

古文：瑾谓典谒曰： 吾不奈朝饥，且归。 
现代文：朱瑾便对门房说 ：我受不了早晨的饥饿，先暂且回去。 
English: Zhu Xi then said to the concierge: I can't stand the hunger in the morning, let's go back first.

古文：既而知训闻之，愕然曰： 晚当过瑾。 
现代文：过后徐知训得知，愕然说： 晚上当看望朱瑾。 
English: Afterward, when Xu Zhixun learned of this, he said in dismay: "You should visit Zhu Xi in the evening.

古文：瑾厚备供帐。
现代文：朱瑾于是大肆具办酒席。
English: Zhu Xi then went to great lengths to arrange a banquet.

古文：瑾有所乘名马，冬以锦帐贮之，夏以罗帱护之。
现代文：朱瑾有乘坐的名马，冬天用锦帐罩着它，夏天用罗帐护着它。
English: Zhu Xi has a famous horse to ride. In winter, he covers it with a brocade curtain, and in summer, he protects it with a rope curtain.

古文：爱妓桃氏，有绝色，善歌舞。
现代文：又有爱妓桃氏，是绝色美人，长于歌舞。
English: There is also a prostitute, Ms. Peach, who is a stunning beauty and is good at singing and dancing.

古文：及知训至，奉卮酒为寿，初以名马奉，知训喜而言曰： 相公出镇，与吾暂别，离恨可知，愿此尽欢。 
现代文：当徐知训来到后，朱瑾捧杯为他祝寿，先将名马奉送给他，徐知训大喜说： 相公外出镇守，与我暂时相别，离情别恨可以心知，愿在此尽情一乐！ 
English: When Xu Zhixun arrived, Zhu Xi raised a glass to wish him a happy birthday, and first presented him with a famous horse. Xu Zhixun was overjoyed and said, "My father-in-law went out to guard the town, and I have to leave him for the time being. I don't want to be separated from him, and I'm willing to enjoy myself here!"

古文：瑾即延知训于中堂，出桃氏，酒既醉，瑾斩知训首，示其部下。
现代文：朱瑾于是请徐知训来到中堂，叫来桃氏陪酒。喝醉后，朱瑾便砍下徐知训的脑袋，给他部下看。
English: Zhu Xi then invited Xu Zhixun to come to the hall and invited Mr. Tao to accompany him. After getting drunk, Zhu Xi cut off Xu Zhixun's head and showed it to his subordinates.

古文：马令《南唐书》云：知训因求马于瑾，瑾不与，遂有隙。俄出瑾为静淮节度使。瑾诣知训别，且愿献前马。
现代文：趁机带着自己的部众紧急赶赴占领衙城，徐知训的党徒已关闭了城门，只有朱瑾一人入城，与衙兵交战，朱瑾只得翻越城墙而出，摔坏了脚，又找不到马匹，于是用剑自杀，他的尸体被抛在街市上，盛夏而不生苍蝇蛆虫，徐温令把他丢到江里，他的部下暗中捞起埋葬了他。
English: He took advantage of the opportunity to rush to occupy the city of Handan with his subordinates. The party members of Xu Zhixun had closed the city gate. Only Zhu Xi entered the city and fought with the soldiers of Handan. Zhu Xi had to climb over the city wall, broke his foot, and could not find a horse, so he committed suicide with a sword. His body was thrown on the street market. In the middle of summer, there were no flies and maggots. Xu Wenling threw him into the river. His subordinates secretly picked him up and buried him.

古文：唐广明元年，无棣人洪霸郎合群盗于齐、棣间，节度使安师儒遣敬武讨平之。
现代文：后徐温病重时，梦见朱瑾披散着头发拉开弓箭将向他射击。徐温于是为朱瑾举行葬礼，立庙祭祀他。王师范，青州人。父亲王敬武，开始时为平卢军牙将。唐朝广明年间，无棣人洪霸郎在齐州、棣州一带纠聚成群的强盗，节度使安师儒派王敬武征讨并平定了他们。
English: Later, when Xu Wen was seriously ill, he dreamed that Zhu Xi, with his hair disheveled, was pulling a bow and arrow to shoot at him. Xu Wen then held a funeral for Zhu Xi and built a temple to worship him. Wang Shifan, a native of Qingzhou. His father, Wang Jingwu, was initially a military admiral in Pinglu. During the Guangming period of the Tang Dynasty, Hong Balang, a ruthless man, gathered a group of robbers in the area of Qizhou and Zhangzhou, and ordered the Confucian scholar Wang Jingwu to fight and subdue them.

古文：及巢贼犯长安，诸籓擅易主帅，敬武乃逐师儒，自为留后。
现代文：到黄巢贼寇进犯长安时，各处藩镇擅自更换主帅，王敬武于是赶走安师儒，自己任留后。
English: When the Yellow Nest bandits invaded and attacked Chang'an, all the towns of the domain changed their chiefs without authorization. Wang Jingwu then drove away An Shiru and remained in his post.

古文：王铎承制授以节钺，后以出师勤王功，加太尉、平章事。
现代文：王铎受诏授予王敬武符节斧钺，后来王敬武因为出兵勤王的功劳，加封为太尉、平章事。
English: Wang Xi awarded Wang Jingwu with the Axe of the Festival of Characters, and later Wang Jingwu was awarded the title of Taijun and Pingzhangji for his service to the king.

古文：龙纪中，敬武卒，师范年幼，三军推之为帅，棣州刺史张蟾叛于师范，不受节度，朝廷乃以崔安潜为平卢帅，师范拒命。
现代文：龙纪年中，王敬武去世，王师范年幼，即被三军推为主帅。棣州刺史张蟾背叛王师范，不受他节制，朝廷于是任命崔安潜为平卢军主帅，王师范抗命不从。
English: In the middle of the Longji era, Wang Jingwu died, and Wang Shifan was promoted to be the commander of the three armies at a young age. Zhang Xuan betrayed Wang Shifan and was not restrained by him. The imperial court then appointed Cui Anqian as the commander of the Pinglu army, but Wang Shifan disobeyed the order.

古文：张蟾迎安潜至郡，同讨师范。
现代文：张蟾迎接崔安潜到棣州，一同讨伐王师范。
English: Zhang Ye welcomed Cui An to Bozhou, and together they fought against Wang Shifan.

古文：师范遣将卢宏将兵攻蟾，宏复叛，与蟾通谋，伪旋军将袭青州。
现代文：王师范派将领卢弘领兵攻打张蟾，卢弘又背叛王师范，与张蟾共谋假装凯旋，准备袭击青州。
English: Wang Shifan sent the general Lu Hong to lead the troops to attack Zhang Ye. Lu Hong betrayed Wang Shifan and conspired with Zhang Ye to pretend to return in triumph and prepare to attack Qingzhou.

古文：师范知之，遣重赂迎宏，谓之曰： 吾以先人之故，为军府所推，年方幼少，未能干事。
现代文：王师范知悉，致送重礼迎接卢弘，对他说： 我因先父的关系，被三军推举为帅，年纪还幼小，不能胜任。
English: Wang Shifan knew that he had sent a heavy gift to meet Lu Hong, and said to him: Because of my father's relationship, I was selected as a handsome man by the three armies. I am still young, and I am not competent.

古文：如公以先人之故，令不乏祀，公之仁也。
现代文：如果您因我先人的缘故，让他不绝香火，是您的仁慈。
English: If, for the sake of my ancestors, you let him continue to burn incense, it is your kindness.

古文：如以为难与成事，乞保首领，以守先人坟墓，亦惟命。 
现代文：如果以为难以与我成就大事，请求您保留我的性命，以守护先人的坟墓，我也唯命是从。 
English: If you think it is difficult to accomplish great things with me and ask you to preserve my life to guard the graves of my ancestors, I will do as you command.

古文：宏以师范年幼，必无能为，不为之备。
现代文：卢弘认为王师范年幼，一定不能有所作为，于是不防备他。
English: Lu Hong believed that Wang Shifan was too young to make a difference, so he did not guard him.

古文：师范伏兵要路，迎而享之，预谓纪纲刘鄩曰： 翼日卢宏至，尔即斩之，酬尔以军校。 
现代文：王师范便暗中在要道旁埋伏兵士，迎接招待他，预先对仆人刘寻阝说： 明天卢弘一到，你就杀死他，我将任你为军校作为报答。 
English: Wang Shifan then secretly ambushed the soldier on the side of the main road, greeted him, and said to his servant Liu Xunqi in advance: "Tomorrow, when Lu Hong arrives, you will kill him, and I will reward you with a military school."

古文：鄩如其言，斩宏于座上，及同乱者数人。
现代文：刘寻阝照他说的去做，在酒席上杀死卢弘，以及共同作乱的若干人。
English: Liu Xingyao did as he was told and killed Lu Hong and a number of people who had been involved in the disturbance at the banquet.

古文：因戒厉士众，大行颁赏，与之誓约，自率之以攻棣州，擒张蟾，斩之。
现代文：王师范于是儆戒激励士兵，大行封赏，与他们发誓结盟，亲自率领他们进攻棣州，活捉了张蟾，杀了他。
English: Wang Shifan then exhorted the soldiers, rewarded them generously, swore an alliance with them, personally led them to attack Zhangzhou, captured Zhang Jun alive, and killed him.

古文：安潜遁还长安。
现代文：崔安潜逃回长安。
English: Cui An fled back to Chang'an.

古文：师范雅好儒术，少负纵横之学，故安民禁暴，各有方略，当时籓翰咸称之。
现代文：王师范很喜爱儒术，从小就掌握了纵横捭阖的学问，所以安抚人民，抑制强暴，各有方法谋略，当时的藩臣儒士都称许他。
English: Wang Shifan was very fond of Confucianism. He had mastered the knowledge of vertical and horizontal lines since childhood, so he had ways and means to appease the people, restrain violence, and devise strategies. The feudal retainers and Confucianists at that time all praised him.

古文：及太祖平兗、郓，遣硃友恭攻之，师范乞盟，遂与通好。
现代文：当太祖平定兖州、郓州后，派朱友恭进攻王师范，王师范请求结盟友好，于是太祖与他互通友好。
English: When the great-grandfather subdued Luzhou and Luzhou, he sent Zhu Youqong to attack Wang Shifan. Wang Shifan asked for alliance and friendship, so the great-grandfather and him exchanged friendship.

古文：天复元年冬，李茂贞劫迁车驾幸凤翔，韩全诲矫诏加罪于太祖，令方镇出师赴难。
现代文：天复元年冬天，李茂贞劫持唐皇御驾到凤翔，韩全诲假托诏令加罪于太祖，令各方镇出兵勤王。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Li Maozhen kidnapped the Emperor of Tang and drove him to Fengxiang. Han Quanzhang issued a fake edict to add a crime to the great ancestor, and ordered all towns to send troops to serve the king.

古文：诏至青州，师范承诏泣下曰： 吾辈为天子籓篱，君父有难，略无奋力者，皆强兵自卫，纵贼如此，使上失守宗祧，危而不持，是谁之过，吾今日成败以之！ 
现代文：诏令传到青州，王师范接受诏令流着眼泪说： 我辈是天子的藩篱，君父有难，全无奋力赴难的人，都各拥强兵自卫，皇上危急而不扶持，是谁的罪过？我今天不管胜负都要一拼了之！ 
English: The edict reached Qingzhou, and Wang Shifan accepted the edict with tears streaming down his face, saying, "We are the sons of heaven, the emperor is in trouble, all those who do not struggle to go to the trouble have strong soldiers to defend themselves, the emperor is in danger and does not support, whose fault is it? I will fight it out today, regardless of victory or defeat!"

古文：乃发使通杨行密，遣将刘鄩袭兗州，别将袭齐。
现代文：于是派使者勾通吴国杨行密，派将领刘寻阝袭击兖州，其他将领袭击齐州。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to persuade Yang Xingmi of the State of Wu, sent General Liu Xingyao to attack Zhangzhou, and other generals to attack Qizhou.

古文：时太祖方围凤翔，师范遣将张居厚部舆夫二百，言有献于太祖。
现代文：当时太祖正围困凤翔，王师范派部将张居厚手下车夫二百人，说有礼物献给太祖。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizu was besieging Fengxiang. Wang Shifan's faction sent Zhang Jiuhuo and two hundred coachmen, saying that they had a gift for Emperor Taizu.

古文：至华州城东，华将娄敬思疑其有异，剖舆视之，乃兵仗也。
现代文：来到华州城东，华州将领娄敬思怀疑其中有诈，剖开车舆一看，里面全是兵仗。
English: When he came to East of Huazhou City, Huazhou General Zou Jingxi suspected that there was fraud, but when he took a closer look, it was all war.

古文：居厚等因呼，杀敬思，聚众攻西城。
现代文：张居厚等人于是大声呐喊，杀死娄敬思，聚合众人攻打华州西城。
English: Zhang Ju Hou and others then shouted loudly, killed Zou Jing Si, and gathered people to attack West Huazhou City.

古文：时崔允在华州，遣部下闭关拒之，遂遁去。
现代文：当时崔胤在华州，派部下闭紧城门抵拒，张居厚等于是逃走。
English: At that time, Cui Yan was in Huazhou and sent his subordinates to close the city gate to resist. Zhang Ju Hou was about to flee.

古文：是日，刘鄩下兗州，河南数十郡同日发。
现代文：这天，刘寻阝攻下兖州，黄河以南数十州同日倒戈。
English: On this day, Liu Huanqian conquered Zhangzhou, and dozens of states south of the Yellow River defected on the same day.

古文：太祖怒，遣硃友宁率军讨之。
现代文：太祖大怒，派朱友宁领军征讨他们。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and sent Zhu Youning to lead an army to fight them.

古文：既而友宁为青军所败，临阵被擒，传首于淮南。
现代文：不久朱友宁被青州军队打败，临阵被捉，被斩下首级送往淮南吴国。
English: Not long after, Zhu Youning was defeated by the Qingzhou army, captured, beheaded and sent to Huainan and Wuzhong.

古文：天复三年七月，太祖复令杨师厚进攻，屯于临朐。
现代文：天复三年七月，太祖又令杨师厚进攻王师范，屯军临朐。
English: In July of the third year of Tianfu, Emperor Taizu ordered Yang Shihou to attack Wang Shifan again, and the garrison moved to Linyi.

古文：太祖许之。岁余，遣李振权典青州事，因令师范举家徙汴。
现代文：杨师厚接连打败青州军队，于是前进扎营于青州城下。王师范害怕，于是令副使李嗣业拜见杨师厚请求投降，太祖答应了他。一年多后，派李振临时主管青州事务，令王师范全家搬往汴州。
English: Yang Shihou defeated the Qingzhou army one after another, so he advanced and camped under the city of Qingzhou. Wang Shifan was afraid, so he ordered the deputy envoy Li Siye to meet Yang Shihou to request surrender, and the great-grandfather agreed to him. More than a year later, he sent Li Zhen to be temporarily in charge of Qingzhou affairs and ordered Wang Shifan's whole family to move to Zhangzhou.

古文：师范将至，缟素乘驴，请罪于太祖。
现代文：师范将到汴京时，穿着缟素骑着驴子，向太祖请罪。
English: When the teacher arrived in Beijing, he rode a donkey wearing a silk robe and asked for forgiveness from his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖以礼待之，寻表为河阳节度使。
现代文：太祖待之以礼，不久上表推荐他任河阳节度使。
English: The great-grandfather received him with courtesy, and soon recommended him to be appointed as the regent of Heyang.

古文：会韩建移镇青州，太祖帐饯于郊，师范预焉。
现代文：遇上韩建调动镇守青州，太祖在郊外设帐为他饯行，王师范也参加了。
English: When Han Jian mobilized the town guard of Qingzhou, Taizu set up a tent in the suburbs for him to walk, and Wang Shifan also participated.

古文：太祖谓建曰： 公顷在华阴，政事之暇，省览经籍，此亦士君子之大务。
现代文：太祖对韩建说： 您不久前在华阴，工作之余，披览文章经籍，这也是君子必修的要务。
English: The great-grandfather said to Han Jian: You were in Huayin not long ago, and in your spare time, you were reading the scriptures. This is also a must-do for a gentleman.

古文：今之青土，政简务暇，可复修华阴之故事。 
现代文：现在到青州，政务简单轻松，可照在华阴时的做法去做。 
English: Now in Qingzhou, government affairs are simple and easy, and can be done according to the practice in Huayin.

古文：建捴谦而已。
现代文：韩建随意谦虚而已。
English: Han Jian is just being casually modest.

古文：太祖又曰： 公读书必须精意，勿错用心。 
现代文：太祖又说： 您读书必须精心，不要用错了心事。 
English: The great-grandfather also said, "You must be meticulous in your reading, and don't use the wrong thoughts.

古文：太祖以师范好儒，前以青州叛，故以此言讥之。
现代文：太祖因为王师范爱好儒学，以前在青州反叛，所以用这话来讥讽他。
English: The great-grandfather used this to mock Wang Shifan because he loved Confucianism and had rebelled in Qingzhou.

古文：及太祖即位，征为金吾上将军。
现代文：到太祖即帝位后，任王师范为金吾上将军。
English: After his great-grandfather ascended the throne, Wang Shifan was appointed as Kingu Shangzheng.

古文：开平初，太祖封诸子为王，友宁妻号诉于太祖曰： 陛下化家为国，人人皆得封崇。
现代文：长平初年，太祖封各位儿子为王，已故朱友宁的妻子号哭着向太祖诉说 ：陛下化家为国，人人都得到高封。
English: In the first year of the Changping era, the great-grandfather enthroned his sons as kings. The wife of the late Zhu Youning cried and told the great-grandfather: "Your majesty has turned the family into a country, and everyone has received a high title."

古文：妾夫早预艰难，粗立劳效，不幸师范反逆，亡夫横尸疆场。
现代文：妾夫朱友宁早年参予艰难创业，立下功劳，不幸王师范反叛，亡夫横尸疆场。
English: Concubine Zhu Youning participated in the early years of the difficult start-up, made a great contribution, unfortunately Wang Shifan rebelled, and her late husband died.

古文：冤仇尚在朝廷，受陛下恩泽，亡夫何罪！ 
现代文：仇人却在朝廷，享受陛下恩泽，亡夫有何罪啊？ 
English: But the enemy is at court, enjoying His Majesty's favour. What is the late husband's crime?

古文：太祖凄然泣下曰： 几忘此贼。 
现代文：太祖凄然泪下说 ：几乎忘了这个逆贼。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, the great-grandfather said, "I almost forgot about this traitor."

古文：即遣人族师范于洛阳。
现代文：立即派人到洛阳族灭王师范全家。
English: Immediately send someone to Luoyang to exterminate Wang Shifan's entire family.

古文：先掘坑于第侧，乃告之，其弟师诲、兄师悦及兒侄二百口，咸尽戮焉。
现代文：先在他住宅旁挖好土坑，然后才传诏告诉他，他的弟弟王师诲、哥哥王师悦及儿侄二百人，全被杀死。
English: First, a pit was dug next to his house, and only then was it announced to him that his brother Wang Shizhi, his brother Wang Shiyue, and 200 of his nephews and nieces had all been killed.

古文：时使者宣诏讫，师范盛启宴席，令昆仲子弟列座，谓使者曰： 死者人所不能免，况有罪乎！
现代文：当时使者宣读诏令完毕，王师范开设盛大宴席，令兄弟子侄按次序就座，对使者说： 死是人不可避免的，何况是有罪的人呢！
English: At that time, after the envoy finished reading the edict, Wang Shifan held a grand banquet, seated his brothers and nephews in order, and said to the envoy: "Death is inevitable for man, let alone a guilty man!

古文：然予惧坑尸于下，少长失序，有愧于先人。 
现代文：然而我们尸体堆于坑下，尊卑老少失了次序，深恐有愧于先人。 
English: However, our bodies are piled up under the pit, and the order of respect for the old and the young has lost its order, and we are deeply afraid of being unworthy of our ancestors.

古文：行酒之次，令少长依次于坑所受戮，人士痛之。
现代文：行酒之中，令老少依次在坑中受戮，人们为之悲痛。
English: During the drinking, the old and the young were killed in the pit in turn, and people were saddened by it.

古文：后唐同光三年三月，诏赠太尉。
现代文：后唐同光三年三月，诏令追赠为太尉。
English: In March of the third year after the Tang Dynasty, Tongguang was posthumously promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：刘知俊，字希贤，徐州沛县人也。
现代文：刘知俊，字希贤，徐州沛县人。
English: Liu Zhijun, surnamed Xixian, a native of Pei County, Xuzhou.

古文：姿貌雄杰，倜傥有大志。
现代文：身材高大相貌英俊，潇洒无拘胸有大志。
English: Tall, good-looking, handsome, dashing and ambitious.

古文：始事徐帅时溥，为列校，溥甚器之，后以勇略见忌。
现代文：开始时事奉徐州统帅时溥，担任列校，时溥很器重他，后来因为勇敢和才略而被嫉妒。
English: At the beginning, he served as the commander of Xuzhou at the time, and served as a school marshal. At the time, he was very important to him. Later, he was envied for his bravery and talent.

古文：唐大顺二年冬，率所部二千人来降，即署为军校。
现代文：唐朝大顺二年冬天，率领部下两千人投降梁太祖，即暂任军校。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Dashun led two thousand of his subordinates to surrender to Liang Taizu, that is, the temporary military school.

古文：知俊披甲上马，轮剑入敌，勇冠诸将。
现代文：刘知俊披上铠甲跨上战马，抡起刀剑杀敌陷阵，勇敢胆略比其他将领都强。
English: Liu Zhijun put on armor and mounted a warhorse, raised a sword to kill the enemy, and was braver and bolder than other generals.

古文：太祖命左右义胜两军隶之，寻用为左开道指挥使，故当时人谓之 刘开道 。
现代文：太祖命令左义胜军和右义胜军都归隶刘知俊指挥，不久又任用他为左开道指挥使，所以当时人都叫他 刘开道 。
English: The great-grandfather ordered both the left and right victorious armies to be under the command of Liu Zhijun, and soon appointed him as the commander of the left open road, so at that time people called him Liu Kaido.

古文：后讨秦宗权及攻徐州，皆有功，寻补徐州马步军都指挥使。
现代文：跟随太祖讨伐秦宗权以及进攻徐州都立有战功，接着补任徐州马步军都指挥使。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather in fighting against the Qin Dynasty and attacking the Xuzhou Capital, and then he was appointed as the commander of the Xuzhou Horse Cavalry Army.

古文：攻海州下之，遂奏授刺史。
现代文：刘知俊进攻海州并夺取了它，太祖奏请皇上授刘知俊为海州刺史。
English: Liu Zhijun attacked Haizhou and captured it. The great-grandfather asked the emperor to confer Liu Zhijun as the crown prince of Haizhou.

古文：天复初，历典怀、郑二州，从平青州，以功奏授同州节度使。
现代文：天复初年，历任怀州、郑州主管，跟从太祖平定青州，因为战功奏请皇上授以同州节度使。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, the successive heads of Waizhou and Zhengzhou followed the Great Ancestor to pacify Qingzhou, and asked the emperor to award him with the title of the festival envoy of Qingzhou because of his war exploits.

古文：天祐三年冬，以兵五千破岐军六万于美原。
现代文：天三年冬天，率领五千士兵在美原击败岐下六万士兵。
English: In the winter of 1533, he led 5,000 soldiers to defeat 60,000 soldiers in Mihara.

古文：自是连克鄜、延等五州，乃加检校太傅、平章事。
现代文：从此接连攻克、延等五州，于是加封为检校太傅、平章事。
English: Since then, he has successively conquered and extended to five states, so he was awarded the title of "school inspector" and "high-ranking official."

古文：开平二年春三月，命为潞州行营招讨使。
现代文：开平二年春三月，任命为潞州行营招讨使。
English: In March of the spring of the second year of Kaiping, he was appointed as an envoy of the Bozhou Campaign.

古文：知俊未至潞，夹寨已陷，晋人引军方攻泽州，闻知俊至，乃退。
现代文：刘知俊还没有到达潞州时，两边的营寨已经陷落，晋人领着军队正在进攻泽州，听说刘知俊来了，才撤退。
English: When Liu Zhijun had not yet arrived in Zhangzhou, the camps on both sides had already fallen, and the Jin people were leading the army to attack Zezhou. When they heard that Liu Zhijun was coming, they retreated.

古文：寻改西路招讨使。
现代文：不久就改任西路招讨使。
English: He was soon appointed the West Road Recruiting and Recruiting Envoy.

古文：六月，大破岐军于幕谷，俘斩千计，李茂贞仅以身免。
现代文：六月，在幕谷大破岐下军队，被俘和被杀的敌军数以千计，李茂贞仅仅只身一人逃脱。
English: In June, with the army at the breaking point of the shogunate and thousands of enemy soldiers captured and killed, Li Maozhen was the only one to escape.

古文：三年五月，加检校太尉、兼侍中，封大彭郡王。
现代文：三年五月，加封为检校太尉，兼任侍中，被封为大彭郡王。
English: In May of the third year, he was awarded the title of lieutenant of the inspection of the school, concurrently served as a chamberlain, and was named the king of Dapeng County.

古文：送款于李茂贞。又分兵以袭雍、华，雍州节度使刘捍被擒，送凤翔害之，华州蔡敬思被伤获免。
现代文：这时刘知俊的威望日益高涨，太祖的猜疑之心也日益强烈，恰遇上佑国军节度使王重师无罪而被太祖诛杀，刘知俊坐卧不安，于是凭据同州反叛太祖，并对李茂贞表达诚意。刘知俊又分兵进攻雍州、华州，雍州节度使刘捍被擒获，送到凤翔李茂贞处被杀害了，华州蔡敬思受伤而得免于一死。
English: At this time, Liu Zhijun's prestige was increasingly high, and the suspicion of the great-grandfather was also increasingly strong. It just so happened that the Yu Guojun Festival made Wang Chongshi innocent and was killed by the great-grandfather. Liu Zhijun was uneasy, so he rebelled against the great-grandfather on the basis of the same state and expressed his sincerity to Li Maozhen. Liu Zhijun also attacked Yongzhou and Huazhou. The Yongzhou Festival caused Liu Han to be captured and sent to Fengxiang Li Maozhen was killed, Huazhou Cai Jingsi was injured and was spared from death.

古文：太祖闻知俊叛，遣近臣谕之曰： 朕待卿甚厚，何相负耶？ 
现代文：太祖听到刘知俊反叛，派遣身边的亲信告诉他说： 我对待你非常优厚，为什么要背叛我呢？ 
English: When the great-grandfather heard that Liu Zhijun had rebelled, he sent a close confidant to tell him: "I have treated you very well. Why did you betray me?

古文：知俊报曰： 臣非背德，但畏死耳！
现代文：刘知俊回话说： 我并不是背叛你对我的恩德，我只是怕死罢了！
English: Liu Zhijun replied: "I'm not betraying your kindness to me, I'm just scared to death!"

古文：王重师不负陛下，而致族灭！ 
现代文：王重师没有对不起陛下的地方，然而招致了灭族的灾祸。 
English: Wang Chongshi did not offend His Majesty in any way, yet he brought about the disaster of extermination.

古文：太祖复遣使谓知俊曰： 朕不料卿为此。
现代文：太祖又派遣使者对刘知俊说 ：我没有料到你会这样做。
English: The great-grandfather also sent an envoy to Liu Zhijun to say: "I didn't expect you to do this.

古文：昨重师得罪，盖刘捍言阴结邠、凤，终不为国家用。
现代文：以前王重师获罪被诛，是因为刘捍说他私下勾结州、凤州，终将不被国家所用。
English: Previously, Wang Chongshi was convicted and imprisoned because Liu Han said that he had secretly colluded with Zhou and Fengzhou, and would eventually not be used by the state.

古文：我今虽知枉滥，悔不可追，致卿如斯，我心恨恨，盖刘捍误予事也，捍一死固未塞责。 
现代文：我现在虽然已经知道是冤枉滥杀，但是后悔已经来不及了，致使你变成这样，我内心非常遗憾悔恨，是因为刘捍误了我的大事呀，刘捍一死仍然不能解脱他的罪责。 
English: Although I now know that it was an unjustified and indiscriminate killing, it is too late to regret that you have become like this. My heart is very regretful and remorseful, because Liu Han misjudged my big event. Liu Han's death still cannot absolve him of his guilt.

古文：知俊不报，遂分兵以守潼关。
现代文：刘知俊不做回答，而是分兵据守潼关。
English: Liu Zhijun did not answer, but a detachment of soldiers guarded the pass.

古文：太祖命刘鄩率兵进讨，攻潼关，下之。
现代文：太祖命令刘寻阝领兵进攻讨伐，攻击潼关，占领了它。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Liu Huanqian to lead the troops to attack the crusade, attack Shaoguan and occupy it.

古文：时知俊弟知浣为亲卫指挥使，闻知俊叛，自洛奔至潼关，为鄩所擒，害之。
现代文：当时刘知俊的弟弟刘知浣是太祖亲卫指挥使，听到刘知俊反叛，从洛阳奔到潼关，被刘寻阝抓获，杀死了他。
English: At that time, Liu Zhijun's younger brother Liu Zhijun was the commander of the Imperial Guards. Hearing Liu Zhijun's rebellion, he ran from Luoyang to Shaoguan, where he was captured by Liu Xun and killed.

古文：寻而王师继至，知俊乃举族奔于凤翔；李茂贞厚待之，伪加检校太尉、兼中书令，以土疆不广，无籓镇以处之，但厚给俸禄而已。
现代文：不久皇室大军接着开来，刘知俊于是带着全家逃奔到凤翔府，李茂贞优厚地接待他，任为伪检校太尉、兼任中书令，因为李茂贞盘踞的疆土不广，没有藩镇可用来安置他，因此只是供给他优厚的俸禄而已。
English: The imperial army soon followed, and Liu Zhijun fled with his entire family to Fengxiangfu. Li Maozhen generously received him, appointing him as a pseudo-inspector first lieutenant and concurrently as a middle secretary, because Li Maozhen's territory was not extensive and there was no town to resettle him, so he was only provided with a generous salary.

古文：寻命率兵攻围灵武，且图牧圉之地。
现代文：接着命令他领兵攻击围困灵武，想得到牧圉一带地方。
English: He then ordered him to lead the troops to attack the besieged Lingwu in order to take the area around Muyi.

古文：会王建亦至，遂解西县之围。既而为茂贞左右石简颙等间之，免其军政，寓于岐下，掩关历年。
现代文：灵武节度使韩逊派使者来向太祖告急，太祖命令康怀英带领军队救援他，部队驻扎在州长城岭，被刘知俊半路拦截袭击，康怀英被打败逃回。李茂贞大喜，命刘知俊暂任泾州节度使。又命令他带领部队攻打兴元府，进军围住蜀国西县，恰逢蜀军援兵来到，刘知俊才撤退。
English: Lingwu Jiedu caused Han Xun to send an envoy to the Great Ancestor to alert him. The Great Ancestor ordered Kang Huaiying to lead an army to rescue him. The army was stationed in Guozhuangchengling. Liu Zhijun intercepted the attack halfway, and Kang Huaiying was defeated and fled back. Li Maozhen was overjoyed and ordered Liu Zhijun to temporarily serve as an envoy to the Shanzhou Jiedu. He also ordered him to lead an army to attack Xingyuanfu and encircle the west county of Shu. Liu Zhijun only retreated when the Shu army reinforcements arrived.

古文：茂贞犹子继崇镇秦州，因来宁觐，言知俊途穷至此，不宜以谗嫉见疑，茂贞乃诛简颙等以安其心。
现代文：不久刘知俊被李茂贞身边的人如石简等人挑拨离间，李茂贞罢免了他的军政大权。刘知俊寓居于岐下，闭门不出有好几年。李茂贞的侄子李继崇镇守秦州，趁来问候拜见李茂贞的机会，诉说刘知俊的困顿，说不该因谗言嫉妒而被怀疑，李茂贞于是诛杀石简等人来抚慰刘知俊的心。
English: Soon, Liu Zhijun was driven apart by people around Li Maozhen, such as Shi Jian and others, and Li Maozhen deposed him from his military and political power. Liu Zhijun lived in Qishan and did not leave his house for several years. Li Maozhen's nephew Li Jizhong, who guarded Qinzhou, took the opportunity to meet Li Maozhen and tell him about Liu Zhijun's difficulties and that he should not be suspected of jealousy. Li Maozhen then killed Shi Jian and others to soothe Liu Zhijun's heart.

古文：继崇又请令知俊挈家居秦州，以就丰给，茂贞从之。
现代文：李继崇又请求让刘知俊携带家眷住到秦州，以接受丰厚的俸给，李茂贞答应了他。
English: Li Jitong also requested that Liu Zhijun bring his family to live in Qinzhou to receive a rich salary, and Li Maozhen agreed.

古文：未几，邠州乱，茂贞命知俊讨之。
现代文：不久，州动乱，李茂贞命令刘知俊讨伐州。
English: Soon, the state was in turmoil, and Li Maozhen ordered Liu Zhijun to attack the state.

古文：时邠州都校李保衡纳款于朝廷，末帝遣霍彦威率众先入于邠，知俊遂围其城，半载不能下。
现代文：这时州都校李保衡效忠于朝廷，梁末帝派遣霍彦威率领部队先进入城，刘知俊于是围住城，半年都不能攻下。
English: At this time, the state capital school Li Baoheng was loyal to the imperial court. Emperor Liang sent Huo Yanwei to lead the troops to enter the city first. Liu Zhijun then surrounded the city and could not capture it for half a year.

古文：会李继崇以秦州降于蜀，知俊妻孥皆迁于成都，遂解邠州之围而归岐阳。
现代文：逢上李继崇将秦州投降了蜀国，刘知俊的妻子儿女都被带去了成都，于是刘知俊解除州的围兵回到岐阳。
English: When Li Jitong surrendered Qinzhou to Shu, Liu Zhijun's wife and children were taken to Chengdu, so Liu Zhijun relieved the besieged soldiers and returned to Qiyang.

古文：以举家入蜀，终虑猜忌，因与亲信百余人夜斩关奔蜀。
现代文：因为自己的一家人都去了蜀地，到底担心被猜疑顾忌，因而与亲信一百多人夜晚杀出城门投奔蜀国。
English: Because his own family had all gone to Shu, he was worried about being suspected and feared, so he and more than a hundred of his cronies left the city gates at night to go to Shu.

古文：王建待之甚至，即授伪武信军节度使，寻命将兵伐岐，不克，班师，因围陇州，获其帅桑宏志以归。
现代文：蜀主王建对待刘知俊非常优厚周到，马上授予他伪武信军节度使。接着命令他领兵攻伐岐下，不能攻下，回师，顺便包围了陇州，俘虏了陇州统帅桑弘志归来。
English: Shu lord Wang Jian treated Liu Zhijun very generously and thoughtfully, immediately awarding him the pseudo-Wuxin Army Festival Envoy. Then he ordered him to lead the troops to attack Qishan, unable to attack, return to the division, incidentally surrounded Zhangzhou, captured Zhangzhou commander Kuang Hongzhi and returned.

古文：久之，复命为都统，再领军伐岐。
现代文：很久以后，又任命他为都统，再次领兵攻伐岐下。
English: A long time later, he was again appointed as the head of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and once again led troops to fight against Mao Zedong.

古文：时部将皆王建旧人，多违节度，不成功而还，蜀人因而毁之。
现代文：这时部下将领都是王建旧日手下人，多次违抗刘知俊的调度指挥，所以没有成功就回来了，蜀国人因此诋毁他。
English: At this time, his subordinate generals were all Wang Jian's old subordinates, and they repeatedly defied Liu Zhijun's dispatching command, so they returned without success. The people of Shu therefore slandered him.

古文：先是，王建虽加宠待，然亦忌之，尝谓近侍曰： 吾渐衰耗，恆思身后。
现代文：在这以前，王建虽然宠爱厚待他，但也有所疑忌，曾经对身旁侍臣说 ：我渐渐衰弱羸老了，经常考虑身后的事情。
English: Before this, although Wang Jian treated him with favor and kindness, he also had doubts. He once said to the attendants around him, "I am getting old and weak, and I often think about the things behind me."

古文：刘知俊非尔辈能驾驭，不如早为之所。 
现代文：刘知俊不是你们这班人能驾驭得了的，不如早点给他一个处置。 
English: Liu Zhijun is not someone you can control, so it's better to deal with him early.

古文：又嫉其名者于里巷间作谣言云： 黑牛出圈棕绳断。 
现代文：又有嫉妒他声誉的人在街头巷尾传播谣言说 ：黑牛出圈棕绳断。 
English: Others, jealous of his reputation, spread rumours in the streets and alleys saying: "The black bull is out of the ring and the brown rope is broken."

古文：知俊色黔而丑生，棕绳者，王氏子孙皆以 宗 、 承 为名，故以此构之。
现代文：刘知俊颜色黑而且生在属牛的丑年，所谓棕绳，王建的子孙都以 宗 、 承 作为名字，所以把这些牵合在一起而构成谣言。
English: Liu Zhijun is black in color and was born in the year of the ox, the so-called brown rope. Wang Jian's descendants are all named Zong and He, so these are linked together to form a rumor.

古文：伪蜀天汉元年冬十二月，建遣人捕知俊，斩于成都府之炭市。
现代文：伪蜀国天汉元年冬天十二月，王建派人逮捕了刘知俊，杀死在成都府的炭市。
English: In the winter of December of the first year of the pseudo-Shu State of Tianhan, Wang Jian sent people to arrest Liu Zhijun and kill him in the coal city of Chengdu Prefecture.

