古文：呜呼甚哉！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：自开平讫于显德，终始五十三年，而天下五代。士之不幸而生其时，欲全其节而不二者，固鲜矣。
现代文：从开平到显德，前后一共五十三年，而天下有五代，士人不幸生在这个时代，想要保全节操而永不背叛的人，必然很少了。
English: From Kaiping to Xiande, there were a total of fifty-three years before and after, and there are five generations in the world. Unfortunately, scholars were born in this era, and those who want to preserve their integrity and never betray are bound to be few.

古文：于此之时，责士以死与必去，则天下为无士矣。
现代文：在这个时代，如果用誓死守节和必定远离尘世要求士人，那么天下就没有士人了。
English: In this day and age, if we use the oath of death to keep the festival and must stay away from the world to require scholars, then there will be no scholars in the world.

古文：然其习俗，遂以苟生不去为当然。
现代文：然而这个时代的习俗，就把苟且偷生不离富贵看成理所当然的事。
English: However, the customs of this era take it for granted that it is a matter of course to live a life of luxury.

古文：至于儒者，以仁义忠信为学，享人之禄，任人之国者，不顾其存亡，皆恬然以苟生为得，非徒不知愧，而反以其得为荣者，可胜数哉！
现代文：至于儒生，把仁义忠信当作学问，享用人家的俸禄，承担人家的国事，不管国家的存亡，都心安理得地以苟且偷生为得意，不只是不懂得羞愧，反而以苟且偷生所得为荣耀的人，能数得完吗！
English: As for Confucianism, can there be an end to the number of people who regard benevolence, righteousness, and loyalty as their learning, enjoy others' salaries, undertake others' affairs of state, and, regardless of whether the country survives or dies, are justifiably proud of the fact that they have lived a virtuous life? Not only do they not know shame, but they take the honor of having lived a virtuous life as their reward.

古文：故吾于死事之臣，有所取焉。
现代文：因此我对于为国事而死的臣子，认为有可取的地方。
English: Therefore, I think there is something to be said for a vassal dying for his country.

古文：君子之于人也，乐成其美而不求其备，况死者人之所难乎？
现代文：君子对于人，乐于成人之美而不责求人完美无缺，何况死是人们难以做到的事呢？
English: For human beings, a gentleman is pleased with the beauty of adulthood and does not demand perfection from people. What's more, death is a difficult thing for people to achieve?

古文：吾于五代，得全节之士三人而已。
现代文：我从五代，找到三个能够保全节操的士人罢了。
English: In five generations, I've only been able to find three taxi drivers who are able to maintain discipline.

古文：其初无卓然之节，而终以死人之事者，得十有五人焉，而战没者不得与也。
现代文：那些开初漫有超群不凡的节操，而最终为他人的事业献身的人，有十五个，而在战场上阵亡的人不在其中。
English: Those who begin with the greatest fortitude and end by devoting their lives to the service of others are fifteen in number, not counting those who die on the battlefield.

古文：然吾取王清、史彦超者，其有旨哉！
现代文：但我选取王清、史彦超，这是有用意的！
English: But I chose Wang Qing and Shi Yanchao. This was intentional!

古文：其有旨哉！作《死事传》。
现代文：这是有用意的！作《死事传》。
English: It's intentional!

古文：○张源德张源德者，不知其世家，或曰本晋人也。
现代文：张源德，不知道他的家世，有人说他原是晋人。
English: Zhang Yuande, do not know his family history, some people say he was originally a Jin.

古文：少事晋，无所称。
现代文：年轻时在晋做官，没有什么值得称道的。
English: There is nothing praiseworthy about being an official in Jin at a young age.

古文：从李罕之以潞州叛晋降梁，罕之遣源德见梁太祖。
现代文：随李罕之以潞州背叛晋投降梁，李罕之派张源德见梁太祖。
English: Li Han's faction Zhang Yuande met Liang Taizu after Li Han's betrayal of Jin and Liang's surrender in Bozhou.

古文：太祖时，源德自金吾卫将军为蔡州刺史。
现代文：梁太祖时，张源德由金吾卫将军任蔡州刺史。
English: During Liang Taizu's reign, Zhang Yuande was appointed as the governor of Caizhou by General Jin Wuwei.

古文：梁贞明三年，魏博节度使杨师厚卒，末帝分魏、相等六州为两镇，惧魏军不从，乃遣刘鄩将兵万人，屯于魏以虞变。
现代文：梁贞明三年，魏博节度使杨师厚死，梁末帝分魏、相等六州为两镇，怕魏军不听从指挥，于是派刘郡率兵一万人，屯驻在魏州以防兵变。
English: In the third year of the reign of Liang Zhenming, the Wei Bo Festival caused the death of Yang Shih Hou, and the last emperor of Liang divided Wei, equal to six states, into two towns. Fearing that the Wei army would not obey the command, he sent Liu County and ten thousand soldiers to stay in Weizhou to prevent a mutiny.

古文：魏军果叛，迫其节度使贺德伦以魏、博二州降晋。
现代文：魏州军队果然叛乱，逼迫节度使贺德伦以魏、博二州向晋投降。
English: The Weizhou army rebelled and forced Jiedu to force Hedren to surrender Wei and Bo to Jin.

古文：当是时，源德为鄩守贝州。
现代文：正当这个时候，张源德为刘郡守贝州。
English: It was at this time that Zhang Yuande became the governor of Liu County.

古文：晋王入魏，诸将欲先击贝州，晋王曰： 贝城小而坚，攻之难卒下。
现代文：晋王进入魏州，将领们想先攻打贝州，晋王说： 贝州城虽小但坚固，攻打它却难以仓猝攻下。
English: When Jin Wang entered Weizhou, the generals wanted to attack Beizhou first. Jin Wang said: Although Beizhou City is small but strong, it is difficult to attack it in a hurry.

古文：且源德虽恃刘鄩之兵，然与沧州相首尾，今德州居其中而无备，不如先取之，则沧、贝之势分而易图也。 
现代文：况且张源德虽然仗恃刘郡的军队，但和沧州互为首尾，如今德州在中间而没有防备，不如先攻占德州，那么沧、贝二州的势力被分开就容易谋取了。 
English: Moreover, although Zhang Yuande relied on Liu County's army, he and Cangzhou were at each other's throats. Today, Texas is in the middle and has no defense. It is better to capture Texas first, so that the forces of Cangzhou and Beizhou can be easily separated.

古文：乃先袭破德州，然后以兵五千攻源德，源德坚守不下，晋军堑而围之。
现代文：于是先袭击攻破德州，然后率领五千士兵进攻张源德，张源德坚守，不能攻克，晋军挖战壕包围他们。
English: So he first attacked and broke through Texas, and then led five thousand soldiers to attack Zhangyuande. Zhangyuande held out and could not be overcome, and Jin troops dug trenches to surround them.

古文：已而刘鄩大败于故元城，南走黎阳，晋军攻破洺州，而卫州刺史来昭、邢州节度使阎宝皆以城降晋，磁州刺史靳昭、相州张筠、沧州戴思远皆弃城走。
现代文：不久刘郭在旧元城大败，向南逃到黎阳，晋军攻破沼州，而卫州刺史来昭、邢州节度使间宝都以城向晋投降，磁州刺史靳昭、相州张筠、沧州戴思远都弃城逃走。
English: Liu Guo was soon defeated in the old Yuancheng and fled south to Liyang, the Jin army defeated Nuzhou, while Weizhou Zhanshi Lai Zhao and Zhangzhou Jiedu made Baotou surrender to the Jin with the city, and Zhengzhou Zhanshi Lai Zhao, Songzhou Zhangye and Cangzhou Dai Siyuan all abandoned the city and fled.

古文：当此时，晋已先下全燕，而镇、定皆附于晋，自河以北、山以东，四面千里，六镇数十州之地皆归晋，独贝一州，围之逾年不可下。
现代文：这时，晋军已先攻克燕全境，而镇、定二州都归附晋，从黄河以北、太行山以束，四方千里，六个镇、几十个州的地方全归属晋，惟独贝州一个州，围攻一年多不能攻下。
English: At this time, the Jin army had first conquered the entire territory of Yan, and the town of Tongzhou and the two states of Ding all belonged to Jin. From the north of the Yellow River and the mountains of Taihang and Sok, thousands of miles in all directions, six towns and dozens of states all belonged to Jin. However, Baizhou, a state, could not be besieged for more than a year.

古文：源德守既坚，而贝人闻晋已尽有河北，城中食且尽，乃劝源德出降，源德不从，遂见杀。
现代文：张源德的防守已然坚固，而贝州人听说晋已完全占据河北，城中粮食快要吃完，就劝张源德出城投降，张源德不听，于是被杀。
English: Zhang Yuande's defense was already strong, and when the Bechu people heard that Jin had completely occupied Hebei and that the grain in the city was about to run out, they persuaded Zhang Yuande to leave the city and surrender. Zhang Yuande did not listen and was killed.

古文：源德已死，贝人谋曰： 晋围吾久，吾穷而后降，惧皆不免也。 
现代文：张源德死后，贝州人商量说： 晋围困我们很久，我们无路可走而后纔投降，恐怕都不能幸免。 
English: After Zhang Yuande's death, the people of Bozhou discussed and said: Jin has besieged us for a long time, we have no way to go but to surrender, I am afraid we will not be spared.

古文：乃告于晋曰： 吾欲被甲执兵而降，得赦而后释之，如何？ 
现代文：于是眚诉晋说： 我们想穿着镗甲手持兵器投降，得到赦免后纔放下武器，怎么样？ 
English: So Zhai told Jin, "We want to surrender with armor and hand weapons, and if we are pardoned, we will lay down our weapons. How about that?"

古文：晋军许诺，贝人三千出降，已释甲，晋兵四面围而尽杀之。
现代文：晋军同意了，三干贝州人出城投降，放下武器后，晋军四面围攻把他们全部杀死。
English: The Jin army agreed, and the Sanganbei people left the city and surrendered. After they laid down their weapons, the Jin army besieged them on all sides and killed them all.

古文：○夏鲁奇夏鲁奇，字邦杰，青州人也。
现代文：夏鲁奇字邦杰，青州人。
English: Sharucci is a native of Qingzhou.

古文：唐庄宗时，赐姓名曰李绍奇，其后庄宗赐姓名者，皆复其故。
现代文：唐庄宗时，赐给姓名叫李绍奇，后来唐庄宗赐给姓名的人，都恢复了原名。
English: At the time of Tangzhuangzong, he was given the name Li Shaoqi. Later, all those who were given names by Tangzhuangzong restored their original names.

古文：鲁奇初事梁为宣武军校，后奔于晋，为卫护指挥使。
现代文：夏鲁奇最初效力梁任宣武军校，后来逃奔到晋，任卫护指挥使。
English: At first, Sharuchi served at the Liang Ren Xuanwu Military Academy, but later fled to Jin, where he served as a guard commander.

古文：从周德威攻刘守光于幽州，守光将单廷珪、元行钦以骁勇自负，鲁奇每与二将斗，辄不能解，两军皆释兵而观之。
现代文：随周德威在幽州进攻刘守光，刘守光的将领单廷珪、元行钦凭借骁悍勇猛自负，夏鲁奇每次和他们二位将领争斗，都打得难分难解，双方军队都放下武器观看。
English: With Zhou Dewei's attack on Liu Shouguang in Yuzhou, Liu Shouguang's generals, Shan Tingtao and Yuan Xingqin, boasted of their bravery and courage. Every time Shirluch fought with their two generals, they were inseparable, and both armies laid down their weapons to watch.

古文：晋已下魏博，梁将刘鄩军于洹水，庄宗以百骑觇敌，遇寻阝伏兵，围之数重，几不得脱，鲁奇力战，手杀百馀人，身被二十馀创，与庄宗决围而出。
现代文：晋攻下魏博后，梁将刘郡驻扎在洹水，唐庄宗率领一百骑兵窥视敌情，碰上刘郡的伏兵，重重包围他们，几乎不能脱身，夏鲁奇奋力作战，亲手杀死一百多人，身上二十多处受伤，和唐庄宗冲破包围逃出。
English: After Jin conquered Weibo, Liang stationed Liu County in Surabaya. Tang Zhuangzong led a hundred cavalry to spy on the enemy situation, encountered Liu County's ambush, surrounded them, and could hardly escape. Sharuchi fought hard, killed more than a hundred people with his own hands, and injured more than twenty parts of his body. He and Tang Zhuangzong broke through the encirclement and escaped.

古文：庄宗益奇之，以为磁州刺史。
现代文：唐庄宗更加觉得他神奇，任他为磁州刺史。
English: Tang Zhuangzong thought he was even more amazing, and allowed him to write the history of the magnetic state.

古文：从战中都，擒王彦章，庄宗壮之，赐绢千疋，拜郑州防御使。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗在中都打仗，擒获王彦章，唐庄宗认为他勇壮，赐给绢纲一千匹，拜为郑州防御使。
English: Following Tang Zhuangzong, he fought in Zhongdu and captured Wang Yanzhang. Tang Zhuangzong thought he was brave and gave him a thousand yakitori, calling him the defense envoy of Zhengzhou.

古文：迁河阳节度使，为政有惠爱。
现代文：升任河阳节度使，为政仁惠慈爱。
English: He was promoted to the post of Heyang's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and was known for his benevolence and benevolence.

古文：徙镇忠武，河阳之人遮留不得行，父老诣京师乞留，明宗遣中使往谕之，鲁奇乃得去。
现代文：调任忠武节度使，河阳人阻拦挽留他，不能赴任，父老乡亲到京师请求留下他，唐阴宗派中使前去说服他们，夏鲁奇纔得以离去。
English: Transferred to the post of Zhongwu Jiedu Envoy, the people of Kheyang blocked and detained him, unable to go to the post, his father and fellow villagers went to Beijing to ask him to stay, the Tangyin sect sent messengers to convince them, and Sharuqian was able to leave.

古文：唐师伐荆南，以鲁奇为招讨副使，无功而还。
现代文：唐军攻伐剂南，任夏鲁奇为招讨副使，没有战功返回。
English: In the south of the Tang army, Ren Xialuqi was the vice-envoy for recruitment, but he did not return with any war achievements.

古文：徙镇武信，东川董璋反，攻遂州，鲁奇闭城拒之，旬月救兵不至，城中食尽，鲁奇自刎死，年四十九。
现代文：调任武信节度使，束川董璋反叛，进攻遂州，夏鲁奇关闭城门抵抗，一个月过去救兵不到，城中粮食吃完，夏鲁奇自刎而死，享年四十九岁。
English: Transferred to Wuxin as the envoy of the festival, Sokchuan Dongye rebelled, attacked Suizhou, and Xialuqi closed the city gate to resist. A month passed, and the soldiers could not be rescued. After eating the grain in the city, Xialuqi hanged himself and died at the age of forty-nine.

古文：○姚洪
现代文：姚洪，原是梁的小军校。
English: Yaohong, formerly Liang's small military school.

古文：姚洪，本梁之小校也。自董璋为梁将，洪尝事璋，后事唐为指挥使。
现代文：自从董璋担任梁将军，姚洪曾为董璋做事，后为唐做事，任指挥使。
English: Since Dong Xuan served as General Liang, Yao Hong had worked for Dong Xuan, and later worked for Tang, serving as a commander.

古文：长兴中，遣洪将千人戍阆州。
现代文：长兴年间，派姚洪率领一千人戍守板州。
English: During the reign of Changxing, he sent Yao Hong to lead a thousand people to defend Banzhou.

古文：董璋反，遣人以书招洪，洪得璋书，辄投厕中。
现代文：董璋反叛，派人送信招降姚洪，姚洪得到董璋的信，就扔到厕所中。
English: Dong Ye rebelled and sent a letter to recruit Yao Hong. When Yao Hong received Dong Ye's letter, he threw it into the toilet.

古文：后璋兵攻破阆州，执洪，璋曰： 尔为健兒，我遇汝厚，奈何负我邪？ 
现代文：后来董璋的军队攻破闽州，抓到姚洪，董璋说： 你当士兵时，我待你很好，为何辜负我呢？ 
English: Later, Dong Xuan's army broke through Zhangzhou and captured Yao Hong. Dong Xuan said: When you were a soldier, I treated you well. Why did you let me down?

古文：洪骂曰： 老贼！
现代文：姚洪骂道： 老贼！
English: Yao Hong scolded: Old thief!

古文：尔昔为李七郎奴，扫马粪，得一脔残炙，感恩不已。
现代文：你过去做李七郎的奴仆，清扫马粪，得到一块剩下的烤肉，感恩不尽。
English: You used to be Li Shichiro's manservant, sweeping up horse manure, and you got a piece of leftover barbecue meat. I can't thank you enough.

古文：今天子用尔为节度使，何苦反邪？
现代文：如今天子任用你为节度使，何苦要反叛呢？
English: If the emperor appoints you to be a regent, why bother to rebel?

古文：吾能为国家死，不能从人奴以生！ 
现代文：我能为国家而死，不能跟着别人的奴仆求生！ 
English: I can die for my country, but I cannot live as someone else's slave!

古文：璋怒，然镬于前，令壮士十人刲其肉而食，洪至死大骂。
现代文：董璋发怒，在面前烧一大锅水，命令十个壮士割他的肉煮来吃，姚洪至死大骂不停。
English: Enraged, Dong Jun boiled a large pot of water in front of him and ordered ten strong men to cut up his flesh and boil it for him to eat. Yao Hong continued to curse until his death.

古文：明宗闻之泣下，录其二子，而厚恤其家。
现代文：唐明宗听说后流下眼泪，录用他的两个儿子，并优厚地抚恤他的家人。
English: Tang Mingzong shed tears after hearing this, hired his two sons, and treated his family well.

古文：○王思同
现代文：王思同是幽州人。
English: Wang Sitong is from Yuzhou.

古文：王思同，幽州人也。其父敬柔，娶刘仁恭女，生思同。
现代文：他的父亲王敬柔，娶刘仁恭的女儿为妻，生下王思同。
English: His father, Wang Jingru, married Liu Renkong's daughter and gave birth to Wang Sitong.

古文：思同事仁恭为银胡录指挥使，仁恭为其子守光所囚，思同奔晋，以为飞胜指挥使。
现代文：王思同效力刘仁恭任银胡棘指挥使，刘仁恭被他的儿子刘守光囚禁，王思同逃奔背，任命为飞胜指挥使。
English: Wang Sitong served Liu Rengong as the commander of the Silver Goose Thorn, Liu Rengong was imprisoned by his son Liu Shuguang, Wang Sitong escaped and was appointed as the commander of the Flying Victory.

古文：梁、晋相距于莘，遣思同筑垒杨刘，以功迁神武十军都指挥使，累迁郑州防御使。
现代文：梁、晋在莘州对峙，派王思同在杨刘修筑营垒，因功升任神武十军都指挥使，积官升任郑州防御使。
English: Liang and Jin confronted each other in Bozhou, and sent Wang Si and Yang Liu to build a fortress. For his service, he was promoted to commander of the Ten Heavenly Armies, and he was promoted to Zhengzhou defense envoy.

古文：思同为人敢勇，善骑射，好学，颇喜为诗，轻财重义，多礼文士，然未尝有战功。
现代文：王思同为人果敢勇猛，擅长骑马射箭，喜好读书，很喜欢写诗，轻财物重节义，对文士常常以礼相待，但不曾有战功。
English: Wang Sitong was a brave and courageous person, good at riding and archery, liked to read, liked to write poetry, valued property highly, and often treated scribes with courtesy, but he had no military merit.

古文：明宗时，以久次为匡国军节度使，徙镇雄武。
现代文：唐明宗时，因久不升迁任匡国军节度使，调任雄武节度使。
English: During the Tang and Ming dynasties, he was appointed as the commander of the Kuangguo Army and transferred to the Xiongwu Army because he had not been promoted for a long time.

古文：是时，吐蕃数为寇，而秦州无亭障，思同列四十馀栅以御之。
现代文：这时，吐蕃多次入侵，而秦州没有边防堡垒，王思同修建四十多个栅栏来防御。
English: At this time, Tubo invaded several times, while Qinzhou did not have a border fortress. Wang Sitong built more than forty fences to defend himself.

古文：居五年，来朝，明宗问以边事，思同指画山川，陈其利害。
现代文：遇了五年，到京师朝见，唐明宗向他询问边防情况，王思同指点山河，陈述形势利害。
English: After five years had passed, he went to Beijing to see the emperor. Tang Mingzong asked him about the border defense situation, and Wang Sitong pointed out the mountains and rivers and stated the situation.

古文：思同去，明宗顾左右曰： 人言思同不管事，能若是邪？ 
现代文：王思同离去后，唐明宗顾望左右的人说： 人们说王思同不管事，不理事的人能像这样吗？ 
English: After Wang Sitong left, people around Guwang of the Tang and Ming Dynasties said: People say that Wang Sitong does not care about things. Can a person who does not make decisions be like this?

古文：于是始知其材，以为右武卫上将军、京兆尹、西京留守。
现代文：于是纔知道他的才能，任命为右武卫上将军、京兆尹、西京留守。
English: As a result, Shun knew of his talent and appointed him to the post of Ubu-e no shogun, the post of Keizhoin, and the post of Saikyo.

古文：石敬瑭讨董璋，思同为先锋指挥使，兵入剑门，而后军不继，思同与璋战，不胜而却。
现代文：石敬瑭讨伐董璋，王思同任先锋指挥使，军队进入剑门，而后续的军队没有跟上，王思同和董璋交战，不能取胜而撤退了。
English: Shi Jingyao fought against Dong Xi, Wang Si was the vanguard commander, the army entered the Jianmen Gate, but the follow-up army did not keep up, Wang Xi and Dong Xi fought, could not win and retreated.

古文：敬瑭兵罢，思同徙镇山南西道，已而复为京兆尹、西京留守。
现代文：石敬瑭罢兵，王思同调任山南西道节镇，不久又任京兆尹、西京留守。
English: Shi Jingyao went on strike, and Wang Sitong was transferred to Shannan West Road Festival Town, and soon he was transferred to Beijing Zhaoyun and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：应顺元年二月，潞王从珂反凤翔，驰檄四邻，言奸臣幸先帝疾病，贼杀秦王而立幼嗣，侵弱宗室，动摇籓方，陈己所以兴兵讨乱之状。
现代文：应顺元年二月，潞王李从珂在凤翔反叛，飞马向四邻传送檄文，声称奸臣藉先帝患病的时机，残杀秦王而拥立年幼的继承人，侵凌削弱宗室，动摇藩镇，陈述自己起兵讨乱的缘由。
English: In February of the first year of the Shun era, King Li of Qin rebelled from Ke in Fengxiang, and sent an imperial edict to his four neighbors on a flying horse, claiming that the traitor had used the opportunity of the previous emperor's illness to kill King Qin and support the young heir, to encroach on and weaken the family, to shake the town, and to state the reason for his army to fight the disorder.

古文：因遣伶奴安十十以五弦谒思同，欲因其欢以通意。
现代文：又派乐官家奴安十十拿五弦琴拜谒王思同，想趁他高兴时表明意向。
English: He also sent the music official, Nu'an, to pay homage to the king with a five-stringed fiddle. He wanted to take advantage of the king's good mood to express his intentions.

古文：是时，诸镇皆怀向背，所得潞王书檄，虽以上闻，而不绝其使。
现代文：这时，各方藩镇都怀有观望成败的二心，得到潞王的檄书后，虽然上报朝延，但不拒绝潞王的使臣。
English: At this time, all the provinces and towns were in the mood to wait and see. After receiving the king's edict, although it was delayed, they did not refuse the king's envoy.

古文：独思同执十十及从珂所使推官郝诩等送京师。
现代文：只有王思同将安十十和李从珂派来的推官郝翔等人押送到京师。
English: Only Wang Sitong escorted An Shijo and Li Congke's envoy So Xiang and others to the capital.

古文：愍帝嘉其忠，即以思同为西面行营马步军都部署。
现代文：唐愍帝赞赏他的忠诚，就任命王思同焉西面行营马步军都部署。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan appreciated his loyalty and appointed Wang Sitongyan to lead the horse-mounted troops to the west.

古文：三月，会诸镇兵围凤翔，破东西关城。
现代文：三月，会集各镇军队围攻凤翔，攻破东西关城。
English: In March, the armies of all the towns gathered to besiege Fengxiang and break through the East and West Guancheng.

古文：从珂兵弱而守甚坚，外兵伤死者众，从珂登城呼外兵而泣曰： 吾从先帝二十年，大小数百战，甲不解体，金疮满身，士卒固尝从我矣。
现代文：李从珂兵力弱小但守城很坚固，城外的士兵死伤很多，李从珂登上城墙向城外的军队呼叫哭泣说： 我跟随先帝二十年，大小几百次战斗，镗甲不离身，满身伤痕，士兵们本来曾跟随我。
English: Li Congka's army was weak, but the defense of the city was very strong. Many soldiers outside the city were killed and wounded. Li Congka climbed the city wall to cry to the troops outside the city and said: I have followed the former emperor for twenty years, hundreds of battles, armor does not leave my body, my body is full of scars. The soldiers had originally followed me.

古文：今先帝新弃天下，而朝廷信用奸人，离间骨肉，我实何罪而见伐乎？ 
现代文：如今先帝刚刚逝世，而朝廷信用坏人，对亲生骨肉挑拨离间，我究竟有什么罪而受到讨伐呢？ 
English: Now that the former emperor has just passed away, and the imperial court trusts bad people to sow discord between my own flesh and blood, what crime do I have to be punished for?

古文：因恸哭。
现代文：于是失声痛哭。
English: Then she burst into tears.

古文：士卒闻者，皆悲怜之。
现代文：听到哭声的士兵，都悲伤怜悯他。
English: When the soldiers heard his cries, they were saddened and pitied him.

古文：兴元张虔钊攻城西，督战甚急，士卒苦之，反兵攻虔钊，虔钊走。
现代文：兴元张虔钊进攻西城，催战很急，士兵苦于催督，掉转兵器进攻张虔钊，张虔钊逃跑。
English: Xingyuan Zhang Qianqian attacked the West City, and it was very urgent to urge the soldiers to fight. The soldiers struggled to urge the governor, and the reversing weapons attacked Zhang Qianqian, and Zhang Qianqian fled.

古文：羽林指挥使杨思权呼曰： 潞王，吾主也！ 
现代文：羽林指挥使杨思权呼喊说： 潞王是我们的君主！ 
English: The orchestra leader made Yang Si Quan shout: "King Gong is our monarch!

古文：乃引军自西门入降从珂。
现代文：于是率兵从西门进城向李从珂投降。
English: So he led his army from the West Gate into the city and surrendered to Li Congke.

古文：而思同硃知，犹督战。
现代文：而王思同不知道，还在督战。
English: But Wang Sitong did not know that he was still supervising the battle.

古文：严卫指挥使尹晖麾其众曰： 城西军入城受赏矣！
现代文：严卫指挥使尹晖煽动他的部下说： 城西的军队进城领赏了！
English: Yan Wei, the commander, instigated his subordinates to say: The troops from the west of the city have entered the city to receive their reward!

古文：何用战邪？ 
现代文：何必再战呢？ 
English: Why do we have to fight again?

古文：士卒解甲弃仗，声闻数里，遂皆入城降。
现代文：士兵们解下镗甲丢弃武器，声音传到几里之外，于是都进城投降。
English: The soldiers took off their armor and dropped their weapons, and the sound was heard several miles away, so they all entered the city and surrendered.

古文：诸镇之兵皆溃。
现代文：各个节镇的军队都溃散了。
English: The armies of all the festival towns have broken up.

古文：思同挺身走，至长安，西京副留守刘遂雍闭门不纳，乃走潼关。
现代文：王思同只身逃走，到达长安，西京副留守刘遂雍关闭城门不让他进城，于是逃到潼关。
English: Wang Sitong fled alone and arrived in Chang'an. Liu Suiyong, the deputy governor of West Beijing, closed the city gate and did not allow him to enter the city, so he fled to Shaoguan.

古文：从珂引兵东，至昭应，前锋追执思同。
现代文：李从珂率兵束进，来到昭应，前锋军兵追捕到王思同。
English: Li led his soldiers from Ke to Zhaoying, and the soldiers of the vanguard pursued and captured Wang Sitong.

古文：从珂责曰： 罪可逃乎？ 
现代文：李从珂责问说： 罪行能逃避吗？ 
English: Li Congke asked: Can a crime be evaded?

古文：思同曰： 非不知从王而得生，恐终死不能见先帝于地下。 
现代文：王思同回答说： 我不是不明白跟随大王就能活命，而是怕最终死后不能在地下与先帝见面。 
English: Wang Sitong replied, "I don't mean that I don't understand that I can live if I follow the great king, but I'm afraid that I won't be able to meet the former emperor underground after I die.

古文：从珂愧其言，乃杀之。
现代文：李从珂为他的话感到羞愧，于是杀了他。
English: Li Congke was ashamed of his words and killed him.

古文：汉高祖即位，赠侍中。
现代文：汉高祖登位，追赠为侍中。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascends to the throne and is posthumously promoted to chamberlain.

古文：○张敬达张敬达，字志通，代州人也，小字生铁。
现代文：张敬达字志通，代州人，小字生铁。
English: Zhang Jingda Zhi Tong, a native of Daizhou, is a small-character pig iron.

古文：少以骑射事唐庄宗为直军使。
现代文：年轻时因擅长骑马射箭效力唐庄宗任厅直军使。
English: When he was young, he excelled at horseback riding and archery, which made him a direct military envoy of the Tangzhuang Patriarchate.

古文：明宗时，为河东马步军都指挥使，领钦州刺史，累迁彰国、大同军节度使，徙镇武信、晋昌。
现代文：唐明宗时，任河东马步军都指挥使，领钦州刺史，连续升任彰国、大同军节度使，调任武信、晋昌节度使。
English: During the reign of Tang Mingzong, he served as the commander and envoy of the Hedong Horse Marching Army, led the history of Qin State, and was successively promoted to the festival envoy of Zhangguo and Datong Army, and transferred to the festival envoy of Wuxin and Jinchang.

古文：清泰二年，契丹数犯边，废帝以河东节度使石敬瑭兼大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉马步军都总管，屯于忻州，屯兵聚噪遮敬瑭呼 万岁 ，敬瑭斩三十馀人以止之。
现代文：遭泰二年，契丹多次侵犯边境，唐废帝以河柬节度使石敬瑭兼任大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃漠马步军都总管，屯驻在忻州，屯驻的军队聚隶鼓噪栏住石敬瑭呼喊 万岁 ，石敬瑭斩杀三十多人制止他们。
English: In the second year after the invasion of Thailand, the Khitan repeatedly violated the border. The Tang Emperor used the River Kham festival to make Shi Jingyao also serve as the general manager of the armies of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu and Wessai, and stationed in Zhangzhou. The stationed troops gathered at the drum and shouted "Long live Shi Jingyao," and Shi Jingyao killed more than 30 people to stop them.

古文：废帝疑敬瑭有异志，乃以敬达为北面副总管，以分其兵。
现代文：唐废帝怀疑石敬瑭有野心，于是任张敬达为北面副总管，以减少他的军队。
English: Emperor Gaozong suspected that Shi Jingyao had ambitions, so he appointed Zhang Jinda as deputy commander of the North Face to reduce his army.

古文：明年夏，徙敬瑭镇天平，遂以敬达为大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉马步军都部署，敬瑭因此遂反。
现代文：第二年夏天，调石敬瑭为天平节度使，于是任张敬达为大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉马步军都部署，石敬瑭因此就反叛了。
English: In the summer of the following year, Shi Jingyi was appointed as the envoy of the balance of power. As a result, Zhang Jingyi was appointed as the envoy of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu, Wuxi and other troops, and the troops were deployed. Shi Jingyi therefore rebelled.

古文：即以敬达为太原四面招讨使。
现代文：皇帝就任命张敬连为太原四面招讨使。
English: The emperor appointed Zhang Jinglian as Taiyuan's four-sided envoy.

古文：六月，兵围太原，敬达为长城连栅，云梯飞砲以攻之，所为城栅将成，辄有大风雨水暴至以坏之。
现代文：六月，率军包围太原，张敬达修筑长城连棚，用云梯飞炮攻城，修筑的城栅快要完成时，狂风暴雨洪水突然到来，毁坏了城栅。
English: In June, he led the army to encircle Taiyuan. Zhang Jingda started to build the Great Wall of China and used ladders and flying cannons to attack the city. When the construction of the city gate was about to be completed, the storm and flood suddenly came and destroyed the city gate.

古文：敬瑭求救于契丹。
现代文：石敬瑭向契丹求救。
English: Shi Jingyao appealed to Khitan for help.

古文：九月，契丹耶律德光自雁门入，旌旗相属五十馀里。
现代文：九月，契丹耶律德光从雁门入关，旌旗前后相连五十多里。
English: In September, Khitan Yerudoglu entered the pass from the Wild Goose Gate, and more than fifty miles were connected before and after the banner.

古文：德光先遣人告敬瑭曰： 吾欲今日破敌可乎？ 
现代文：耶律德光先派人告诉石敬瑭说： 我想在今天攻破敌军，行吗？ 
English: Yerutde Guang first sent someone to tell Shi Jingyao, "I want to break through the enemy's army today, is that okay?

古文：敬瑭报曰： 大兵远来，而贼势方盛，要在成功，不必速也。 
现代文：石敬瑭回答说： 大军远道而来，而贼军气势正旺，关键是要成功，不必太怏。 
English: Shi Jingyao replied: The great army has come from far away, and the bandit army is in full swing. The key is to be successful without being too arrogant.

古文：使者未复命，而兵已交。
现代文：使臣还没有回报，而两军已经交锋。
English: The envoy has not yet returned, and the two armies have already clashed.

古文：敬达阵于西山，契丹以羸骑三千，革鞭木登，人马皆不甲胄，以趋唐军。
现代文：张敬达在西山摆开战阵，契丹以羸弱的骑兵三干人，革鞭木鉴，人马都不披挂镗甲，向唐军扑来。
English: Zhang Jingda set up a battle line in the West Mountain, and Khitan rushed to the Tang army with three weak cavalrymen, a leather whip, and no armor.

古文：唐军争驰之，契丹兵走。追至汾曲，伏发，断唐军为二，其在北者皆死，死者万馀人。
现代文：唐军争相追逐他们，契丹军队逃跑，追到汾曲，契丹的伏兵出击，把唐军截成两部分，在北面的唐军都被杀死，死了一万多人。
English: The Tang army chased after them, the Khitan army ran away and chased them to Zhangye. The ambush of the Khitan army attacked and cut the Tang army into two parts. The Tang army in the north was all killed, and more than 10,000 people died.

古文：敬达收军栅晋安，契丹围之。
现代文：张敬达收拾军队在晋安扎寨，契丹军队包围他们。
English: Zhang Jingda gathers his troops in Jinan Zazhai, and the Khitan army surrounds them.

古文：废帝遣赵延寿、范延光等救之。
现代文：唐废帝派赵延寿、范延光等人救援。
English: Emperor Tang sent Zhao Yanshou, Fan Yanguang and others to the rescue.

古文：延寿屯团柏谷，延光屯辽州，相去皆百馀里。
现代文：赵延寿屯驻团柏谷，范延光屯驻辽州，距离张敬达都有一百多里。
English: Zhao Yan Shou Tun was stationed in Kashi Valley, Fan Yan Guang Tun was stationed in Liaozhou, and both were more than a hundred miles away from Zhang Jinda.

古文：契丹兵围敬达者，自晋安寨南，长百馀里，阔五十里，敬达军中望之，但见穹庐连属如冈阜，四面亘以毛索，挂铃为警，纵犬往来。
现代文：契丹包围张敬达的军队，从晋安寨往南，长一百多里，宽五十里，张敬达从军中望去，只见毡帐相连如同冈峦起伏，四面用毛绳贯穿，挂上铃铛做警报，放出狗来回巡逻。
English: The army of Zhang Jinda, surrounded by the Khitans, stretched southward from Jin'an Village. It was more than a hundred miles long and fifty miles wide. Zhang Jinda looked out from the army and saw that the posts were connected like the ridges of a mountain. They were connected on all four sides with a rope. A bell was hung to sound the alarm, and dogs were let out to patrol back and forth.

古文：敬达军中有夜出者，辄为契丹所得，由是闭壁不敢复出。
现代文：张敬达军中有晚上出去的人，就被契丹抓获，从此封闭营寨不敢再出来。
English: Some of Zhang Jingda's soldiers who went out at night were captured by the Khitans, and since then they have not dared to leave the closed camp.

古文：延寿等皆有二心，无救敬达意。
现代文：赵延寿等人都有二心，没有救张敬达的意思。
English: Zhao Yanshou and others are double-minded and have no intention of rescuing Zhang Jingda.

古文：敬达犹有兵五万人、马万匹，久之食尽，削木筛粪以饲其马，马死者食之，已而马尽。
现代文：张敬达还有士兵五万人、战马一万匹，过了很久粮食吃完，只好削树木筛马粪来喂马，军士吃死马，不久马吃光了。
English: Zhang Jingda still had fifty thousand soldiers and ten thousand horses. After a long time, when they had finished eating the grain, they had to cut trees and sift horse dung to feed the horses. The sergeant ate the dead horse, and soon the horses were eaten up.

古文：副招讨使杨光远劝敬达降晋，敬达自以不忍背唐，而救兵且至，光远促之不已，敬达曰： 诸公何相迫邪！
现代文：副招讨使杨光速劝张敬达向晋投降，张敬达自认为不忍心背叛唐，而且救兵快到了，杨光速不断催他，张敬达说： 各位为什么逼我呢！
English: Sub-solicitation caused Yang Guanghui to persuade Zhang Jingda to surrender to Jin. Zhang Jingda thought that he could not bear to betray Tang, and the rescuers were about to arrive. Yang Guanghui constantly urged him. Zhang Jingda said: Why are you forcing me?

古文：何不杀我而降？ 
现代文：为什么不杀掉我向晋投降？ 
English: Why not kill me and surrender to Jin?

古文：翟进宗、张万迪者，皆不知其何人也。
现代文：杨光速就杀死张敬达投降。契丹主耶律德光聪说张敬达死了，哀怜他的忠诚，派人收葬他的尸体。翟进宗、张万迪都不知道是什么地方的人。
English: Yang Guanghui killed Zhang Jingda and surrendered. The Khitan lord Yerudde Guangcong said that Zhang Jingda was dead, lamented his loyalty, and sent someone to bury his body. Both He Jinzong and Zhang Wandi did not know where he was.

古文：初皆事唐，后事晋，进宗为淄州刺史，万迪为登州刺史。
现代文：最初都在唐做官，后来在晋做官，翟进宗任淄州刺史，张万迪任登州刺史。
English: At first, they all served as officials in Tang, and later as officials in Jin. Zou Jin served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Zhang Wandi served as the governor of Dengzhou.

古文：杨光远反，以骑兵数百胁取二刺史至青州，万迪听命，而进宗独不屈，光远遂杀进宗。
现代文：杨光速反叛，用骑兵一百人胁迫他们两个刺史到青州，张万迪遵命，而翟进宗偏偏不屈服，杨光速于是杀死翟进宗。
English: Yang Guanghui rebelled and used a hundred cavalrymen to coerce the two of them to go to Qingzhou. Zhang Wandi complied with the order, but He Jinzong refused to give in. Yang Guanghui then killed He Jinzong.

古文：出帝赠进宗左武卫上将军。
现代文：晋出帝追封翟进宗为左武卫上将军。
English: Emperor Jinzong promoted Shunjinzong to the rank of General of the Left Division of Imperial Guards.

古文：及光远平，曲赦青州，虽光远子孙皆见慰释，而独不赦万迪，暴其罪而斩之。
现代文：到杨光速被平定时，宽恩赦免青州人，即使是杨光速的子孙也都受到安慰宽免，而惟独不赦免张万迪，宣布他的罪行把他杀掉。
English: By the time Yang Guangji was subdued, Kuan had pardoned the people of Qingzhou. Even Yang Guangji's children and grandchildren were consoled and pardoned, but Zhang Wandi was not pardoned, and his crime was announced and he was killed.

古文：诏求进宗尸，加礼归葬，葬事官给，以其子仁钦为东头供奉官。
现代文：下诏寻求翟进宗的尸体，越礼安葬他，丧事由官府出资办理，任命他的儿子翟仁钦为束头供奉官。
English: He issued an edict to search for the body of Hao Jinzong, buried him with great ceremony, the funeral was funded by the government, and appointed his son, Hao Renqin, as the head of the funeral service.

古文：○沈斌沈斌，字安时，徐州下邳人也。
现代文：沈斌字安时，徐州下邳人。
English: Shen Bin Zi An Shi, a native of Xuzhou in the Lower Yunnan Province.

古文：少为军卒，事梁为拱辰都指挥使。
现代文：年轻时当兵，效力梁任拱辰都指挥使。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier and served as commander of the Liang Ren Arch Chen.

古文：后事唐，从魏王继岌破蜀，平康延孝，以功为虢州刺史，历随、赵等八州刺史。
现代文：后来在唐做官，随魏王李继岌攻破蜀，平定康延孝，因功任虢州刺史，历任随、趟等八个州的刺史。
English: Later, he worked as an official in Tang, followed the Wei King Li Jian to invade Shu, and pacified Kang Yanxiao. He was awarded the title of the history of Zhangzhou for his achievements, and the history of the history of eight states such as Su, Wai and so on.

古文：晋开运元年，为祁州刺史。
现代文：置塱运元年，任祁州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the governor of Heian Province.

古文：契丹犯塞至于榆林，过祁州，斌以谓契丹深入晋地而归兵羸乏可击，即以州兵邀之。
现代文：契丹侵犯边界到达榆林，经过祁州，沈斌认为契丹深入晋地，而回归的军队疲弱可以攻击，就率本州岛军兵拦击他们。
English: The Khitan invaded the border and reached Yulin, passing through Zhangzhou. Shen Bin thought that the Khitan had penetrated deep into Jin and that the returning army was too weak to attack, so he led the soldiers from Honshu Island to stop them.

古文：契丹以精骑划门，斌兵多死，城中无备，虏将赵延寿留兵急攻之，延寿招斌降，斌从城上骂延寿曰： 公父子误计，陷于腥膻，忍以犬羊之众，残贼父母之邦，斌能为国死尔，不能效公所为也！ 
现代文：契丹派精锐骑兵攻破城门，沈斌的士兵大多战死，城中没有防备，契丹将趟延寿留下兵力，向他发起猛攻。赵延寿招降沈斌，沈斌从城上骂趟延寿说： 你们父子二人失算，身陷契丹，忍心率领犬羊般的士兵，残害父母的邦国，我沈斌能为国家一死而已，不能效法你的所作所为！ 
English: The Khitan sent elite cavalry to break through the city gate, most of Shen Bin's soldiers died in the battle, there was no defense in the city, the Khitan left Yan Shou with troops and launched an onslaught against him. Zhao Yan Shou recruited and demoted Shen Bin, Shen Bin scolded Yan Shou from the city and said: You two fathers and sons have miscalculated, are trapped in the Khitan, have the courage to lead soldiers like dogs and sheep, and destroy the country of your parents, I, Shen Bin, can only die for the country, I cannot follow what you have done!

古文：已而城陷，斌自尽，其家属皆没于虏。
现代文：不久州城失陷，沈斌自杀，他的家属都陷没在契丹军中。
English: Not long after, Zhucheng fell, and Shen Bin committed suicide. His family members were all caught up in the Khitan army.

古文：○王清王清，字去瑕，洺州曲周人也。
现代文：王清字去瑕，沼州曲周人。
English: Wang Qing's character is flawless, while Numazu Qu Zhou's is flawless.

古文：初事唐为宁卫指挥使。
现代文：开初效力唐任宁卫指挥使。
English: At the beginning of his tenure, Tang appointed Ning Wei as commander.

古文：后事晋为奉国都虞候。
现代文：后来效力晋任奉国都虞候。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of provincial governor.

古文：安从进叛襄州，从高行周攻之，逾年不能下，清谓行周曰： 从进闭孤城以自守，其势岂得久邪？ 
现代文：安从进在襄州反叛，王清随高行周攻打他，一年多没能攻克，王清对高行周说： 安从进关闭孤城防守，形势怎能长久呢？ 
English: An Congjin rebelled in Xiangzhou, Wang Qing followed Gao Xingzhou to attack him, and failed to conquer him for more than a year. Wang Qing said to Gao Xingzhou: An Congjin closed the defense of the lone city, how can the situation last long?

古文：因请先登，遂攻破之。
现代文：于是请求率先登城，就攻破了州城。
English: Therefore, he requested to take the lead in attacking the city, and broke through the state capital.

古文：开运二年冬，从杜重威战阳城，清以力战功为步军之最，加检校司徒。
现代文：开运二年冬，随杜重威在阳城作战，王清因奋力作战在步军中功劳最大，晋升为检校司徒。
English: In the winter of the second year of the campaign, he fought with Du Chongwei in Yangcheng. Wang Qing was promoted to school inspector because of his greatest contribution to the infantry.

古文：是冬，重威军中渡桥南，虏军其北以相拒，而虏以精骑并西山出晋军后，南击栾城，断晋饷道。
现代文：这年冬，杜重威驻扎在中渡桥南面，契丹军在桥北面和他们对峙，而契丹军派精锐骑兵沿着西山从普军背后绕出，向南攻打乐城，截断晋军供应军饷的道路。
English: This winter, Du Chongwei was stationed on the south side of the Zhongdu Bridge, the Khitan army confronted them on the north side of the bridge, and the Khitan army sent elite cavalry along the West Mountain from the back of the Prussian army to attack Lecheng to the south and cut off the road for the Jin army to supply military supplies.

古文：清谓重威曰： 晋军危矣！
现代文：王清对杜重威说： 晋军危险了！
English: Wang Qing said to Du Chongwei: The Jin army is in danger!

古文：今去镇州五里，而守死于此，营孤食尽，将若之何？
现代文：现在距离镇州五里，而在这里死守，营寨孤立，粮食耗尽，将怎么办呢？
English: Now we are five miles from Zhenzhou, but here we are on the defensive, our camp is isolated, and we have run out of grain. What will we do?

古文：请以步兵二千为先锋，夺桥开路，公率诸军继进以入镇州，可以守也。 
现代文：请求用两千步兵作为先锋，夺桥开路，您率各军跟随而来进入镇州，就能防守了。 
English: Request to use two thousand infantrymen as the vanguard, seize the bridge to open the way, you lead the army to follow and enter the township, you can defend it.

古文：重威许之，遣与宋彦筠俱前，清与虏战，败之，夺其桥。
现代文：杜重威同意了，派他和宋彦筠一同前往，王清和契丹军作战，打败契丹军，抢占桥梁。
English: Du Chongwei agreed, and sent him and Song Yanqi to go together. Wang Qing fought against the Khitan army, defeated the Khitan army, and seized the bridge.

古文：是时，重威已有二志，犹豫不肯进，彦筠亦退走，清曰： 吾独死于此矣！ 
现代文：这时，杜重威已有二心，犹豫不肯前进，宋彦筠也退逃了，王清说： 我一个人死在这里了！ 
English: At this time, Du Chongwei had two hearts, hesitated and refused to advance, Song Yanyu also fled, Wang Qing said: I died here alone!

古文：因力战而死。
现代文：于是奋力作战而死。
English: So he fought hard and died.

古文：年五十三。
现代文：享年五十三岁。
English: He was fifty-three years old.

古文：汉高祖立，赠清太傅。
现代文：漠高祖登位，追赠王清焉太傅。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, and was posthumously given the title of Wang Qingyan Taifu.

古文：○史彦超
现代文：史彦超是云州人。
English: Shi Yanchao is from Yunnan Province.

古文：史彦超，云州人也。为人勇悍骁捷。
现代文：为人武勇剽悍骁捷。
English: He is a man of great bravery and courage.

古文：周太祖起魏时，彦超为汉龙捷都指挥使，以兵从。
现代文：周太祖在魏州起兵时，史彦超任汉龙捷都指挥使，率领士兵跟随。
English: When Zhou Taizu raised an army in Weizhou, Shi Yan was appointed as the commander of Hanlong Jiedu and led the soldiers to follow.

古文：太祖入立，迁虎捷都指挥使，戍于晋州。
现代文：周太祖进京登位，改任虎捷都指挥使，在晋州戍守。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne in Beijing and was appointed as the commanding envoy of Hubei and Jiedu, and stayed in Jinzhou.

古文：刘旻攻晋州，州无主帅，知州王万敢不能拒，彦超以戍兵坚守月馀，太祖遣王峻救之，旻兵解去。
现代文：刘曼进攻晋州，州中没有主帅，知州王万敢不能抵抗，史彦超率守军坚守一月多，周太祖派王峻营救他们，刘曼的军队解围离去。
English: Liu Man attacked Jinzhou, there was no commander in the state, Chizhou Wang Wan Dare could not resist, Shi Yan Chao led the defenders to hold out for more than a month, Zhou Taizu sent Wang Jun to rescue them, Liu Man's army broke the siege and left.

古文：以功迁龙捷右厢都指挥使，领郑州防御使。
现代文：因功升迁龙捷右厢都指挥使，兼任郑州防御使。
English: Due to his merits, he was promoted to the commander of the right compartment of Longjing and Zhubei, and also served as the defense envoy of Zhengzhou.

古文：周、汉战高平，彦超为前锋，先登陷阵，以功拜感德军节度使。
现代文：周、汉在高平交战，史彦超任前锋，率先攻陷敌阵，因功拜为感德军节度使。
English: Zhou and Han fought at Gaoping. Shi Yan was the superior striker and took the lead in capturing the enemy's position. He was the top commander of the German army because of his exploits.

古文：周兵围汉太原，契丹救汉，出忻、代。
现代文：周军包围汉太原城，契丹救援汉，从忻、代二州出兵。
English: The Zhou army encircled the Han city of Taiyuan, the Khitan rescued Han, and sent troops from the two states of Qi and Dai.

古文：世宗遣符彦卿拒之，以彦超为先锋，战忻口，彦超勇愤俱发，左右驰击，解而复合者数四，遂殁于阵。
现代文：周世宗派符彦卿抵御，任史彦超为先锋，在忻口作战，史彦超奋勇抗敌，驰马左右出击，四次突围出来而又被包围，于是阵亡。
English: The Zhou Sect's Fu Yanqing resisted, and appointed Shi Yanchao as the vanguard to fight at the mouth of the river. Shi Yanchao fought bravely against the enemy, galloping left and right to attack, breaking out of the encirclement four times and being encircled, and then died in battle.

古文：是时，世宗败汉高平，乘胜而进，围城之役，诸将议不一，故久无成功。
现代文：这时，周世宗在高平打败汉军，乘胜前进，围城的战役，将领们意见不一，因此攻城久而没有成功。
English: At this time, Zhou Shizong defeated the Han army in Gaoping and advanced with victory. In the siege of the city, the generals had different opinions, so the siege was long and unsuccessful.

古文：世宗欲解去而未决，闻彦超战死，遽班师，仓卒之际，亡失甚众。
现代文：周世宗想解围离去但还没有决定，听说史彦超战死，于是急速回师，仓猝撤军的时候，死亡损失很多士兵。
English: Zhou Shizong wanted to break the siege and leave, but he had not yet decided. He heard that Shi Yanchao had died in the battle, so he quickly returned to his division. When the army withdrew in a hurry, many soldiers were killed and lost.

古文：世宗既惜彦超而愤无成功，忧忿不食者数日。
现代文：周世宗既惋惜史彦超的死，又气愤没有战功，有几天忧虑愤懑不吃东西。
English: Zhou Shizong not only regretted the death of Shi Yanchao, but also was angry that he did not win the war. For a few days, he did not eat because he was worried and angry.

古文：赠彦超太师，优恤其家焉。
现代文：追赠史彦超为太师，优厚抚恤他的家人。
English: He posthumously made Shi Yanchao Grand Master, and provided generous pensions to his family.

古文：○孙晟孙晟，初名凤，又名忌，密州人也。好学，有文辞，尤长于诗。
现代文：孙晟原名孙凤，又名孙忌，密州人。好学，文章有文采，特别擅长写诗。
English: Sun Yat-sen was originally named Sun Feng, also known as Sun Gui, and was from the state of Michoacán. He was eager to learn, had a literary flair, and was particularly good at writing poetry.

古文：少为道士，居庐山简寂宫。
现代文：年轻时做道士，住在庐山简寂宫。
English: He was a Taoist when he was young and lived in Lushan Jianzhong Palace.

古文：常画唐诗人贾岛像置于屋壁，晨夕事之。
现代文：曾经画唐代诗人贾岛的像挂在屋中墙壁上，早晚敬奉。
English: A portrait of the Tang Dynasty poet Jia Dao, which he once painted, hangs on the wall in the middle of the house and is venerated morning and evening.

古文：简寂宫道士恶晟，以为妖，以杖驱出之。
现代文：简寂宫的道士讨厌孙晟，把他当成妖怪，用棍棒把他驱赶出去。
English: The Taoists of Jianzhagong hated Sun Yat-sen. They regarded him as a monster and drove him out with sticks.

古文：乃儒服北之赵、魏，谒唐庄宗于镇州，庄宗以晟为著作佐郎。
现代文：于是身穿儒生的服饰向北到赵、魏二州，在镇州拜见唐庄宗，唐庄宗任命孙晟为著作佐郎。
English: So, dressed in Confucian attire, he traveled north to the two states of Zhao and Wei, where he met Tangzhuangzong in Zhenzhou. Tangzhuangzong appointed Sun Yat-sen as his literary guardian.

古文：天成中，硃守殷镇汴州，辟为判官。
现代文：天成年问，朱守殷镇守汴州，征召他为判官。
English: When asked by Heaven, Zhu Shou Yin Zhen Shou Luzhou conscripted him as a judge.

古文：守殷反，伏诛，晟乃弃其妻子，亡命陈、宋之间。
现代文：朱守殷反叛，伏法，孙晟于是抛弃妻子儿女，逃亡到陈、宋二州之间。
English: Zhu Shouyin rebelled and overthrew the law, and Sun Yat-sen abandoned his wife and children and fled to the two states of Chen and Song.

古文：安重诲恶晟，以谓教守殷反者晟也，画其像购之，不可得，遂族其家。
现代文：安重诲讨厌孙晟，认为唆使朱守殷反叛的就是孙晟，画他的像悬赏捉拿他，役能抓到，于是把他家族的人全杀掉。
English: An Chongyun hated Sun Yat-sen. He thought that Sun Yat-sen was the one who instigated Zhu Shouyin to rebel. He drew his portrait and offered a reward to catch him. He was able to catch him, so he killed all the members of his family.

古文：晟奔于吴。
现代文：孙晟逃奔到吴。
English: Sun Yao fled to Wuzhong.

古文：是时，李昪方篡杨氏，多招四方之士，得晟，喜其文辞，使为教令，由是知名。
现代文：这时，李升正要篡夺杨氏国家，大量招纳四方人士，得到孙晟，喜欢他的文章，让他撰写教令，因此而出名。
English: At this time, Li Sheng was about to usurp Yang's country, recruited a large number of Quartet members, got Sun Yat-sen, liked his articles, let him write edicts, and thus became famous.

古文：晟为人口吃，遇人不能道寒暄，已而坐定，谈辩锋生，听者忘倦。
现代文：孙晟口吃，碰上人不能寒喧应酬，不久坐定后，论辩机锋四出，听的人不知疲倦。
English: Sun Yat-sen stammered, and when he met people, he could not stand the hustle and bustle of socializing. Soon after he sat down, his argumentative wit was on full display, and his listeners were tireless.

古文：昪尤爱之，引与计议，多合意，以为右仆射，与冯延巳并为昪相。
现代文：李升特别喜欢他，召他商议事情，常常合他的心意，任命为右仆射，和冯延巳一起任李升的宰相。
English: Li Sheng especially liked him, called him to discuss things, often agreed with him, appointed him as his right-hand man, and made him Li Sheng's prime minister together with Feng Yanxi.

古文：晟轻延巳为人，常曰： 金碗玉杯而盛狗屎可乎？ 
现代文：孙晟看不起冯延巳的为人，常常说： 金碗玉杯而装狗屎，行吗？ 
English: Sun Yat-sen looked down on Feng Yan-mei as a person and often said, "A golden bowl and a jade cup filled with dog excrement, okay?

古文：晟事昪父子二十馀年，官至司空，家益富骄，每食不设几案，使众妓各执一器，环立而侍，号 肉台盘 ，时人多效之。
现代文：孙晟效力李升父子二十多年，官做到司空，家中更加富豪骄奢，每次吃饭不摆几案，让家妓们各持一种食器，围着他站着侍候，号称 肉台盘 ，当时很多人效法他。
English: Sun Yat-sen served Li Sheng and his son for more than 20 years. He was a high-ranking official, and his family was even richer and more luxurious. Every time he dined, he didn't serve several dishes. He had the courtesans stand around him, each holding a type of tableware. It was known as the "meat plate," and many people followed his example at the time.

古文：周世宗征淮，李景惧，始遣泗州牙将王知朗至徐州，奉书以求和，世宗不答。
现代文：周世宗征讨淮南，李景害怕，起初派泗州下级军官王知朗到徐州，捧国书求和，周世宗不答应。
English: Li Jing was afraid of Zhou Shizong's attempt to invade Huainan. At first, he sent Wang Zhilang, a lower-ranking military officer from Zhangzhou, to Xuzhou to plead for peace. Zhou Shizong did not agree.

古文：又遣翰林学士钟谟、文理院学士李德明奉表称臣，不答。
现代文：又派翰林学士锺谟、文理院学士李德明上表称臣，仍不答应。
English: He also sent Hanlin Scholar Zou Mo and Academy of Arts and Sciences Scholar Li Deming to present themselves as ministers, but they still did not agree.

古文：乃遣礼部尚书王崇质副晟奉表，谟与晟等皆言景愿割寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州之地，岁贡百万以佐军。
现代文：于是派礼部尚书王崇质为孙晟的副使上表，锺谟和孙晟等人都说李景愿意割让寿、濠、泗、楚、光、海六州的土地，每年献纳一百万资助军队。
English: As a result, he sent Shangshu Wang Chongqing from the Ministry of Ceremonies to act as Sun Yat-sen's deputy envoy to the table, and both Xiumu and Sun Yat-sen said that Li Jing was willing to cede land in six prefectures of Shou, Nanning, Shandong, Chu, Guangxi, and Hai, and donate one million yuan every year to subsidize the army.

古文：而世宗已取滁、扬、濠、泗诸州，欲尽取淮南乃止，因留使者不遣，而攻寿州益急。
现代文：而周世宗已经攻取滁、扬、濠、泗各州，打算全部占领淮南纔罢休，于是扣留使臣不让他们回去，而加紧攻打寿州。
English: Zhou Shizong, on the other hand, had already conquered the states of Yan, Yang, Zhai, and Zhai, and intended to occupy all of Huainan. Therefore, he detained the envoys to prevent them from returning, and intensified the attack on Shuzhou.

古文：谟等见世宗英武非景敌，而师甚盛，寿春且危，乃曰： 愿陛下宽臣五日之诛，容臣还取景表，尽献淮北诸州。 
现代文：锺谟等人见周世宗英武雄杰不是李景能对付的，而军队气势很盛，寿春就要危急，于是说： 希望陛下宽免我们五天不杀，让我们回去取李景的表文，把淮北各州全部献给你。 
English: Seeing that Zhou Shizong's valiant warriors were no match for Li Jing, and that the army was very powerful and Shuchun was about to be in danger, Xiumuo and the others said: "I hope that Your Majesty will forgive us for not killing for five days, and let us go back to get Li Jing's documents, and dedicate all the states of Huaibei to you."

古文：世宗许之，遣供奉官安弘道押德明、崇质南还，而谟与晟皆见留。
现代文：周世宗同意了，派供奉官安弘道押送李德明、王崇质南归，而锺谟和孙晟都被扣留。
English: Zhou Shizong agreed, and sent the official in charge of offerings, An Hongdao, to escort Li Deming and Wang Chongqing to return to the south, while Yan Mo and Sun Yat-sen were detained.

古文：德明等既还，景悔，不肯割地。
现代文：李德明等人返回后，李景反悔，不愿割地。
English: After Li Deming and others returned, Li Jing repented and did not want to divide the land.

古文：世宗亦以暑雨班师，留李重进、张永德等分攻庐、寿，周兵所得扬、泰诸州，皆不能守，景兵复振。
现代文：周世宗也因天热多雨回师，留下李重进、张永德等人分别进攻庐、寿二州，周军攻占的扬、泰各州，都不能坚守，李景的军队又重振旗鼓了。
English: Zhou Shizong also returned to his division due to hot and rainy weather, leaving Li Chongjin, Zhang Yongde and others to attack Shou and Shou two states respectively. Yang and Tai states, which Zhou's army conquered, could not be held, and Li Jing's army was reinvigorated.

古文：重进与永德两军相疑，有隙，永德上书言重进反，世宗不听。
现代文：李重进和张永德两军相互猜疑，有矛盾，张永德上书说李重进反叛，周世宗不听。
English: The two armies of Li Chongjin and Zhang Yongde were suspicious of each other and had conflicts. Zhang Yongde sent a letter saying that Li Chongjin had rebelled, but Zhou Shizong did not listen.

古文：景知二将之相疑也，乃以蜡丸书遗重进，劝其反。
现代文：李景获知他们雨人相互猜疑，于是送蜡丸害给李重进，规劝他反叛。
English: Li Jing learned that they were suspicious of each other, so he sent a wax pill to Li Chongjin to persuade him to rebel.

古文：初，晟之奉使也，语崇质曰： 吾行必不免，然吾终不负永陵一抷土也。 
现代文：当初，孙晟奉命出使时，对王崇质说： 我这一去必定不能幸免，但我最终不会辜负永陵的一杯泥土。 
English: At first, when Sun Yat-sen was ordered to go on a mission, he said to Wang Chongyong, "I will not be spared this time, but in the end, I will not betray Yongling's cup of earth."

古文：永陵者，昪墓也。
现代文：永陵是李升的坟墓。
English: Yongling is the tomb of Li Sheng.

古文：及崇质还，而晟与钟谟俱至京师，馆于都亭驿，待之甚厚，每朝会入阁，使班东省官后，召见必饮以醇酒。
现代文：到王崇质返回，而孙晟和锺谟都到周的京城，住茌都亭驿，周世宗待他们很好，每次朝见进入阁门内，让他们排在束省官后面，召见时必拿好酒招待。
English: When Wang Chongqing returned, Sun Yat-sen and Zhou Miao both went to Zhou's capital and lived in the Grand Pavilion. Zhou treated them very well. Every time they entered the pavilion, they made them line up behind the provincial officials. When they were summoned, they had to take good wine to invite them.

古文：已而周兵数败，尽失所得诸州，世宗忧之，召晟问江南事，晟不对，世宗怒，未有以发。
现代文：不久周军多次被打败，攻占的各州全部失去，周世宗很忧虑，召孙晟询问江南的情况，孙晟不回答，周世宗愤怒，没有机会发泄。
English: Soon, Zhou's army was defeated many times, and all the occupied states were lost. Zhou Shizong was very worried and called Sun Yat-sen to inquire about the situation in the south of the Yangtze River. Sun Yat-sen did not answer, and Zhou Shizong was angry and had no opportunity to vent.

古文：会重进以景蜡丸书来上，多斥周过恶以为言，由是发怒曰： 晟来使我，言景畏吾神武，愿得北面称臣，保无二心，安得此指斥之言乎？ 
现代文：正好李重进将李景的蜡丸书上报，有很多斥责周的过失罪恶的话，因此发怒说： 孙晟前来出使我国，说李景怕我神奇威武，愿意面向北面自称臣子，保证没有二心，怎能有这种指责的话呢？ 
English: It just so happened that Li Chongjin reported Li Jing's wax pill book, and there were many words rebuking Zhou's faults and sins, so he became angry and said: Sun Yat-sen came to our country and said that Li Jing was afraid of my miraculous might, and was willing to face the north and call himself a vassal to ensure that there was no double-mindedness. How can there be such accusations?

古文：亟召待卫军虞候韩通收晟下狱，及其从者二百馀人皆杀之。
现代文：急召侍卫军虞候韩通收孙晟下狱，连同他的随从两百多人全部杀了。
English: Han Tong summoned the guards to take Sun Yat-sen to prison, and together with his entourage, killed more than two hundred people.

古文：晟临死，世宗犹遣近臣问之，晟终不对，神色怡然，正其衣冠南望而拜曰： 臣惟以死报国尔！ 
现代文：孙晟临死时，周世宗还派近臣询问他，孙晟始终不回答，神态安详自然，整理衣帽望着南方下拜说： 我只有以死报国了！ 
English: When Sun Yat-sen was on the verge of death, Zhou Shizong also sent a courtier to inquire about him. Sun Yat-sen never answered, his demeanor was calm and natural, he tidied up his clothes and hat, looked down to the south, and said, "I can only serve my country by dying!"

古文：乃就刑。
现代文：于是就刑。
English: He was sentenced to death.

古文：晟既死，钟谟亦贬耀州司马。
现代文：孙晟死后，锺谟也被贬为耀州司马。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's death, Jang Moo was also relegated to the post of Yaw Chow Sima.

古文：其后，世宗怒解，怜晟忠，悔杀之，召拜钟谟卫尉少卿。
现代文：后来，周世宗怒气消解，怜悯孙晟的忠诚，后悔杀了他，召拜锺谟为卫尉少卿。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong dissipated his anger, took pity on Sun Yat-sen's loyalty, regretted killing him, and summoned Bai Xiumu to be the junior captain of the imperial guards.

古文：景已割江北，遂遣谟还，而景闻晟死，亦赠鲁国公。
现代文：李景已经割让长江以北土地，于是让锺谟返回，而李景获知孙晟死去，也追封他为鲁国公。
English: Li Jing had already ceded the land north of the Yangtze River, so he let Jimmu return, and when Li Jing learned that Sun Yat-sen had died, he also made him the prince of Lu.

