古文：崔骃子瑗孙寔崔骃字亭伯，涿郡安平人也。
现代文：◆崔骃传，崔骃字亭伯，涿郡安平人。
English: ◆Cui Yu Chuan, Cui Yu Zi Ting Bo, from Anping County, Shandong Province.

古文：高祖父朝，昭帝时为幽州从事，谏剌史无与燕刺王通。
现代文：高祖父崔朝，昭帝时为幽州从事，谏刺史不要与燕刺王来往。
English: The great-great-grandfather of the Cui Dynasty, Zhao Di, was engaged in Yuzhou at the time, so don't have any dealings with Yan Zhi Wang.

古文：及剌王败，擢为侍御史。
现代文：后来刺王失败，被升为侍御史。
English: Later, Sashio failed and was promoted to Samurai Governor.

古文：生子舒，历四郡太守，所在有能名。
现代文：生了儿子叫崔舒，历任四郡太守，所在之处均有能干之名。
English: She gave birth to a son named Cui Shu, who became the de facto ruler of the four counties. He was known for his ability wherever he went.

古文：舒小子篆，王莽时为郡文学，以明经征诣公车。
现代文：崔舒的小儿子名崔骃，王莽时做郡文学，以明经召到公车。
English: Cui Shu's youngest son, named Cui Wei, was summoned to the bus by Wang Mang when he was doing county literature.

古文：太保甄丰举为步兵校尉，篆辞曰： 吾闻伐国不问仁人，战陈不访儒士。
现代文：太保甄丰举他做步兵校尉。崔骃辞道 ：我听说伐国不问仁人，战阵不访儒士。
English: Taiho Zhenfeng promoted him to the rank of infantry captain.Cui Yu said, "I heard that no benevolent person is asked to invade a country, and no Confucian is asked to fight in a battle.

古文：此举奚为至哉？ 
现代文：这一举动怎么找我呢？ 
English: How did this action come to me?

古文：遂投劾归。
现代文：于是自陈有过，回家去了。
English: So he went back home.

古文：莽嫌诸不附己者，多以法中伤之。
现代文：王莽讨厌那些不附和自己的人，多用法中伤他们。
English: Wang Mang hates those who don't agree with him and uses many ways to slander them.

古文：时，篆兄发以佞巧幸于莽，位至大司空。
现代文：当时崔骃之兄崔发因佞巧被王莽宠幸，官位做到大司空。
English: At that time, the elder brother of Cui Jie, Cui Fa, was favored by Wang Mang because of his skill, and his official position was empty.

古文：母师氏能通经学、百家之言，莽宠以殊礼，赐号义成夫人，金印紫绶，文轩丹毂，显于新世。
现代文：母师氏能通经学、百家之言，王莽宠以殊礼，赐号义成夫人，金印紫绶，文轩丹毂，显于新莽一代。
English: His mother and teacher were able to pass through the study of the classics and the words of a hundred families, and Wang Mangzhu was honored with a special gift, and was given the title of Yicheng Lady, Jin Ying Zi, and Wen Xuan Dan Zi, which appeared in the new generation of Mangzhu.

古文：后以篆为建新大尹，篆不得已，及叹曰： 吾生无妄之世，值浇、羿之君，上有老母，下有兄弟，安得独洁己而危所生哉！ 
现代文：后来用崔骃为建新大尹，崔骃不得已，便叹气道： 我生在无妄之世，碰上浇、羿这样的君，上有老母，下有兄弟，怎能独自法身而使所生危险呢？ 
English: Later, he used Cui Zhen to build a new Great Yin. Cui Zhen had no choice but to resign, and he sighed, "I was born in a world without arrogance. If I meet a prince like Cui and Zhen, with an old mother and a brother, how can I risk my life alone?

古文：乃遂单车到官，称疾不视事，三年不行县。
现代文：是单车到官所，称病不管事，三年不到县去劝农桑。
English: He cycled to the government office, said he was ill and did not care, and did not go to the county for three years to persuade the farmers.

古文：门下掾倪敞谏，篆乃强起班春。
现代文：门下掾吏倪敞劝他，崔骃才勉强起身颁布春令。
English: Ni Zhan, his disciple, advised him, and Cui Yao reluctantly got up to issue the Spring Decree.

古文：所至之县，狱犴填满。
现代文：所到之县，大小牢狱关满了人。
English: In every prefecture I visited, jails and prisons were full of people.

古文：篆垂涕曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：崔骃流着泪道： 唉呀！
English: With tears streaming down her face, Cui Lan said: Alas!

古文：刑罚不中，乃陷人于阱。
现代文：刑罚不中，于是陷人于阱。
English: The punishment does not fit the crime, so they are caught in a trap.

古文：此皆何罪，而至于是！ 
现代文：这些人有什么罪，而关在这里！ 
English: These people are guilty of nothing, yet they are locked up here!

古文：遂平理，所出二千余人。
现代文：于是公平审理，放出二千多人。
English: As a result, the trial was fair and more than two thousand people were released.

古文：掾吏叩头谏曰： 朝廷初政，州牧峻刻。
现代文：掾吏叩头劝道： 朝廷初政，州牧严峻。
English: The eunuch kowtowed and advised, "The imperial court is in its first year of power, and the provincial government is in a grim situation.

古文：宥过申枉，诚仁者之心；然独为君子，将有悔乎！ 
现代文：宽恕犯人，确是仁者之心；然而独有你这样做，将有后悔的么！ 
English: It is the heart of the merciful to forgive the offender, but will you alone regret it?

古文：篆曰： 邾文公不以一人易其身，君子谓之知命。
现代文：崔骃说： 邾文公不因一个人易其身，君子称他知命。
English: Cui Yao said, "Shi Wen Gong did not change his mind because of a person. The gentleman said that he knew his fate.

古文：如杀一大尹赎二千人，盖所愿也。 
现代文：如杀一大尹赎二千人，是我所愿意的。 
English: I am willing to kill one Yin to redeem two thousand Yin.

古文：遂称疾去。
现代文：于是称疾而去。
English: So he claimed to be ill and left.

古文：建武初，朝廷多荐言之者，幽州刺史又举篆贤良。
现代文：建武初年，朝廷多荐言的，幽州刺史又举崔骃贤良。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the imperial court made many commendations, and Yuzhou Jishi also cited Cui Xuanxianliang.

古文：贵启体之归全兮，庶不忝乎先子。篆生毅，以疾隐身不仕。
现代文：崔骃自以宗门受王莽伪宠，惭愧对汉朝，于是辞归不做官。客居在荥阳，闭门反省，著《周易林》六十四篇，用来决断吉凶，多所占验。临终作赋以自悼，名叫《慰志》。崔骃生了崔毅，因病隐身不仕。
English: Cui Gan was falsely favored by Wang Mang with his family lineage, and was ashamed to oppose the Han Dynasty, so he resigned from his position. He lived in Shenyang and reflected behind closed doors. He wrote the 64 chapters of "Zhou Yilin," which were used to judge good and evil, and many of which were used for tests. His last work was a self-mourning work called "Comforting Thoughts." Cui Gan was born as Cui Yi, and was unable to live in seclusion due to illness.

古文：毅生骃，年十三能通《诗》、《易》、《春秋》，博学有伟才，尽通古今训诂百家之言，善属文。
现代文：崔毅生了崔骃，十三岁能通晓《诗经》、《易经》、《春秋》，博学有大才，尽通古今训诂百家之言，会写文章。
English: Cui Yi was born as Cui Yao. At the age of thirteen, he was able to read "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Changes" and "The Spring and Autumn Annals." He was a great scholar and could read hundreds of ancient and modern sayings. He could also write articles.

古文：少游太学，与班固、傅毅同时齐名。
现代文：年轻时游历到太学，与班固、傅毅同时齐名。
English: He traveled to Taihaku when he was young, and became famous at the same time as Ban Gu and Fu Yi.

古文：常以典籍为业，未遑仕进之事。
现代文：常以钻研典籍为业，不遑做官之事。
English: He often studied classics as his profession, and did not shy away from official duties.

古文：仆诚不能编德于数者，窃慕古人之所序。 元和中，肃宗始修古礼，巡狩方岳。
现代文：当时人有的讥笑他太玄静，将以后名失实。崔骃模仿杨雄的《解嘲》，写了《达旨》来答复他们。元和年间，肃宗才修古礼，巡狩方岳。
English: At that time, some people mocked him for being too quiet, and misrepresented his real name. Cui Yao imitated Yang Xiong's "Answering the Mockery" and wrote "Achievement" to answer them. During the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, Su Zong only practiced ancient rituals and went on hunting expeditions.

古文：骃上《四巡颂》以称汉德，辞甚典美，文多，故不载。
现代文：崔骃上《四巡颂》以称汉德，文辞很典美，文字太多所以不记在这里。
English: Cui Yao's "Song of the Four Crusades" is known as a masterpiece, the words are very elegant, there are too many words, so it is not recorded here.

古文：帝雅好文章，自见骃颂后，常嗟叹之，谓侍中窦宪曰： 卿宁知崔骃乎？ 
现代文：皇上常好文章，自从看了崔骃的颂以后，常嗟叹起来。对侍中窦宪说： 你知道崔骃吗？ 
English: The emperor often read good articles, and after reading the poem of Cui Xi, he often sighed. He said to the attendant Dou Xian: Do you know Cui Xi?

古文：对曰： 班固数为臣说之，然未见也。 
现代文：答道 ：班固多次对我说起他，我没有看见。 
English: He replied, "Bangu told me about him many times, but I didn't see him."

古文：帝曰： 公爱班固而忽崔骃，此叶公之好龙也。
现代文：皇上说 ：你喜欢班固而忽略了崔骃，这是叶公好龙哩。
English: The emperor said, "You like Ban Gu, but ignore Cui Gan. This is Ye Gong's doing."

古文：试请见之。 
现代文：试请见他。 
English: Try to see him.

古文：骃由此候宪。
现代文：崔骃由此问候窦宪。
English: Cui Rong sent his regards to Dou Xian.

古文：宪屣履迎门，笑谓骃曰： 亭伯，吾受诏交公，公何得薄哉？ 
现代文：窦宪急忙穿鞋在门口迎接，笑着对马因说道： 亭伯，我奉皇上的命令和你交朋友，你不会薄待我吧？ 
English: Dou Xian hurriedly put on his shoes to meet him at the door, smiled and said to Ma Ying: "Ting Bo, I made friends with you on the emperor's orders. You won't treat me poorly, will you?

古文：遂揖入为上客。
现代文：于是揖为座上客。
English: So I became the guest of honor.

古文：居无几何，帝幸宪第，时骃适在宪所，帝闻而欲召见之。
现代文：住不多久，皇帝来到窦宪家。当时崔骃正在宪家，皇帝听说而想召见他。
English: After living there for a short while, the emperor came to Dou Xian's house. At that time, Cui Yao was at Xian's house, and the emperor heard about it and wanted to summon him.

古文：宪谏，以为不宜与白衣会。
现代文：窦宪劝阻，认为不应与白衣之士相见。
English: Dou Xian tried to dissuade him, saying that he should not meet the man in white.

古文：帝悟曰： 吾能令骃朝夕在傍，何必于此！ 
现代文：皇帝懂了，便说： 我能使崔骃朝夕在我身旁，何必在此！ 
English: The emperor understood and said, "If I can have Choe Hee by my side morning and evening, why not here?"

古文：适欲官之，会帝崩。
现代文：正想请他做官，碰到皇帝驾崩。
English: He was about to ask him to become an official when the emperor died.

古文：窦太后临朝，宪以重戚出内诏命。
现代文：窦太后临朝，窦宪以贵戚出纳诏命。
English: The Dowager Empress Dou was enthroned, and Dou Xian issued the imperial edict through a noble relative.

古文：骃献书诫之曰：骃闻交浅而言深者，愚也；在贱而望贵者，惑也；未信而纳忠者，谤也。
现代文：崔骃献书告诫道： 马因听说交谊浅而言语深，是愚蠢；在贱位而望贵显，是糊涂；不相信而纳忠言，是毁谤。
English: Cui Yao's dedication cautioned: Ma is foolish to say that friendship is shallow because he has heard that friendship is deep; he is confused because he is in a lowly position and wants to appear noble; he is slanderous because he does not believe and does not accept honest advice.

古文：三者皆所不宜，而或蹈之者，思效其区区，愤盈而不能已也。
现代文：三项都不相宜，而想试试看，是想效区区之心，愤懑而不能自止哩。
English: All three are unsuitable, and if you want to try it, it's because you want to follow your heart, you're angry and can't stop yourself.

古文：窃见足下体淳淑之姿，躬高明之量，意美志厉，有上贤之风。
现代文：我私下看见足下体淳淑之姿，躬高明之量，意美志厉，有上贤的风度。
English: Privately, I saw the figure of the foot of the body of Jun Suk, the amount of high and bright, the intention of beauty and ambition, and the demeanor of the superior.

古文：骃幸得充下馆，序后陈，是以竭其拳拳，敢进一言。
现代文：马因幸而得充下馆，排在后列，因此竭尽拳拳之心，敢进一言。
English: Fortunately, Ma was able to fill the lower pavilion and was in the back row. Therefore, he tried his best and dared to say something.

古文：传曰： 生而富者骄，生而贵者傲。 
现代文： 古人说： 生而富者骄，生而贵者傲。 
English: The ancients said: Born rich is proud, born noble is proud.

古文：生富贵而能不骄傲者，未之有也。
现代文：生在富贵而能不骄傲的，是没有的。
English: There is no one who is born rich and can not be proud.

古文：今宠禄初隆，百僚观行，当尧、舜之盛世，处光华之显时，岂可不庶几夙夜，以永众誉，弘申伯之美，致周、邵之事乎？
现代文：现在宠禄初隆，百僚观行，正当尧舜的盛世，处在光华的显时，岂可不庶几早晚，使众人之誉能久，弘扬申伯之美名，成就周公、召公的事业么？
English: Now, when China's prestige is at its height, when hundreds of people are watching the parade, when the country is in the prime of its life, and when it is in a period of brilliance, how many mornings and evenings should be set aside to perpetuate the reputation of the people, promote the good name of Shen Bo, and achieve the cause of Zhou Gong and summoning the public?

古文：语曰： 不患无位，患所以立。 
现代文：古语说： 不患无位，患所以立。 
English: An ancient saying goes: "Do not stand where there is no seat, stand where there is a seat."

古文：昔冯野王以外戚居位，称为贤臣；近阴卫尉克已复礼，终受多福。
现代文：从前冯野王以外戚居高位，称为贤臣；近来阴卫尉克己复礼，最终得到多福。
English: In the past, relatives other than King Fengye held high positions and were called wise men; recently, the Yinwei lieutenant refrained from returning the salute and eventually received many blessings.

古文：郯氏之宗，非不尊也；阳平之族，非不盛也。
现代文：郯氏的祖先，不是不尊贵，阳平的宗族，不是不隆盛。
English: The ancestors of the Zou clan were not without honor, and the Yangping clan was not without prosperity.

古文：重侯累将，建天枢，执斗柄。其所以获讥于时，垂愆于后者，何也？
现代文：重侯累将，建天枢，执斗柄，其所以被讥笑于当时，垂愆尤于后世，为什么呢？
English: Why was it ridiculed at the time, but coveted in later years?

古文：盖在满而不挹，位有余而仁不足也。
现代文：就因为满而不挹，位有余而仁义不足哩。
English: Just because you're full, you don't feel satisfied. You have more than enough, but not enough kindness.

古文：汉兴以后，迄于哀、平，外家二十，保族全身，四人而己。
现代文：汉兴以后，到哀帝、平帝之时，外家二十，保族全身，只有四人罢了。
English: After Han Xing, by the time of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping, there were twenty foreign families and only four Baos.

古文：《书》曰： 鉴于有殷。 
现代文：《书经》说： 鉴于有殷。 
English: "Scripture" says: In view of the Yin and Yang.

古文：可不慎哉！窦氏之兴，肇自孝文。
现代文：可不谨慎吗？ 窦氏的兴起，从孝文帝开始。
English: Isn't it prudent? The rise of the Dou clan began with Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：二君以淳淑守道，成名先日；安丰以佐命著德，显自中兴。
现代文：长君、少君以淳淑守道，成名在前日；安丰侯窦融以佐命著德，显自中兴。
English: Changjun and Shaojun followed the path of Junshu, and became famous the day before; Anfeng Hou Dou Rong followed the path of Sasuke, and became famous from Zhongxing.

古文：内以忠诚自固，外以法度自守，卒享祚国，垂祉于今。
现代文：内以忠诚自固，外用法度自守，终于享了国祚，垂福至今。
English: Internal with loyalty and self-sufficiency, external with self-sufficiency, finally enjoyed the national honor, and has been blessed ever since.

古文：夫谦德之光，《周易》所美；满溢之位，道家所戒。
现代文：谦德之光，《周易》所赞美；满溢之位，道家所戒。
English: The light of modesty, praised by "Zhou Yi"; the place of overflow, forbidden by Taoists.

古文：故君子福大而愈惧，爵隆而益恭。
现代文：所以君子福大而更加恐慎，爵隆而愈恭敬。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is more cautious when he is rich, and more respectful when he is wealthy.

古文：远察近览，俯仰有则，铭诸几杖，刻诸盘杅。
现代文：看远近，俯仰都有法则可循，铭刻在几杖之上，刻记在盘盂之间。
English: Looking far and near, there are rules to follow when pitching, engraved on a few sticks, engraved between the coils.

古文：矜矜业业，无殆无荒。
现代文：兢兢业业，无敢怠荒。
English: Dedication, dare not be idle.

古文：如此，则百福是荷，庆流无穷矣。
现代文：这样，就百福到来，庆流无穷了。 
English: In this way, when the hundred blessings come, the celebration is endless.

古文：及宪为车骑将军，辟骃为掾。
现代文：等到窦宪做了车骑将军，召崔骃做掾吏。
English: When Dou Xian became the general of chariot and cavalry, he called Cui Yao to be the leading official.

古文：宪府贵重，掾属三十人，皆故刺史、二千石，唯骃以处士年少，擢在其间。
现代文：宪府贵重，掾属三十人，都是故刺史、二千石，只有崔骃以处士年少，提升在其间。
English: The gendarmerie is held in high esteem, and there are thirty members of the gendarmerie, all of whom have a distinguished record and are worth two thousand koku. Only Cui Jie, who was promoted to the rank of officer when he was younger, is among them.

古文：宪擅权骄恣，骃数谏之，及出击匈奴，道路愈多不法，骃为主簿，前后奏记数十，指切长短。
现代文：窦宪擅权骄傲放恣，崔骃多次劝阻。等到出击匈奴，道路上更多违法之事，崔骃做主簿，前后奏记数十次，指切长短之处。
English: When the Xiongnu attacked, there were more illegal things on the road, and Cui Yao made a master book, recording dozens of times before and after, pointing out the shortcomings.

古文：宪不能容，稍疏之，因察骃高第，出为长岑长。
现代文：窦宪不能容忍，稍为疏远了他，因为崔骃是高第出身，让他出为长岭县长。
English: Dou Xian couldn't tolerate it and distanced himself from him a little, because Cui Yao was from Gaodi, and let him become the head of Changling County.

古文：骃自以远去，不得意，遂不之官而归。
现代文：崔骃自认为远去，不得意，于是不到官位而回家。
English: Unwilling to go so far away, Cui Yao decided to return home instead of taking up his official position.

古文：永元四年，卒于家。
现代文：永元四年，死在家中。
English: Yongyuan four years, died at home.

古文：所著诗、赋、铭、颂、书、记、表、《七依》、《婚礼结言》、《达旨》、《酒警》合二十一篇。
现代文：所著诗、赋、铭、颂、书、记、表、《七依》、《婚礼结言》、《达旨》、《酒警》共二十一篇。
English: There are a total of twenty-one poems, fus, inscriptions, odes, books, records, tables, "Seven Observances," "Wedding Closing Remarks," "Affirmation," and "Wine Cops."

古文：中子瑗。
现代文：中子崔瑗。
English: Starring Nakago Choi Min.

古文：瑗字子玉，早孤，锐志好学，尽能传其父业。
现代文：◆崔瑗传，崔瑗字子玉，早年丧父，锐志好学，尽能继承父业。
English: ◆Cui Yu Chuan, Cui Yu Zidam, lost his father at an early age, eager to learn, do his best to inherit his father's business.

古文：年十八，至京师，从侍中贾逵质正大义，逵善待之，瑗因留游学，遂明天官、历数、《京房易传》、六日七分。
现代文：十八岁，到京师，从侍中贾逵质正大义，贾逵待他很好，崔瑗于是有机会游学，遂明天官、历数、《京房易传》、六日七分。
English: At the age of eighteen, he went to Beijing to study, and he was treated very well by Jia Yu, the attendant. Cui Yu then had the opportunity to travel to study, and he became an official, a historian, and the author of "Beijing House Easy Biography" and "Six Days and Seven Minutes."

古文：诸儒宗之。
现代文：诸儒以他为宗。
English: Confucianism takes him as its founder.

古文：与扶风马融、南阳张衡特相友好。
现代文：他与扶风马融、南阳张衡特别友好。
English: He is particularly friendly with Fufeng Ma Rong and Nanyang Zhang Heng.

古文：初，瑗兄章为州人所杀，瑗手刃报仇，因亡命。
现代文：起初，崔瑗之兄崔章被州人所杀，崔瑗手持白刃报仇，于是逃命出去。
English: At first, Cui Yan's brother Cui Zhang was killed by the statesmen, Cui Yan took revenge with a white blade in his hand, and then fled for his life.

古文：会赦，归家。
现代文：碰上大赦，回了家。
English: After the amnesty, he returned home.

古文：家贫，兄弟同居数十年，乡邑化之。
现代文：家中贫困，兄弟同住数十年，乡邑被他们感化。
English: The family is poor, the brothers have lived together for decades, and the village has been influenced by them.

古文：年四十余，始为郡吏。
现代文：崔瑗四十多岁，才做郡吏。
English: Cui Wei is in his forties and has just started working as a county official.

古文：以事系东郡发干狱。
现代文：因事被关在东郡发干县的牢狱。
English: Due to the incident, he was locked up in a prison in Fagan County, Dong County.

古文：狱掾善为《礼》，瑗间考讯时，辄问以《礼》说。
现代文：狱掾会《礼记》，崔瑗在考讯之余，常阅《礼》。
English: The "Rituals" will be read by the guards, and Cui Yao often reads the "Rituals" in addition to the examination.

古文：其专心好学，虽颠沛必于是。
现代文：他的专心好学，即使在颠沛倒霉之时，也是如此。
English: His dedication to his studies, even in the face of adversity, remains the same.

古文：后事释归家，为度辽将军邓遵所辟。
现代文：后来事情弄清被释回家，被度辽将军邓遵所召。
English: Later, when the matter was clarified, he was released to go home and was summoned by Du Liao's general Deng Zun.

古文：居无何，遵被诛，瑗免归。
现代文：不久，邓遵被杀，崔瑗免职而归。
English: Soon after, Deng Zun was killed, and Cui Gan resigned from his post.

古文：瑚复辟车骑将军阎显府。
现代文：后来又被召进车骑将军阎显之府里。
English: Later, he was summoned to the palace of the charioteer General Yan Xian.

古文：时阎太后称制，显入参政事。
现代文：当时阎太后称制摄政，代行天子之事，阎显入朝参与政事。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Yan proclaimed herself regent, acting on behalf of the emperor, and Yan Xian entered the court to participate in political affairs.

古文：先是，安帝废太子为济阴王，而以北乡侯为嗣。
现代文：先是安帝废太子为济阴王，而以北乡侯为嗣。
English: At first, Prince Andei was the king of Jieyin, but he was succeeded by Prince Beixiang.

古文：瑗以侯立不以正，知显将败，欲说蓬废立，而显日沉醉，不能得见。
现代文：崔瑗认为以侯立不以正，知道阎显将失败，想说令废立，而阎显日沈醉，不能见到。
English: Cui Yao thought that it was not correct to rely on Hou Li, knowing that Yan Xian would fail, he wanted to say that the order was scrapped, but Yan Xian was drunk and could not see the sun.

古文：乃谓长史陈禅曰： 中常侍江京、陈达等，得以嬖宠惑蛊先帝，遂使废黜正统，扶立疏孽。
现代文：于是对长史陈禅道 ：中常侍江京、陈达等，得因嬖宠蛊惑先帝，于是使废黜正统，扶立疏孽。
English: Therefore, for the long history of Chen Zendou: Zhong Chang served Jiangjing, Chen Daru, and so on, because of his favor, he was able to bewitch the former emperor, so he made the dethronement of orthodoxy and the establishment of righteousness.

古文：少帝即位，发病庙中，周勃之征，于斯复见。
现代文：少帝即位，发病于庙中，周勃的专权，在此又出现。
English: The enthronement of the young emperor, the outbreak in the temple, Zhou Bo's exclusive power, here again.

古文：今欲与长史君共求见，说将军白太后，收京等，废少帝，引立济阴王，必上当天心，下合人望。
现代文：今想与长史君共同求见，劝将军向太后请求，逮捕江京等人，废少帝，引立济阴王，必会上合天心，下合人望。
English: Now I want to seek an audience with Chang Shi Jun, persuade the general to make a request to the empress dowager, arrest Jiang Jing and others, abolish the young emperor, and set up the Jiyin king. It will surely meet the heart of heaven and meet people's expectations.

古文：伊、霍之功，不下席而立炁则将军兄弟传祚于无穷。
现代文：伊、霍之功，不下席而立，那么将军兄弟传祚于无穷。
English: Yi and Huo's feats, standing up without leaving their seats, have been passed down from generation to generation by the generals and brothers.

古文：若拒违天意，久旷神器，则将以无罪并辜元恶。
现代文：如拒违天意，久空帝位，那么将因无罪成了大恶。
English: If, in defiance of God's will, His Majesty abdicates the throne, it will be a great evil because of his innocence.

古文：此所谓祸福之会，分功之时。 
现代文：这就是祸福之机，分功之时。 
English: This is the time of calamity and blessing, the time of the division of labor.

古文：禅犹豫未敢从。
现代文：陈禅犹豫不敢听从。
English: Chen Zhen hesitates to obey.

古文：会北乡侯薨，孙程立济阴王，是为顺帝。
现代文：遇上北乡侯死掉，孙程立济阴王，这就是顺帝。
English: When Hokusho died, Sun Ching became the king of Jianyin. This is Shunde.

古文：阎显兄弟悉伏诛，瑗坐被斥。
现代文：阎显兄弟都被杀，崔瑗也被排斥。
English: All of Yan Xian's brothers were killed, and Cui Yao was also ostracized.

古文：门生苏祇具知瑗谋，欲上书言状，瑗闻而遽止之。
现代文：门生苏礻氏全部知道崔瑗的意图，想上书把情况说清，崔瑗听到立刻制止了。
English: All of Su Ye's disciples knew of Cui Ye's intention and wanted to write a letter to clarify the situation. Upon hearing this, Cui Ye immediately put a stop to it.

古文：时陈禅为司隶校尉，召瑗谓曰： 第听祇上书，禅请为之证。 
现代文：当时陈禅作了司隶校尉，召崔瑗。对瑗说： 但听苏礻氏上书，我请替你作证。 
English: At that time, Chen Zen, who was the captain of the brigade, called Cui Yao and said to him, "But listen to Su Yao's letter, I will testify for you."

古文：瑗曰： 此譬犹兒妾屏语耳，愿使君勿复出口。 
现代文：崔瑗说： 这好比儿子、小妻在说私房话罢了，希望你不要说出口来。 
English: Cui Yao said, "This is just like your son and daughter-in-law talking about their private lives. I hope you don't say it out loud."

古文：遂辞归，不复应州郡命。
现代文：于是辞归，不再应州郡之命。
English: As a result, he resigned and no longer responded to the order of the state and county.

古文：久之，大将军梁商初开莫府，复首辟瑗。
现代文：过了许久，大将军梁商初开幕府，又召崔瑗。
English: After a long time, the great general Liang Shangchu opened the capital and summoned Cui Yao.

古文：自以再为贵戚吏，不遇被斥，遂以戚固辞。
现代文：自认为再作贵戚的官吏，搞不好又被斥，于是以病固辞。
English: The official, who considered himself to be a member of a noble family, was probably rebuffed, so he resigned due to illness.

古文：岁中举茂才，迁汲令。
现代文：年中举为茂才，授职汲县令。
English: In the middle of the year, he was promoted to Maozai and given the post of county magistrate.

古文：在事数言便宜，为人开稻田数百顷。
现代文：在职时数次谈及时事，替百姓开垦稻田数百顷。
English: When he was in office, he talked about current affairs several times and reclaimed hundreds of hectares of rice fields for the people.

古文：视事七年，百姓歌之。
现代文：在职七年，百姓歌颂他。
English: During his seven years in office, the people sang his praises.

古文：汉安初，大司农胡广、少府窦章共荐瑗宿德大儒，从政有迹，不宜久在下位，由此迁济北相。
现代文：汉安初年，大司农胡广、少府窦章共荐崔瑗为宿德大儒，从政有功迹，不应久在下位，由此升为济北相。
English: In the first year of Han'an, the grand secretary of farmers, Hu Guang, and the minor prefect, Dou Zhang, jointly recommended Cui Wei as a great scholar, who had made great achievements in politics and should not be in a lower position for a long time, thus he was promoted to the Minister of North Jeolla Province.

古文：时，李固为太山太守，美瑗文雅，奉书礼致殷勤。
现代文：这时李固做太山太守，赞美崔瑗文雅，奉书礼表示殷勤之意。
English: At this time, Li Gu acted as the governor of Taishan, praised Cui Yingwen, and paid a courtesy call to show his attentiveness.

古文：岁余，光禄大夫杜乔为八使，徇行郡国，以臧罪奏瑗，征诣廷尉。
现代文：一年多，光禄大夫杜乔为八使，徇行郡国，用贪赃罪奏崔瑗，召到廷尉那里。
English: For more than a year, Guanglu doctor Du Qiao was the eighth envoy, went to the county, used the crime of embezzlement to play Cui Wei, and was summoned to the courtier.

古文：瑗上书自讼，得理出。
现代文：崔瑗上书自讼，弄清案情放了出来。
English: Cui Gan filed a private lawsuit to clarify the case and was released.

古文：会病卒，年六十六。
现代文：不久病死了，享年六十六岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 66.

古文：临终，顾命子寔曰： 夫人禀天地之气以生，及其终也，归精于天，还骨于地。
现代文：临终时，顾命儿子崔萛道： 人是秉天地之气以生，到了死时，归精于天，还骨于地。
English: At the time of his death, his son, Cui Xiwen, said: "A person lives by upholding the spirit of heaven and earth. When he dies, he will return his essence to heaven and his bones to the earth.

古文：何地不可臧形骸，勿归乡里。
现代文：哪里不可埋葬形骸，不要归回乡里。
English: Don't go back to the countryside where you can't bury your remains.

古文：其帽赠之物，羊豕之奠，一不得受。 
现代文：那些赠送的物品，祭奠羊猪的，一概不得接受。 
English: Those items that are given as gifts, or that are used to worship sheep and pigs, should not be accepted.

古文：寔奉遗令，遂留葬洛阳。
现代文：崔萛奉了遗命，于是留葬在洛阳。
English: Choe Son was buried in Luoyang according to his last wishes.

古文：瑗高于文辞，尤善为书、记、箴、铭，所著赋、碑、铭、箴、颂、《七苏》、《南阳文学官志》、《叹辞》、《移社文》、《悔祈》、《草书艺》七言，凡五十七篇。
现代文：崔瑗文辞水平很高，尤其善于为书、记、箴、铭，所著赋、碑、铭、箴、颂、《七苏》、《南阳文学官志》、《叹辞》、《移社文》、《悔祈》、《草书艺》、七言共五十七篇。
English: Cui Rong has a high level of literature, and is particularly good at writing, recording, saying, and inscribing. He has written a total of fifty-seven books, including Fu, He, Miao, Zheng, Song, Seven Su, Nanyang Literature Official History, Lamentation, Translation, Repentance, Cursive Calligraphy, and Seven Words.

古文：其《南阳文学官志》称于后世，诸能为文者皆自以弗及。
现代文：他的《南阳文学官志》被称于后世，那些能为文的人都自认为赶不上。
English: His "Nanyang Literature Official History" is known to posterity, and those who can write think they can't keep up.

古文：瑗爱士，好宾客，盛修肴膳，单极滋味，不问余产。
现代文：崔瑗爱士子，喜宾客，盛修菜肴膳食，尽用美味，不问还剩多少。
English: Cui Yao Aishi Zi, the guest of honor, lavishly prepared dishes and meals, made the most of the delicacies, no matter how much was left.

古文：居常蔬食菜羹而已。
现代文：平日常食蔬食菜羹罢了。
English: It's just ordinary everyday food, vegetables and vegetable soup.

古文：家无担石储，当世清之。
现代文：家中无甚积蓄，当世认为很清廉。
English: The family didn't have much in the way of savings and was considered to be very honest.

古文：寔字子真，一名台，字元始。
现代文：◆崔萛传，崔萛，宇子真，又名台，字元始。
English: ◆Cui Yu Chuan, Cui Yu, Uzi Zhen, also known as Tai, the beginning of the characters.

古文：少沉静，好典籍。
现代文：少年时很沉静，喜欢读书。
English: When he was a boy, he was quiet and liked to read.

古文：父卒，隐居墓侧。
现代文：父亲死后，住在墓旁守丧。
English: After his father's death, he lived next to the grave to mourn.

古文：服竟，三公并辟，皆不就。
现代文：守丧期满，三公请他出去做官，他都不去。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the three princes invited him to go out to work as an official, but he did not go.

古文：桓帝初，诏公卿郡国举至孝独行之士。
现代文：桓帝初年，皇帝下诏给公卿郡国推举极孝顺和品德好的人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Kantei, the emperor issued an edict to the nobles of the county to nominate people who were extremely filial and virtuous.

古文：寔以郡举，征诣公车，病不对策，除为郎。明于政体，吏才有余，论当世便事数十条，名曰《政论》。
现代文：崔萛因病不能参加面试，拜为郎。崔萛对政体很精明，做官的能力很强，写了评论当代政事的意见数十条，题目叫《政论》。
English: Due to illness, Cui Hao was unable to attend the interview, but he was praised as a hero. Cui Hao was very astute about the political system and had a strong ability to be an official. He wrote dozens of opinions commenting on contemporary political affairs, the title of which was "Political Theory."

古文：指切时要，言辩而确，当世称之。
现代文：针对当时要害，议论很正确，博得当代人的称赞。
English: In view of the key issues at that time, the discussion was very correct and won the praise of the present generation.

古文：仲长统曰： 凡为人主，宜写一通，置之坐侧。 
现代文：仲长统说 ：所有国君，应抄一遍，作为座右铭。 
English: Nakanaga said, "All sovereigns should copy this as their motto."

古文：其辞曰：自尧、舜之帝，汤、武之王，皆赖明哲之佐，博物之臣。
现代文：文章说： 自从尧帝、舜帝、汤王、武王开始，都依靠明哲的臣子去辅佐，博学之士当参谋。
English: The article said: Since Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong, Tang Wang, and King Wu began, they have all relied on the courtiers of Mingzhe to assist, and the learned men to be staff officers.

古文：故皋陶陈谟而唐、虞以兴，伊、箕作训而殷、周用隆。
现代文：所以皋陶写了一篇《谟》而唐虞得以兴旺，伊尹、箕子作了《训》而商周也很兴隆。
English: Therefore, Zou Tao wrote a "Moo" and Tang Yu was able to flourish, Yi Yin and Zou Zi wrote a "Teachings" and Shang Zhou was also flourishing.

古文：及继体之君，欲立中兴之功者，曷尝不赖贤哲之谋乎！
现代文：到了后代的君主，想中兴起来建功立业，何尝不依赖贤哲的臣子去参谋呢？
English: When it comes to future generations of monarchs, if you want to rise up and build a career, why not rely on wise and sagacious courtiers to advise you?

古文：凡天下所以不理者，常由人主承平日久，俗渐敝而不悟，政浸衰而不改，习乱安危，不自睹。
现代文：凡天下治理不好，常常由于君主处在太平的日子太久，风俗渐渐衰败而不觉悟，政治渐渐腐化而不悔改，在危乱的环境之中，视而不见。
English: Whenever the world is not well governed, it is often because the monarch has been at peace for too long, customs gradually decay without awareness, politics gradually corrupts without repentance, and in the midst of a dangerous environment, they turn a blind eye.

古文：或荒耽嗜欲，不恤万机；或耳蔽箴诲，厌伪忽真；或犹豫歧路，莫适所从；或见信之佐，括囊守禄；或疏远之臣，言以贱废，是以王纲纵弛于上，智士郁伊于下。悲夫！自汉兴以来，三百五十余岁矣。
现代文：有的人沉醉在私欲中，不管国家大事；有的人好话听不进去，颠倒了是非黑白；有的人在三岔路口徘徊，不知该往哪里走；有的人身边有可信的辅佐，但不让他们开口；有的人看到疏远之臣，因为身份不高而听不进耳，因此王纲弛废在上面，智士忧郁在下面，真可悲叹呀！ 从汉朝兴起以来，三百五十多年了。
English: Some people are intoxicated with lust, regardless of national events; some people can't listen to good words, and reverse black and white; some people wander at the fork in the road and don't know where to go; some people have trusted aides around them, but they don't let them speak; some people see estranged courtiers, because their status is not high and they can't listen, so the king is flabby on top and the wise man is melancholy below. What a pity! It's been more than 350 years since the rise of the Han Dynasty.

古文：政令垢玩，上下怠懈，风俗凋敝，人庶巧伪，百姓嚣然，咸复思中兴之救矣。
现代文：政令蒙受尘土，上下懒惰，风俗凋敝，人多巧伪，百姓议论纷纷，都希望中兴起来就有救了。
English: The government decrees are covered with dust, people are lazy, customs are withering, there are many people who are crafty and false, and the people are discussing one after another. They all hope that ZTE will be saved.

古文：且济时拯世之术，岂必体尧蹈舜然后乃理哉？
现代文：再说拯救时世的方法，难道一定按尧舜的办法才能治理吗？
English: Besides, the way to save the world, is it possible to govern by force?

古文：期于补衤定决坏，枝柱邪倾，随形裁割，要措斯世于安宁之域而已。
现代文：只要能弥补缺陷，加根顶梁柱把大厦撑持，根据实情对症下药，相体裁衣，总之要把国家放在安宁的境域罢了。
English: As long as we can make up for the defects, strengthen the roof beams and columns to support the building, take the right medicine according to the actual situation, cut the clothes according to the shape, in short, we should put the country in a peaceful environment.

古文：故圣人执权，遭时定制，步骤之差，各有云设。
现代文：所以圣人执掌权衡，针对实际制定对策，步骤有所差别，各有巧妙安排。
English: Therefore, sages hold the balance, formulate countermeasures according to the actual situation, the steps are different, and each has a clever arrangement.

古文：不强人以不能，背急切而慕所闻也。
现代文：不强迫人办做不到的事，违背当时急切的需要而追求听来的做法，都是不可取的。
English: It is not advisable not to force people to do what they cannot do, and to pursue what they have heard contrary to the urgent needs of the time.

古文：盖孔子对叶公以来远，哀公以临人，景公以节礼，非其不同，所急异务也。
现代文：从前孔子回答国君的问题，都是因人因事而异，他回答叶公的问政，就是要求近者悦而远者来；回答鲁哀公就是 政在选贤 ；回答齐景公就是 政在节财 ，不是为政之道不同，而是当务之急不同。
English: Once upon a time, Confucius answered the questions of the sovereign, all of which varied from person to person and from event to event. His answer to Ye Gong's question about politics was to ask those who were close to him to be pleased and those who were far away to come; his answer to Lu Aigong was that politics was in the selection of sages; his answer to Qi Jinggong was that politics was in the saving of money. It was not a different way of doing politics, but a different urgency.

古文：是以受命之君，每辄创制；中兴之主，亦匡时失。
现代文：因此，刚接受天命为君的人，每每有些独到的规定，中兴的国王，也要纠正当时的失误。
English: Therefore, those who have just accepted the fate of heaven as the ruler, each have some unique provisions, and the king of ZTE should also correct the mistakes at that time.

古文：昔盘庚愍殷，迁都易民；周穆有阙，甫侯正刑。
现代文：古时盘庚想中兴商朝，把国都从耿迁到亳；周穆王有过失，让甫侯修正刑法。
English: In ancient times, Pan Geng wanted to revive the mercantile dynasty and moved the capital from Geng to Handan; King Zhou Mu was negligent and let Fuhong amend the criminal law.

古文：俗人拘文牵古，不达权制，奇伟所闻，简忽所见，乌可与论国家之大事哉！
现代文：可是有些俗人拘泥于古文字记载，不懂得通权达变，听信奇特的新闻，忽略眼前的实际，怎么能和他们议论国家的大事呢！
English: However, some laymen are fixated on ancient records, do not know how to pass power, listen to strange news, and ignore the current reality. How can you discuss important matters of the country with them?

古文：故言事者，虽合圣德，辄见掎夺。
现代文：所以谈政事的，虽然听起来好像符合圣德，但实际上行不通。
English: So talking about politics, while it sounds virtuous, doesn't really work.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：其顽士暗于时权，安习所见，不知乐成，况可虑始，苟云率由旧章而已。
现代文：那班顽固的人对于当时情况完全不了解，习惯走老路。不知怎样安享其成，怎能考虑开创新局面，只是照老章程办事而已。
English: Those stubborn people did not fully understand the situation at that time, and were accustomed to taking the old road. They did not know how to enjoy their achievements, how to consider opening a new situation, but only acted according to the old regulations.

古文：其达者或矜名妒能，耻策非已，舞笔夺辞，以破其义，寡不胜众，遂见摈弃。
现代文：那些通达的人有的夸耀自己，嫉妒别人，不愿与政见不同的人合作，写起文章来洋洋洒洒，表达其含义，可是少数派毕竟寡不敌众，最终还是被抛弃。
English: Some of the clever people boast of themselves, envy others, are unwilling to cooperate with people with different political views, and write articles to express their meaning, but after all, the minority is outnumbered and eventually abandoned.

古文：虽稷、契复存，犹将困焉。
现代文：即使稷、契那样的贤相还在，仍将感到困难。
English: Even if the wise men like Zhai and Qi are still alive, they will still find it difficult.

古文：斯贾生之所以排于绛、灌，屈子之所以摅其幽愤者也。
现代文：这就是贾谊被绛、灌排斥原因，屈原写离骚发泄幽愤的原故。
English: This is the reason why Jia Yi was ostracized and ostracized, and the reason why Qu Yuan wrote about it to vent his anger.

古文：夫以文帝之明，贾生之贤，绛、灌之忠，而有此患，况其余哉！
现代文：汉文帝那样英明，贾生那样的才能，绛、灌那样的忠心，尚有这种结果，何况其余的人呢？ 量力度德，这是《春秋》上提到的。
English: As wise as Emperor Hanwen, as talented as Jia Sheng, as loyal as Yan and Guan, there are still such results, and what about the rest of the people? Quantitative virtue, this is mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：量力度德，《春秋》之义，今既不能纯法八代，故宜参以霸政，则宜重赏深罚以御之，明著法术以检之。
现代文：现在既不能完全按三皇五帝的办法，应该参入一些霸政，应该重赏深罚来治理国家，明文制定法律来检查一切工作。
English: Now it is not possible to completely follow the method of the three emperors and five emperors, some hegemony should be introduced, deep punishment should be rewarded to govern the country, and laws should be clearly formulated to check all work.

古文：自非上德，严之则理，宽之则乱。
现代文：自己不具备上等的品德，严格就能治理，宽松必然紊乱。
English: If you do not have the best moral character, you will be able to govern strictly, and looseness will inevitably lead to disorder.

古文：何以明其然也：近孝宣皇帝明于君人之道，审于为政之理，故严刑峻法，破奸轨之胆，海内清肃，天下密如。
现代文：怎么知道会这样呢？近代孝宣皇帝懂得为君之道，研究了为政之理，所以采用严刑峻法，使坏人吓破了胆，海内政纪严肃，天下安静。
English: How did he know this would happen? The modern Emperor Xiaoxuan knew how to be a ruler and studied the principles of government, so he used harsh punishments to scare the bad guys. He was serious about discipline at home and abroad, and the world was quiet.

古文：荐勋祖庙，享号中宗。
现代文：功勋上告祖庙，享有中宗的谥号。
English: The temple was awarded the Medal of Merit, and was given the nickname of Zhongzong.

古文：算计见效，优于孝文。
现代文：他的计划与效果，超过了孝文皇帝。
English: His plans and results exceeded those of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：及元帝即位，多行宽政，卒以堕损，威权始夺，遂为汉室基祸之主。
现代文：后来元帝即位，多用宽松的政治，结果彻底失败，威权被人篡夺，成为汉朝衰微的祸乱之源。
English: Later, Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne and used loose politics, but the result was a complete failure. The authority was usurped and became the source of the disaster of the decline of the Han Dynasty.

古文：政道得失，于斯可监。
现代文：政治的好坏，在此可以看得清楚。
English: The good and bad of politics can be clearly seen here.

古文：昔孔子作《春秋》，褒齐桓，懿晋文，叹管仲之功。
现代文：古时孔子写《春秋》，称赞齐桓公、晋文公的霸业，表彰管仲的功劳。
English: In ancient times, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," praising the hegemony of Qi Kuan Gong and Jin Wen Gong, and commending the merits of Guanzhong.

古文：夫岂不美文、武之道哉？
现代文：难道不知道赞美周文王、武王的正道吗？
English: Don't they know that praising King Chouwen and King Wu is the right way?

古文：诚达权救敝之理也。
现代文：的确是为了通权达变挽救衰败的道理。
English: Indeed, it is the principle of saving decay for the purpose of achieving power.

古文：故圣人能与世推移，而俗士苦不知变，以为结绳之约，可复理乱秦之绪，《干戚》之舞，足以解平城之围。夫熊经鸟伸，虽延历之术，非伤寒之理；呼吸吐纳，虽度纪之道，非续骨之膏。
现代文：所以圣人能够随着形势变迁，而俗士却不懂得变化，认为上古结绳的办法，可用来治理秦代的乱政，《干戚》之舞，能够解除汉高祖平城的围困，这不是相距十万八千里吗？ 模仿熊的运动、鸟的伸颈吸气，虽然是延年益寿的方法，但是治不好伤寒病；呼吸吐纳，虽然能使寿命增加，但是接不好已折的骨。
English: Therefore, the sages can adapt to the changing situation, but the laymen do not understand the changes. They think that the ancient method of tying ropes can be used to control the chaos of the Qin Dynasty, and the dance of "Kang Qi" can lift the siege of the Han Gao Zu Pingcheng. Isn't this a distance of one hundred and eight thousand miles? Imitating the movement of a bear and the stretching of a bird's neck to inhale, although it is a method of prolonging life, but it can't cure typhoid fever; breathing Tuna, although it can increase life expectancy, but it can't fix broken bones.

古文：盖为国之法，有似理身，平则致养，疾则攻焉。
现代文：治国的办法，有些像治病，平时注意养身之道，生病就要对症下药。
English: Some methods of governing the country are like curing a disease. Pay attention to the way of self-improvement in peacetime. If you are sick, you should take the right medicine.

古文：夫刑罚者，治乱之药石也；德教者，兴平之粱肉也。
现代文：刑罚，等于治乱世的药方；德教，好比平时养身的粱肉。
English: Penalty is equal to the prescription to cure the chaotic world; moral education is like the stew to nourish oneself at ordinary times.

古文：夫以德教除残，是以梁肉理疾也；以刑罚理平，是以药石供养也。
现代文：用德教去除残暴，等于用粱肉治疾病。以刑罚去治理太平之世，等于用药石作营养。
English: To use morality to get rid of brutality is like using meat to cure a disease. To use punishment to cure a peaceful world is like using medicinal stone to nourish oneself.

古文：方今承百王之敝，值厄运之会。
现代文：现在正是继承百王衰敝的时期，正在走厄运的时候。
English: Now is the time to inherit the decadence of a hundred emperors. It is the time to walk the road of doom.

古文：自数世以来，政多恩贡，驭委其辔，马骀其衔，四牡横奔，皇路险倾。
现代文：几代以来，政多恩宽贷，好像驾马车的丢失了马龙头，马没有衔嚼口，让四匹牡马乱跑，大路上险些儿倾倒。
English: For several generations, the government has been lenient and lenient, as if the driver of the carriage lost the horse's head, the horse had no jaws, let the four stallions run wild, and almost fell down on the highway.

古文：方将柑勒鞬辀以救之，岂暇鸣和銮，清节奏哉？
现代文：正应该加上龙头嚼口来挽救，难道有功夫听它们响着铃铛，有节奏地按辔徐行吗？
English: It should be saved by adding the dragon's head chewing mouth, is there any effort to listen to them ringing the bell and rhythmically pressing the gong?

古文：昔高祖令萧何作九章之律，有夷三族之令，黥、劓、斩趾、断舌、枭首，故谓之具五刑。
现代文：从前汉高祖叫萧何作九章的法律，其中有杀三族的规定，在面部刻字、割鼻子、斩脚趾、割舌头，砍头，所以叫做五刑具备。
English: Once upon a time, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu, asked Xiao He to make a nine-chapter law. Among them, there was a provision to kill the three ethnic groups, and to engrave the face, cut the nose, cut the toes, cut the tongue, and cut the head, so it was called the five punishments.

古文：文帝虽除肉刑，当劓者笞三百，当斩左趾者笞五百，当斩右趾者弃市。
现代文：汉文帝虽然废除肉刑，应割鼻子的改为打三百板子，应斩左趾的改为打五百板子，应斩右趾的杀头示众。
English: Although Emperor Hanwen abolished corporal punishment, the punishment of cutting the nose was changed to beating three hundred boards, the punishment of chopping the left toe was changed to beating five hundred boards, and the punishment of chopping the right toe was shown to the public.

古文：右趾者既殒其命，笞挞者往往至死，虽有轻刑之名，其实捅也。
现代文：可是斩右趾的已经丧了命，挨板子的每每被打死，即使有减轻刑罚之名，其实还是杀了不少。
English: However, the person who chopped off his right toe has already lost his life, and the person who was beaten to death was beaten to death. Even if there is a name of mitigating punishment, in fact, he still killed a lot.

古文：当此之时，民皆思复肉刑。
现代文：这个时候，百姓都希望恢复肉刑。
English: At this time, the people all want to resume corporal punishment.

古文：至景帝元年，乃下诏曰： 加笞与重罪无异，幸而不死，不可为人。 
现代文：到景帝元年，于是下诏书道： 增加打板子与重罪没有区别，即使侥幸不死，也成了残废。 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the emperor issued an edict saying, "Increasing the number of whackers is no different from committing a serious crime. Even if you are lucky enough not to die, you will still be disabled."

古文：乃定律，减笞轻捶。
现代文：于是修订法律，减少笞刑。
English: As a result, the law was amended to reduce flogging.

古文：自是之后，笞者得全。
现代文：从此以后，被笞者得以保全性命。
English: Since then, the victims have been able to save their lives.

古文：以此言之，文帝乃重刑，非轻之也；以严致平，非以宽致平也。
现代文：这样说来，汉文帝仍是重刑，不是轻刑。是以严刑达到太平，不是用宽宥达到太平。
English: In this way, Emperor Hanwen is still a heavy punishment, not a light punishment. Peace is achieved by severe punishment, not by forgiveness.

古文：必欲行若言，当大定其本，使人主师五帝而式三王，荡亡秦之俗，遵先圣之风，弃苟全之政，蹈稽古之踪，复五等之爵，立井田之制。
现代文：一定想行动和言语一致，应当从根本做起，使人主向五帝三王学习。破除亡秦的败俗，遵守先王的遗风，抛弃只图暂时苟安的措施，重蹈古代的旧迹，恢复公、侯、伯、子、男五等爵位，确立一分公田、八分私田的井田制。
English: If we want our actions and words to be consistent, we should start from the basics and make our masters learn from the five emperors and three kings. We should abolish the corrupt customs of the late Qin Dynasty, abide by the legacy of the former king, abandon the measures that only seek temporary peace, repeat the old practices of ancient times, restore the five titles of nobility, lord, peasant, son, and son, and establish a rice paddy system with one point of public land and eight points of private land.

古文：然后选稷、契为佐，伊吕为辅，乐作而凤皇仪，击石而百兽舞。
现代文：然后选出稷、契那样的贤臣作辅佐，选拔伊尹、吕尚作宰相，奏乐时凤凰率百鸟来朝，击石磬而百兽来跳舞。
English: Then, they selected the wise men such as Yao and Qi as assistants, and selected Yi Yun and Lushan as prime ministers. When the music was played, the phoenix led hundreds of birds to the North, and when the stone was struck, hundreds of beasts came to dance.

古文：若不然，则多为累而已。
现代文：如果不是这样，那么再多也是累赘罢了。 
English: If this is not the case, then any more is just a burden.

古文：其后辟太尉袁汤、大将军梁冀府，并不应。
现代文：后来朝廷叫崔萛到太尉袁汤，大将军梁冀府里去当官，崔萛都不去。
English: Later, the imperial court asked Cui Gan to go to the headquarters of First Lieutenant Yuan Tang and General Liang Jifu to become an official, but Cui Gan did not go.

古文：大司农羊傅、少府何豹上书荐寔才美能高，宜在朝廷。
现代文：太司农羊傅、少府何豹上书推荐崔萛，说崔的才干很好，能力很强，应在朝廷做官。
English: The farmer-sheep farmer and the minor prefect He Piao wrote to recommend Cui Wei, saying that Cui's talent was very good and his ability was very strong, and that he should be an official in the imperial court.

古文：召拜议郎，迁大将军冀司马，与边韶、延笃等著作东观。
现代文：于是皇帝封崔为议郎，提升大将军梁冀作司马，与边韶、延笃等人在东观著书立说。
English: As a result, the emperor appointed Cui as the speaker, promoted the general Liang Ji as the secretary, and wrote a book with Bentham, Yan Tu and others in Dongguan.

古文：出为五原太守。
现代文：后来崔萛出任五原太守。
English: Later, Cui Gan served as the Fifth Empress Dowager.

古文：五原土宜麻枲，而俗不知织绩，民冬月无衣，积细草而卧其中，见吏则衣草而出。
现代文：五原的土质宜于种麻，而当地人不知道织布，老百姓冬天没有衣服穿，堆些细草睡在草里面，见官吏就披着草出来。
English: The soil of the Wuhuan is suitable for growing hemp, but the local people do not know how to weave cloth, the common people do not have clothes to wear in winter, they sleep in piles of grass, and when they see officials, they come out covered in grass.

古文：寔至官，斥卖储峙，为作纺绩、织纴，綀缊之具以教之，民得以免寒苦。
现代文：崔萛到任后，叫百姓卖掉储藏的粮食，替他们添制纺绩、织纟壬、纟束等工具并教他们如何使用，百姓才免受冻馁之苦。
English: After Cui Rong took office, he asked the people to sell their stored grain, and made tools for them such as spinning rods, weaving reeds, and bundles of reeds, and taught them how to use them, so that the people would be spared the suffering of frostbite.

古文：是时胡虏连入云中、朔方，杀略吏民，一岁至九奔命。
现代文：这时匈奴连续入侵云中、朔方，杀掠官吏百姓，一年之内九次逃命。
English: At this time, the Xiongnu invaded Yunzhong and Shuo in succession, killing and plundering officials and commoners, and fled for their lives nine times within a year.

古文：寔整厉士马，严烽候，虏不敢犯，常为边最。
现代文：崔萛就厉兵秣马，严饬烽火台侦察，敌人不敢进犯，成为边塞最安静的地方。
English: Cui Rong led the troops in a vigorous march and closely watched the fire tower for reconnaissance. The enemy did not dare to attack, making it the quietest place in the frontier fortress.

古文：以病征，拜议郎，复与诸儒博士共杂定《五经》。
现代文：崔萛在病中，被拜为议郎，又与当时的名儒博士一同审定《五经》。
English: During his illness, Cui Gan was worshipped as a healer, and together with the famous Confucian doctor of the time, he approved the "Five Classics."

古文：会梁冀诛，寔以故吏免官，禁锢数年。
现代文：恰逢梁冀被杀，崔萛是梁冀的故吏，受牵连，罢了官，关在牢里数年。
English: Coinciding with the murder of Liang Jie, Cui Wei, a former official of Liang Jie, was implicated, dismissed from his post, and locked up in prison for several years.

古文：时，鲜卑数犯边，诏三公举威武谋略之士，司空黄琼荐寔，拜辽东太守。
现代文：当时鲜卑多次进犯边境，皇帝下诏书给三公推荐威武谋略之士，司空黄琼推荐崔萛，崔被拜为辽东太守。
English: At that time, Xianbei repeatedly invaded the border, and the emperor issued an edict to the Three Kingdoms recommending the mighty military strategist, Sikuo Huang Qiong recommended Cui Wei, and Cui was worshiped as the governor of Liaodong.

古文：行道，母刘氏病卒，上疏求归葬行丧。
现代文：走到半路上，母亲刘氏病死了，崔萛上疏请求回家料理丧事。
English: Halfway through the journey, Ms. Liu's mother died of illness, and Ms. Cui requested to go home to prepare for the funeral.

古文：母有母仪淑德，博览书传。
现代文：母亲刘氏生前品德很好，读了不少书。
English: Liu's mother had a good moral character during her lifetime and read a lot of books.

古文：初，寔在五原，常训以临民之政，寔之善绩，母有其助焉。
现代文：起初，崔萛在五原任太守，母亲经常教导如何治理政事，崔萛的好功绩，母亲很有帮助。
English: At the beginning, Cui Gan was the governor of Wuhuan. His mother often taught him how to run the government. Cui Gan did a good job, and his mother was very helpful.

古文：服竟，召拜尚书。
现代文：服丧已完，皇上又拜他为尚书。
English: After the mourning was over, the emperor again paid homage to him.

古文：寔以世方阻乱，称疾不视事，数月免归。
现代文：崔萛以时局很乱，生病不能工作为理由，几个月后免职回家。
English: A few months later, Cui Wei was relieved of his duties and returned home, citing that the current situation was very chaotic and that he was ill and unable to work.

古文：初，寔父卒，剽卖田宅，起冢茔，立碑颂。
现代文：当初，崔萛的父亲死了，崔萛卖掉田产，做了坟墓，立了墓碑。
English: At first, Cui Yao's father died. Cui Yao sold his farmland, made a grave and erected a tombstone.

古文：葬讫，资产竭尽，因穷困，以酤酿贩鬻为业。
现代文：埋葬完毕，家产卖尽，因为穷困，便以卖酒贩粥为生。
English: After the burial, the family property was sold out, and because of poverty, he made a living by selling wine and porridge.

古文：时人多以此讥之，寔终不改。
现代文：当时人多用这事讥笑他，他始终不改。
English: At the time, many people used this to ridicule him, but he never changed.

古文：亦取足而已，不致盈余。
现代文：他做生意只求够本就行，不多赚钱。
English: He only does business to make enough money, not too much.

古文：及仕官，历位边郡，而愈贫薄。
现代文：后了做了官，多是边境地区，所以更加贫薄。
English: Later, he became an official, mostly in the border areas, so he was even poorer.

古文：建宁中病卒。
现代文：建宁年间死去。
English: Jianning died in the same year.

古文：家徒四壁立，无以殡敛，光禄勋杨赐、太仆袁逢、少府段颎为备棺葬具，大鸿胪袁隗树碑颂德。
现代文：家里很穷困，没有钱装殓，光禄勋杨赐、太仆袁逢、少府段赹等替他准备棺椁葬具，大鸿胪袁隗替他树碑，称颂他的功德。
English: His family was very poor and had no money to decorate the coffin. Yang Zhi, Guanglu Xun, Yuan Feng, Shao Fu Danzhong and others prepared the coffin and funeral equipment for him. Yuan Zhi, a great man, made a monument for him and praised his merits.

古文：所著碑、论、箴、铭、答、七言、祠、文、表、记、书凡十五篇。
现代文：他所著的碑文、论文、箴、铭、答、七言、祠、文、表、记、书共十五篇。
English: There are a total of fifteen inscriptions, essays, proverbs, mottos, answers, seven sayings, shrines, texts, tables, records, and books written by him.

