古文：满宠字伯宁，山阳昌邑人也。
现代文：满宠传，满宠，字伯宁，山阳昌邑人。
English: He is a beloved legend, a beloved character, a citizen of Berning, Shanyang and Chang'e.

古文：年十八，为郡督邮。
现代文：十八岁时任郡中督邮。
English: At the age of eighteen, he became the county postmaster.

古文：时郡内李朔等各拥部曲，害于平民，太守使宠纠焉。
现代文：当时那个地方乡民李朔等人，各自拥有自己的武装，侵害百姓。太守派遣满宠明察此事。
English: At that time, Li Shuo, a local villager, and others, each with their own weapons, violated the people. The governor sent Mangdup to investigate the matter.

古文：朔等请罪，不复钞略。
现代文：李朔等人前来请罪，不再侵扰百姓。
English: Li Shuo and others came to plead guilty and no longer harassed the people.

古文：守高平令。
现代文：其后满宠任高平令。
English: After that, he was appointed to the position of Gaoping.

古文：县人张苞为郡督邮，贪秽受取，干乱吏政。
现代文：有一张苞，身为郡中督邮，贪赃枉法，行贿，扰乱政事。
English: There is a card showing that as the county's postmaster general, he was corrupt, paid bribes, and disrupted political affairs.

古文：宠因其来在传舍，率吏卒出收之，诘责所犯，即日考竟，遂弃官归。
现代文：满宠得知他在专为官吏住宿的客舍时，率部下突然将他逮捕，历数他的犯罪事实，当日便在监狱中把他打死，尔后自己也辞职回家。
English: When he learned that he was staying in a guest house exclusively for government officials, he and his subordinates suddenly arrested him, recounted his criminal facts, killed him in prison on the same day, and then resigned himself to go home.

古文：太祖临兖州，辟为从事。
现代文：魏武帝曹操在兖州，征召满宠为从事。
English: Emperor Cao Cao of the Wei and Wu Dynasties was in Zhangzhou, and he conscripted all of his favorites to serve him.

古文：及为大将军，辟署西曹属，为许令。
现代文：曹操任大将军时，又召任满宠为西曹属，任许县令。
English: When Cao Cao was appointed as the general, he also appointed Manpiao as the West Cao and appointed Xu as the county magistrate.

古文：时曹洪宗室亲贵，有宾客在界，数犯法，宠收治之。
现代文：当时曹操从弟曹洪以曹氏宗室自居，身份很高贵。他有个朋友在许县多次犯法，满宠依法惩办了此人。
English: At that time, Cao Cao considered his younger brother, Cao Hong, to be Cao's legitimate son-in-law, and his status was very high. He had a friend who repeatedly broke the law in Xu County, and he punished this person according to the law.

古文：洪书报宠，宠不听。
现代文：曹洪给满宠写信求情，满宠置之不理。
English: Cao Hong wrote to Mancheng to plead for mercy, but Mancheng ignored him.

古文：洪白太祖，太祖召许主者。
现代文：曹洪又上告到曹操，曹操将许县主事官召来。
English: Cao Hong appealed to Cao Cao again, and Cao Cao summoned the chief official of Xu County.

古文：宠知将欲原，乃速杀之。
现代文：满宠知道曹操有放掉之意，便迅速将此人处决。
English: Knowing that Cao Cao intended to let him go, he quickly executed the man.

古文：太祖喜曰： 当事不当尔邪？ 
现代文：曹操高兴地说： 身担重任负责处理公务的人，难道不应当像这样做吗？ 
English: Cao Cao said happily, "Shouldn't a person who is entrusted with a heavy responsibility and is responsible for handling public affairs do the same?"

古文：故太尉杨彪收付县狱，尚书令荀彧、少府孔融等并属宠： 但当受辞，勿加考掠。 
现代文：原太尉杨彪被关在县属监狱里，尚书令荀彧、少府融等人都曾叮嘱过满宠： 只须审问，不要拷打。 
English: Former First Lieutenant Yang Biao was locked up in a county-owned prison. Shang Shulingjun, Shofu Rong and others had all admonished him: "You only need to interrogate, don't torture."

古文：宠一无所报，考讯如法。
现代文：满宠置之不理，照旧依法严审考训。
English: If they ignore it, they will still be subject to strict examination and training in accordance with the law.

古文：数日，求见太祖，言之曰： 杨彪考讯无他辞语。
现代文：几天后，满宠请求拜见曹操，说： 考审杨彪没有发现罪证。
English: A few days later, he asked to see Cao Cao, saying: "The examination of Yang Biao did not find any evidence of guilt.

古文：当杀者宜先彰其罪；此人有名海内，若罪不明，必大失民望，窃为明公惜之。 
现代文：对该杀的人首先要公布其罪证。此人海内闻名，如果证据不足而杀了他，必失信于民，愿您三思，万勿匆忙行事。 
English: The first step is to publish the evidence against the person to be killed. This person is well-known in the country. If you kill him without sufficient evidence, you will lose the trust of the people. Please think twice and do not act in haste.

古文：太祖即日赦出彪。
现代文：曹操当即就放了杨彪。
English: Cao Cao immediately released Yang Biao.

古文：初，彧、融闻考掠彪，皆怒，及因此得了，更善宠。
现代文：起初，荀彧、孔融等听说拷打了杨彪，都大为震怒，但后得知满宠处理此事的结果，对满宠更加友善了。
English: At first, Zhai, Kong Rong and others were furious when they heard that Yang Biao had been tortured, but when they later learned the outcome of the matter, they became more friendly towards Mianzhong.

古文：时袁绍盛於河朔，而汝南绍之本郡，门生宾客布在诸县，拥兵拒守。
现代文：当时，袁绍在河北势力强大，在他的家乡汝南，很多门徒宾客都在那里各县拥兵自守。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao's influence in Hebei was strong. In his hometown of Runan, many disciples and guests were there in every county to support the soldiers and defend themselves.

古文：太祖忧之，以宠为汝南太守。
现代文：为此，曹操忧心忡忡，委派满宠为汝南太守。
English: For this reason, Cao Cao was worried and appointed Manpiao as the governor of Yunnan.

古文：宠募其服从者五百人，率攻下二十馀壁，诱其未降渠帅，於坐上杀十馀人，一时皆平。
现代文：满宠招募了五百人左右，攻下二十多个营垒。又用计引诱那些没有投降的首领，在席间杀死十余人，一时叛乱都被平定。
English: Manchong recruited about five hundred people and captured more than twenty camps. He also used tricks to lure those leaders who did not surrender, killing more than ten people at the table, and the rebellion was temporarily suppressed.

古文：得户二万，兵二千人，令就田业。
现代文：收民二万余户，获兵二千余人，命令他们归田耕作。
English: More than twenty thousand households were resettled, and more than two thousand soldiers were recruited, and they were ordered to return to farming.

古文：建安十三年，从太祖征荆州。
现代文：建安十三年，满宠随曹操征讨荆州。
English: In the 13th year of Jian'an, he followed Cao Cao in conquering Jingzhou.

古文：大军还，留宠行奋威将军，屯当阳。
现代文：大军回师后，曹操命令满宠代理奋威将军，屯兵当阳。
English: After the great army returned to the division, Cao Cao ordered the deputy general Fenwei to be favored, and the garrison to be the sun.

古文：孙权数扰东陲，复召宠还为汝南太守，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：孙权不断侵扰东部边境，曹操又召满宠为汝南太守，并赐给他关内侯的爵位。
English: Sun Quan constantly encroached on the eastern border, Cao Cao also summoned Man Pi as the governor of the south of the country, and gave him the title of the Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：关羽围襄阳，宠助征南将军曹仁屯樊城拒之，而左将军于禁等军以霖雨水长为羽所没。
现代文：关羽包围襄阳，满宠协助征南将军曹仁屯兵樊城，迎击关羽。左将军于禁等因为大雨连绵，汉水上涨而被关羽消灭。
English: Guan Yu encircled Xiangyang, and was greatly assisted by Cao Ren, a general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, who encamped in the city to meet Guan Yu. General Zuo Yuxin and others were wiped out by Guan Yu because of the continuous heavy rain and the rising Han River.

古文：羽急攻樊城，樊城得水，往往崩坏，众皆失色。
现代文：关羽猛攻樊城，樊城城墙常常被大水冲毁，众人都大惊失色。
English: Guan Yu stormed the city of Handan, and the city wall of Handan was often destroyed by water. Everyone was shocked.

古文：或谓仁曰： 今日之危，非力所支。
现代文：有人对曹仁说： 今日所面临的危机，我们是力所不能及的。
English: Someone said to Cao Ren: The crisis we are facing today is beyond our control.

古文：可及羽围未合，乘轻船夜走，虽失城，尚可全身。 
现代文：现趁关羽尚未大举包围，赶紧在夜里乘小船弃城而逃，虽失掉樊城，却可保全性命。 
English: Now, taking advantage of the fact that Guan Yu had not yet been extensively besieged, he hurriedly abandoned the city in a small boat at night and fled. Although he lost Shicheng, he was able to save his life.

古文：宠曰： 山水速疾，冀其不久。
现代文：满宠说： 山水来去迅急，希望它不会持续很久。
English: Manchia said: "The landscape comes and goes quickly. I hope it won't last long.

古文：闻羽遣别将已在郏下，自许以南，百姓扰扰，羽所以不敢遂进者，恐吾军掎其后耳。
现代文：听说关羽已派遣部下集结于郏县。自许县以南，老百姓人心惶惶。关羽所以不敢再推进一步，是怕背部受敌。
English: It was heard that Guan Yu had sent his subordinates to gather in Min County. To the south of Zixu County, the people were in a panic. Therefore, Guan Yu did not dare to push any further, for fear of being attacked from behind.

古文：今若遁去，洪河以南，非复国家有也；君宜待之。 
现代文：如果现在弃城而逃，洪河以南的领土，便拱手让给关羽了，不再属于我们。
English: If we abandon the city and flee now, the territory south of the Honghe River will be handed over to Guan Yu and will no longer belong to us.

古文：仁曰： 善。 
现代文：愿阁下再坚持一下。 曹仁说： 对！ 
English: May Your Excellency insist one more time. Cao Ren said, "Yes!

古文：宠乃沈白马，与军人盟誓。
现代文：满宠淹死自己的白马，与军士一起盟誓。
English: Drowning his white horse, he swore together with the sergeant.

古文：会徐晃等救至，宠力战有功，羽遂退。
现代文：正好这时徐晃率援兵赶来，满宠奋力冲杀，立下战功，关羽只得退却。
English: Just at this time, Xu Qiao led the reinforcements to arrive, and made great efforts to fight and win the battle. Guan Yu had to retreat.

古文：进封安昌亭侯。
现代文：满宠因功被封为安昌亭侯。
English: Manchong was awarded the title of Anchang Prince for his achievements.

古文：文帝即王位，迁扬武将军。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕即位，任满宠为扬武将军。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi ascended to the throne and was appointed as Yangwu general.

古文：破吴於江陵有功，更拜伏波将军，屯新野。
现代文：在江陵打败东吴军队，他因功又被封伏波将军，屯兵新野。
English: After defeating the Eastern Wu army in Jiangling, he was awarded the title of General Fubo and sent to Xinye.

古文：大军南征，到精湖，宠帅诸军在前，与贼隔水相对。
现代文：大军讨伐东吴，至精湖，满宠率诸军在前，与敌兵一水之隔。
English: The great army fought against Dongwu until it reached Jinghu Lake, and the army led by Manpai was in front, separated from the enemy soldiers by a body of water.

古文：宠敕诸将曰： 今夕风甚猛，贼必来烧军，宜为其备。 
现代文：满宠命令手下将领： 今夜风很急，敌人定会来烧军营，应做好准备。 
English: He ordered his generals: The wind is very strong tonight, the enemy will surely come to burn the military camp, you should be prepared.

古文：诸军皆警。
现代文：各路军队都提高了警惕。
English: All armies have raised their guard.

古文：夜半，贼果遣十部伏夜来烧，宠掩击破之，进封南乡侯。
现代文：到半夜，果然有十来股军队来烧军营。满宠率兵乘其不备击溃敌兵，因此晋封南乡侯。
English: By the middle of the night, there were indeed more than ten groups of troops coming to burn down the military camp. Manpai led the soldiers to take advantage of their unpreparedness to defeat the enemy soldiers, so he was promoted to the position of Nanxianghou.

古文：黄初三年，假宠节钺。
现代文：黄初三年，满宠被授予符节和斧钺。
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he was fully favored to be awarded the Rune Festival and the Axe.

古文：五年，拜前将军。
现代文：黄初五年，被任命为前将军。
English: In the fifth year of the Yellow Emperor, he was appointed as a former general.

古文：明帝即位，进封昌邑侯。
现代文：魏明帝曹睿即位，又晋封满宠为昌邑侯。
English: Emperor Cao Rui of the Wei and Ming Dynasties ascended to the throne, and he was also promoted to the position of Changyi marquis.

古文：太和二年，领豫州刺史。
现代文：太和二年，满宠任豫州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Taihe era, he was appointed to the post of Henan Provincial Governor.

古文：三年春，降人称吴大严，扬声欲诣江北猎，孙权欲自出。
现代文：太和三年春天，投降的人说，东吴进入战备状态，扬言要到江北来狩猎，孙权要亲自出马。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Heian period, those who surrendered said that Dongwu entered a state of combat readiness, threatening to come to the north of the river to hunt, and that Sun Quan would personally ride out.

古文：宠度其必袭西阳而为之备，权闻之，退还。
现代文：满宠估计敌人一定会袭击酉阳，于是也加紧战备。孙权闻讯，只得退还。
English: Manchong estimated that the enemy would certainly attack Shenyang, so he also stepped up his combat readiness. Sun Quan heard the news and had to return the crane.

古文：秋，使曹休从庐江南入合肥，令宠向夏口。
现代文：那年秋，派曹休从庐江南到合肥，派满宠向夏口。
English: In the autumn of that year, Cao Xiu was sent from the south of the Minjiang River to Hefei, and Manpiao was sent to Xiakou.

古文：宠上疏曰： 曹休虽明果而希用兵，今所从道，背湖旁江，易进难退，此兵之洼地也。
现代文：满宠上疏言道： 曹休虽聪明果敢，但很少用兵，实践经验不足。今所行线路，背后是湖，旁边是长江，前进容易，退却却难。
English: "Although Cao Xiu is smart and courageous, he rarely uses soldiers and lacks practical experience. The route we are taking now, with the lake behind us and the Yangtze River next to us, is easy to advance, but difficult to retreat.

古文：若入无强口，宜深为之备。 宠表未报，休遂深入。
现代文：这样的路是兵家所最忌讳的呀！如果进入无强口，应该做好充分准备。 满宠的上疏没有送到，曹休就深入到无强口。
English: Such a path is the most taboo for soldiers! If you enter the no-strong entrance, you should be fully prepared. If you don't get to the favored upper gate, Cao Xiu will go deep into the no-strong entrance.

古文：贼果从无强口断夹石，要休还路。
现代文：敌兵果真在无强口断了去夹石的路，阻截了曹休的退路。
English: The enemy soldiers really cut off the road to the rock-climbing site at Wuqiangkou and blocked Cao Xiu's escape route.

古文：休战不利，退走。会朱灵等从后来断道，与贼相遇。贼惊走，休军乃得还。
现代文：曹休边战边退，正好朱灵等从后面拦截敌兵，与敌人相遇，敌人惊恐而逃，曹休得以生还。
English: Cao Xiu retreated from the battlefield, just as Zhu Ling and others intercepted the enemy soldiers from behind, met with the enemy, the enemy fled in fright, and Cao Xiu survived.

古文：是岁休薨，宠以前将军代都督扬州诸军事。
现代文：这一年曹休死去。满宠以前将军职代理都督扬州诸军事。
English: This year, Cao Xiu died. He was favored by the military as the acting military governor of Yangzhou.

古文：汝南兵民恋慕，大小相率，奔随道路，不可禁止。
现代文：汝南士兵和民众慕恋满宠，扶老携幼，要随满宠一起走，无法阻止。
English: The soldiers and people of the south of the Ryukyus yearn for the full pet, support the old and carry the young, and must go along with the full pet, and cannot be stopped.

古文：护军表上，欲杀其为首者。诏使宠将亲兵千人自随，其馀一无所问。
现代文：护军上表要求剿杀首领。魏明帝让满宠带走亲信部下的一千人，其余的不再管了。
English: The escort demanded the execution of the leader. Emperor Ming of Wei allowed Mancheng to take away a thousand of his trusted subordinates, and the rest were no longer under his control.

古文：四年，拜宠征东将军。
现代文：太和四年，满宠为征东将军。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, he was favored to become a general to conquer the East.

古文：其冬，孙权扬声欲至合肥，宠表召兖、豫诸军，皆集。
现代文：这年冬，孙权声称要取合肥。满宠上表要求召集兖州、豫州兵力。
English: In the winter of that year, Sun Quan claimed that he wanted to take Hefei. He demanded that the troops from Bozhou and Yuzhou be called up.

古文：贼寻退还，被诏罢兵。
现代文：后来两州兵力云集，敌兵只好退还了。朝廷命满宠就此撤兵。
English: Later, troops from the two states gathered, and the enemy soldiers had no choice but to retreat. The imperial court ordered the troops to withdraw.

古文：宠以为今贼大举而还，非本意也，此必欲伪退以罢吾兵，而倒还乘虚，掩不备也，表不罢兵。
现代文：满宠认为敌兵大举退还，恐怕不是本意。他们一定是佯装退却以麻痹我们，等我们撤军后，好趁虚而入。于是上表要求不要撤军。
English: I am afraid that it was not the intention of the enemy soldiers to retreat en masse. They must have pretended to retreat to paralyze us, so that after we withdrew, they could take advantage of the situation. Therefore, the above table requested not to withdraw.

古文：后十馀日，权果更来，到合肥城，不克而还。
现代文：太和五年，东吴将领孙布派人到扬州求降，说： 因为路途遥远不能前来致意，特请派兵前来迎接。 
English: In the fifth year of Tahe, Sun Bu, the general of the Eastern Wu Dynasty, sent a man to Yangzhou to ask for surrender, saying: Because the road is far away, I can't come to pay my respects, so please send soldiers to meet me.

古文：其明年，吴将孙布遣人诣扬州求降，辞云： 道远不能自致，乞兵见迎。 刺史王凌腾布书，请兵马迎之。宠以为必诈，不与兵，而为凌作报书曰： 知识邪正，欲避祸就顺，去暴归道，甚相嘉尚。
现代文：扬州刺史王腸将孙布信传到满宠手里，请求派兵马前去迎接。满宠认为此必有诈，不派兵马，替王腸写信给孙布说： 你认识错误，迷途知返，想脱离灾祸归顺我们，离开暴政，改走正道，值得赞扬。
English: Wang Qi, Yangzhou's magistrate, passed Sun Bu's letter to Mancheng and asked him to send soldiers and horses to meet him. Mancheng thought that this must be a trick and did not send soldiers and horses. He wrote a letter to Sun Bu on behalf of Wang Qi, saying: You know the error, know the way back, want to get rid of the disaster and submit to us, leave the tyranny, and take the right path. You are worthy of praise.

古文：今欲遣兵相迎，然计兵少则不足相卫，多则事必远闻。
现代文：今希望我们派兵迎接你们，但思来想去，兵少则不能保卫你们，兵多则又易泄露机密。
English: Now you want us to send troops to meet you, but if you think about it, fewer troops can't protect you, and more troops are more likely to leak secrets.

古文：且先密计以成本志，临时节度其宜。 宠会被书当入朝，敕留府长史： 若凌欲往迎，勿与兵也。 
现代文：暂且设密计以成全你的志向，临时再商讨办法。 正好这时满宠被召入朝，临行前他命令留府长史： 若王腸想要前往迎接，不要给他派兵。 
English: For the time being, set up a secret plan to fulfill your ambition, and temporarily renegotiate the method. It was just at this time that he was summoned to the imperial court. Before leaving, he ordered the governor to stay: If Wang Ji wants to go to meet, do not send him soldiers.

古文：凌於后索兵不得，乃单遣一督将步骑七百人往迎之。
现代文：王腸因为不能从满宠处索得兵马，于是就派遣督将，率步兵骑兵七百人前往迎接孙布。
English: Because Wang Ci could not get the soldiers and horses from the favored place, he sent the commander-in-chief and led seven hundred infantry and cavalry to meet Sun Bu.

古文：布夜掩击，督将迸走，死伤过半。
现代文：孙布在夜里突然袭击，督将逃走，七百人死伤大半。
English: Sun Bu suddenly attacked in the night, the governor fled, and most of the seven hundred people were killed and injured.

古文：初，宠与凌共事不平，凌支党毁宠疲老悖谬，故明帝召之。
现代文：当初，满宠与王腸不和，王腸的同党诋毁满宠年老力衰，言行荒谬，不合事理。因此魏明帝才召满宠入朝。
English: At first, Manchong was at odds with Wangchong, and Wangchong's fellow party members slandered Manchong as old and feeble, and his words and deeds were absurd and unreasonable. Therefore, Emperor Wei Ming only invited Manchong to join the imperial court.

古文：既至，体气康强，见而遣还。
现代文：魏明帝下诏说： 从前廉颇为向使者表示自己身体健康，仍可带兵打仗，一顿吃掉斗米、十斤肉。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei issued the following edict: "In the past, it was a good deed for an emperor to show his emissary that he was in good health and could still lead soldiers into battle, eating a bowl of rice and ten catties of meat in one meal.

古文：宠屡表求留，诏报曰： 昔廉颇强食，马援据鞍，今君未老而自谓已老，何与廉、马之相背邪？
现代文：马援六十二岁时仍请兵战斗，据马鞍顾视，以示可用。今你未老而自谓已老，怎不以廉颇、马援自比呢？
English: When Ma Yuan was sixty-two years old, he still invited soldiers to fight. According to his saddle, he rode as far as he could to show that he was available. Now that you are not old and you say that you are old, why not compare yourself with Ma Yuan, a man of integrity?

古文：其思安边境，惠此中国。 
现代文：要想法保卫边境，为国效力呵。 
English: We need to think about defending our borders and serving our country.

古文：明年，吴将陆逊向庐江，论者以为宜速赴之。宠曰： 庐江虽小，将劲兵精，守则经时。
现代文：太和六年，东吴大将陆逊移兵庐江，不少人认为应赶快救援，满宠说： 庐江虽小，但是兵精将猛，定能坚守一段时日。
English: In the sixth year of Tahe, the general of the Eastern Wu Dynasty, Lu Xun, moved his troops to the Li River. Many people thought that it should be rescued as soon as possible. Manpiao said: Although the Li River is small, but the soldiers are fierce, they will be able to hold on for a while.

古文：又贼舍船二百里来，后尾空县，尚欲诱致，今宜听其遂进，但恐走不可及耳。 
现代文：再说，敌军弃船深入二百里，后方空虚，正宜诱其深入，乘机击败他们。应当听之任之，让其推进，让他们连逃跑都来不及。 
English: Moreover, since the enemy abandoned ship two hundred miles away and the rear is empty, it is proper to entice them to go deeper and take advantage of the opportunity to defeat them. They should be left alone, let them advance, and let them not even have time to escape.

古文：整军趋杨宜口。
现代文：整肃军队开往杨宜口。
English: The clean-up troops drove to Yangyikou.

古文：贼闻大兵东下，即夜遁。
现代文：敌兵听说大兵东下，当夜逃走了。
English: Hearing that the soldiers were heading east, the enemy soldiers fled that night.

古文：时权岁有来计。
现代文：当时，孙权每年都有进攻之计。
English: At that time, Sun Quan had a plan of attack every year.

古文：贼往甚易，而兵往救之甚难，宜移城内之兵，其西三十里，有奇险可依，更立城以固守，此为引贼平地而掎其归路，於计为便。 护军将军蒋济议，以为： 既示天下以弱，且望贼烟火而坏城，此为未攻而自拔。
现代文：青龙元年，满宠上疏说： 合肥城南面江靠湖，北面远接寿春，敌兵围攻合肥，得以依恃水势。官兵救援，应当先攻破其主力军，然后才能解围。应当转移城内的兵力向西三十里，那里可以依据地势奇险，再加上城兵固守。这是引敌出洞而断其退路的上计。 护军将军蒋济则以为： 如此做是向敌人示弱，而且看见敌人的烟火就毁坏自己的城池，这可是不攻自破呀！
English: In the first year of the Qinglong Dynasty, Mianzhong Shangzhu said: In the south of Hefei City, the river is close to the lake, and in the north, it is far from Shuchun. Enemy soldiers besieged Hefei and were able to cling to the water potential. Officers and soldiers should first break through their main force before they could relieve the siege. The troops in the city should be transferred to thirty miles to the west, where they can be based on the geographical situation and the danger, and the city soldiers should hold fast. This is the plan to lead the enemy out of the hole and cut off their escape route. The escort general Jiang Jie thought:

古文：一至於此，劫略无限，必以淮北为守。 
现代文：如果情形真是到了这地步，则敌兵必肆无忌惮地掠夺，我兵则必然以淮北为守了。 
English: If the situation really reaches this stage, then the enemy soldiers will plunder recklessly, and our soldiers will inevitably defend Huaibei.

古文：帝未许。
现代文：因此明帝没有同意满宠的意见。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming did not agree with Manpiao's opinion.

古文：宠重表曰： 孙子言，兵者，诡道也。
现代文：满宠又上表： 孙子说：兵者，实为诡变之道。
English: Full of favor and on the table: Grandson said: Soldier, it is indeed a way of treachery.

古文：故能而示之以弱不能，骄之以利，示之以慑。
现代文：本来有能力，但却让敌兵认为贫弱而不能，予以小利麻痹敌人使其骄傲，而以为我们害怕了。
English: Originally capable, but let the enemy soldiers think that we are weak and unable, give them a small profit, paralyze the enemy, make them proud, and think that we are afraid.

古文：此为形实不必相应也。
现代文：这就是所谓形与实不必相符的道理。
English: This is the so-called reason why form and reality do not have to match.

古文：又曰 善动敌者形之 。
现代文：孙子又说： 善于诱引敌人示以假象。 
English: Sun Tzu also said, "He is good at luring the enemy into a false impression."

古文：今贼未至而移城卻内，此所谓形而诱之也。
现代文：今趁敌兵未到之前，移兵城外，内布精兵，这是设假象而诱敌深入之道。
English: Now, take advantage of the enemy soldiers before they arrive, move troops outside the city, Nebu elite soldiers, this is a way to set up a false impression and lure the enemy in.

古文：引贼远水，择利而动，举得於外，则福生於内矣。 
现代文：诱敌远离水路，相机而动，则外能御敌，内能生福。 
English: Lure the enemy away from the waterway, the camera moves, then the outside can resist the enemy, and the inside can create happiness.

古文：尚书赵咨以宠策为长，诏遂报听。
现代文：尚书赵咨认为满宠的计谋更符合实际，于是皇帝下诏照此办理。
English: Shangshu Zhao Zi thought that the favored strategy was more in line with reality, so the emperor issued an edict to do so.

古文：其年，权自出，欲围新城，以其远水，积二十日不敢下船。
现代文：这一年，孙权亲自率兵，欲包围新城，但因为此城离水路太远，在水上停留二十天不敢下船。
English: That year, Sun Quan personally led an army to encircle the new city, but because the city was too far from the waterway, he did not dare to get off the boat after staying on the water for twenty days.

古文：宠谓诸将曰： 权得吾移城，必於其众中有自大之言，今大举来欲要一切之功，虽不敢至，必当上岸耀兵以示有馀。 
现代文：满宠对各位将领说： 孙权得知我移兵城外，一定会夸下海口。
English: Manchong said to the generals, "When Sun Quan learns that I am moving my troops outside the city, he will surely boast about Haikou.

古文：乃潜遣步骑六千，伏肥城隐处以待之。
现代文：现在前来展示其实力，邀取功名。虽然他不敢再推进，但一定会上岸来炫耀一下兵力，以示其兵多将广。 
English: Now he came to demonstrate his strength and claim the glory. Although he did not dare to advance any further, he would certainly go ashore to show off his strength and show that he had a large number of soldiers.

古文：权果上岸耀兵，宠伏军卒起击之，斩首数百，或有赴水死者。
现代文：于是在合肥城的隐蔽处埋伏步兵骑兵六千人，等待敌兵自投罗网。孙权果然上岸耀武扬威，满宠布署的伏兵突然冲过来猛袭敌兵，杀死了敌人几百人，还有一些落水而死。
English: So he ambushed six thousand infantry and cavalry at a hiding place in Hefei City, waiting for the enemy soldiers to throw themselves into the net. Sun Quan did indeed go ashore to show off his military prowess, and the ambushers full of pets suddenly rushed over and attacked the enemy soldiers, killing several hundred of the enemy, and some died from falling into the water.

古文：明年，权自将号十万，至合肥新城。
现代文：青龙二年，孙权亲自统率十万大军来到合肥新城。
English: In the second year of the Qinglong, Sun Quan personally led 100,000 troops to Hefei New City.

古文：宠驰往赴，募壮士数十人，折松为炬，灌以麻油，从上风放火，烧贼攻具，射杀权弟子孙泰。
现代文：满宠招募勇猛之士数十人，折松枝作成火炬，又灌上麻油，顺风放火，烧掉敌兵的作战器械，又射死孙权的侄子孙泰。
English: Manpo recruited dozens of brave men, broke pine branches to make torches, poured hemp oil, set fire to the wind, burned the enemy's combat equipment, and shot Sun Quan's nephew Sun Tai.

古文：贼於是引退。
现代文：敌兵只好撤退。
English: The enemy soldiers had to retreat.

古文：三年春，权遣兵数千家佃於江北。
现代文：青龙三年春天，孙权派兵数千家到江北屯田。
English: In the spring of the third year of Qinglong, Sun Quan sent thousands of soldiers to Tongtian, Jiangbei Province.

古文：至八月，宠以为田向收熟，男女布野，其屯卫兵去城远者数百里，可掩击也。
现代文：这年八月，满宠认为，正值庄稼收割季节，男女老少，布满田野。而屯兵的士兵离城有数百里远，可乘其不备，突然袭击。
English: In August of that year, Manchou thought that it was the harvest season, and the fields were full of men, women and children, and the soldiers of the garrison were hundreds of miles away from the city, and they could take advantage of their unpreparedness and make a surprise attack.

古文：遣长吏督三军循江东下，摧破诸屯，焚烧谷物而还。
现代文：于是派遣长吏率兵沿江东下，摧毁各个屯兵营，焚烧许多谷物后撤回。
English: So he sent his officers and soldiers down the east side of the river, destroyed all the garrisons, burned a lot of grain, and then withdrew.

古文：诏美之，因以所获尽为将士赏。
现代文：皇帝下诏嘉奖满宠，同时将所获的东西全部赏赐给将士。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict awarding full favors, and at the same time rewarded all the things won to the soldiers.

古文：景初二年，以宠年老徵还，迁为太尉。
现代文：景初二年，朝廷因为满宠年老而召回京城，授以太尉官职。
English: In the second year of the Jingchu era, the imperial court recalled him to the capital due to his advanced age and gave him the official post of lieutenant.

古文：宠不治产业，家无馀财。
现代文：满宠不好积蓄，所以家无余财。
English: Full of money is not good for savings, so the family has no extra money.

古文：诏曰： 君典兵在外，专心忧公，有行父、祭遵之风。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 阁下领兵在外，一心向公，有季孙行父和祭遵的风范。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Your excellency leads the troops outside, is devoted to the public, and has the demeanor of a great-grandson and a great-grandfather.

古文：赐田十顷，谷五百斛，钱二十万，以明清忠俭约之节焉。 
现代文：赐田十顷，谷五百斛，钱二十万，以表彰你清忠俭约的高风亮节。 
English: In recognition of your loyalty and frugality, I will give you ten hectares of land, five hundred mu of grain, and two hundred thousand in money.

古文：宠前后增邑，凡九千六百户，封子孙二人亭侯。
现代文：满宠前后增加的封邑共有九千六百户，子孙二人封为亭侯。
English: There were a total of 9,600 households in the fiefdoms that were added around the time of Mianzhao, and two of his descendants were appointed as princes.

古文：正始三年薨，谥曰景侯。
现代文：正始三年卒，谥号景侯。
English: He was three years old at the beginning of the year, and his nickname was Jinghou.

古文：子伟嗣。
现代文：儿子满伟继承爵位。
English: His son, Man Wei, succeeded to the title.

古文：伟以格度知名，官至卫尉。
现代文：满伟以风格度量知名于世，官至卫尉。
English: Man Wei is known worldwide for his style and stature. He rose to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：田豫字国让，渔阳雍奴人也。
现代文：田豫传，田豫，字国让，渔阳雍奴人。
English: Tian Yu Chuan, Tian Yu, Zi Guo Zhan, Yu Yang Yong Niu Ren.

古文：刘备之奔公孙瓒也，豫时年少，自讬於备，备甚奇之。
现代文：刘备投奔公孙瓒时，田豫还年幼，自己投奔刘备，勇气十足，因得刘备器重。
English: When Liu Bei defected to Gongsun Yao, Tian Yu was still young. When he defected to Liu Bei, he was full of courage, which made Liu Bei more powerful.

古文：备为豫州刺史，豫以母老求归，备涕泣与别，曰： 恨不与君共成大事也。 
现代文：刘备为豫州刺史时，田豫因为母亲年老，请求回家。刘备挥泪与他告别，说： 很遗憾不能和你共创大业了。 
English: When Liu Bei was making history in Yuzhou, Tian Yu asked him to go home because his mother was old. Liu Bei said goodbye to him with tears, saying: I'm sorry I can't work with you to create a great career.

古文：公孙瓒使豫守东州令，瓒将王门叛瓒，为袁绍将万馀人来攻。
现代文：公孙瓒让田豫任东州县令。公孙瓒的将领王门背叛了他，并替袁绍率兵万余人前来进攻。
English: Gongsun Zang appointed Tian Yu as the governor of Dongzhou County. Gongsun Zang's general Wang Men betrayed him and led more than 10,000 soldiers to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：众惧欲降。
现代文：当时人心惶惶，很多人主张投降。
English: There was a lot of panic, a lot of people calling for surrender.

古文：豫登城谓门曰： 卿为公孙所厚而去，意有所不得已也；今还作贼，乃知卿乱人耳。
现代文：田豫登上城门对王门说： 公孙瓒对你不薄，可你还是弃他而去。也许你是迫不得已，但现在你却为虎作伥，才知你是一个乱臣贼子。
English: Tian Yu went up to the gate of the city and said to the king's gate: Gongsun Yao did not treat you well, but you still abandoned him. Perhaps you were forced to do so, but now you are working for the tiger, only to find out that you are a ruffian thief.

古文：夫挈瓶之智，守不假器，吾既受之矣，何不急攻乎？ 门惭而退。
现代文：我尽管智识浅薄，但也知道如何谨守城池。我既已接受守城的任务，你为何还不猛攻？ 王门很惭愧，只好撤退。
English: I know how to guard a castle, even though I am not very intelligent. Since I have accepted the task of guarding the city, why don't you storm it? Wangmen was ashamed and had to retreat.

古文：瓒虽知豫有权谋而不能任也。
现代文：公孙瓒知道田豫有权谋，但并没有重用他。
English: Gongsun Yao knew that Tian Yu had the power to do something, but he did not make much use of him.

古文：瓒败而鲜于辅为国人所推，行太守事，素善豫，以为长史。
现代文：公孙瓒失败后，鲜于辅为众人推举，代理太守的职权。鲜于辅很欣赏田豫，任命他为长史。
English: After the defeat of Gongsun Rong, Shian Yu Fu was elected by the people to act as acting governor. Shian Yu Fu admired Tian Yu Rong very much and appointed him to serve for a long time.

古文：时雄杰并起，辅莫知所从。
现代文：当时群雄并起，鲜于辅不知所从。
English: At that time, the heroes rose up together, and few knew what to do.

古文：豫谓辅曰： 终能定天下者，必曹氏也。
现代文：田豫劝他说： 最终能平定天下的人只有曹操。
English: Tian Yu advised him, "Only Cao Cao can ultimately pacify the world.

古文：宜速归命，无后祸期。 
现代文：应赶快归附他，这样才免除后祸。 
English: They should quickly return to him, so as to avoid the subsequent disaster.

古文：辅从其计，用受封宠。
现代文：鲜于辅听从了他的计策，得到曹操的任用。
English: Xian Yu Fu followed his advice and was appointed by Cao Cao.

古文：太祖召豫为丞相军谋掾，除颍阴、朗陵令，迁弋阳太守，所在有治。
现代文：曹操又任命田豫为丞相军谋掾，担任颍阳、朗陵县令，又转升为弋阳太守。所到之处，政绩颇佳。
English: Cao Cao also appointed Tian Yu to be the military adviser to the prime minister, he served as the governor of Shenyang and Langling counties, and was promoted to the governor of Shenyang. Everywhere he went, his political performance was quite good.

古文：鄢陵侯彰征代郡，以豫为相。
现代文：鄢陵侯曹彰征伐代郡，任命田豫为相。
English: Cao Zhang, the lord of Fuling, conquered Lada County and appointed Tian Yu as his minister.

古文：军次易北，虏伏骑击之，军人扰乱，莫知所为。
现代文：驻军在易县以北，敌骑兵埋伏在那里，向部队发起进攻。军内顿时一片骚乱，不知如何是好。
English: The garrison was north of Yixian, and the enemy cavalry was lying in ambush there, attacking the troops. Suddenly, there was a riot in the army, and I didn't know what to do.

古文：豫因地形，回车结圜陈，弓弩持满於内，疑兵塞其隙。
现代文：田豫根据地形，把战车排成圜阵，弓箭手在阵内拉弓以待，又设精兵守卫在车间的空隙处以防不测。
English: According to the topography, Tian Yu arranged the chariots into a phalanx, the archers drew their bows to wait within the phalanx, and also set up elite soldiers to guard the gaps in the workshop to prevent accidents.

古文：胡不能进，散去。
现代文：敌兵攻不进来，只好撤退。
English: The enemy soldiers couldn't get in, so they had to retreat.

古文：追击，大破之，遂前平代，皆豫策也。迁南阳太守。
现代文：田豫追击，打败敌兵，又乘胜追杀，平定代郡。田豫迁任南阳太守。
English: Tian Yu chased and defeated the enemy soldiers, and took advantage of the victory to chase and kill, and pacified the county. Tian Yu was transferred to the position of Nanyang governor.

古文：先时，郡人侯音反，众数千人在山中为群盗，大为郡患。
现代文：此前，郡内有个叫侯音的人反叛，聚合几千人在山中为盗，是郡中的一大祸患。
English: Previously, there was a man named Hou Yin who rebelled in the county, gathering several thousand people to steal in the mountains, which was a major disaster in the county.

古文：前太守收其党与五百馀人，表奏皆当死。
现代文：前任太守抓住了其中的五百多人，上书朝廷要求处死他们。
English: The previous governor-general caught more than five hundred of them and sent a letter to the imperial court demanding that they be executed.

古文：豫悉见诸系囚，慰谕，开其自新之路，一时破械遣之。
现代文：田豫逐一查检了这些人，给予安慰，让他们改过自新，打开枷锁，放了他们。
English: Tian Yu inspected these people one by one, gave comfort, let them reform, opened the shackles, and released them.

古文：诸囚皆叩头，愿自效，即相告语，群贼一朝解散，郡内清静。
现代文：这些囚犯十分感动，叩头表示愿意效力，并互相转告。一时间，聚集的强盗都散了伙，郡内平静下来。
English: The prisoners were so moved that they bowed their heads to show their willingness to serve and told each other. For a while, the gathered robbers dispersed and the county calmed down.

古文：具以状上，太祖善之。
现代文：田豫把这些情况上报朝廷，曹操十分欣赏。
English: Tian Yu reported these circumstances to the imperial court, which Cao Cao greatly appreciated.

古文：文帝初，北狄强盛，侵扰边塞，乃使豫持节护乌丸校尉，牵招、解俊并护鲜卑。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕初继位，北边少数民族日益强盛，经常进犯边境。于是任命田豫持节护乌丸校尉，与牵招、解鯭并护鲜卑。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi was the first to succeed to the throne, and the ethnic minorities in the north were becoming more and more powerful, often attacking the border. Therefore, he appointed Tian Yujing as the commander of Wumaru, who was responsible for recruiting, dismissing, and protecting the inferior classes.

古文：自高柳以东，濊貊以西，鲜卑数十部，比能、弥加、素利割地统御，各有分界；乃共要誓，皆不得以马与中国市。
现代文：从高柳以东、氵岁貊以西，鲜卑有几十个部落，比能、弥加、素利各霸一方。他们又互相盟誓，不允许用马和中国进行贸易。
English: There are dozens of tribes in Xianbei, from east of Gaoliu and west of Lianyungang, with Bineng, Yiga and Suri dominating each side. They also swore to each other that they would not allow horses to be used for trade with China.

古文：豫以戎狄为一，非中国之利，乃先构离之，使自为雠敌，互相攻伐。
现代文：田豫认为各少数民族团结一心对中国不利，于是设计离间，让他们彼此猜忌，互相进攻。
English: Tian Yu believed that the unity of all ethnic minorities was unfavorable to China, so he designed a rift, making them suspicious of each other and attacking each other.

古文：素利违盟，出马千匹与官，为比能所攻，求救於豫。
现代文：素利首先违背誓约，出售一千匹马给官府。比能为此而进攻素利。
English: Suri was the first to break his oath and sell a thousand horses to the government. Binao attacked Suri for this.

古文：豫恐遂相兼并，为害滋深，宜救善讨恶，示信众狄。
现代文：素利向田豫求救。田豫又怕他们相互兼并，为害更甚，应当讨伐首恶，鼓励行善之人，以便向少数民族昭示中国讲求信义。
English: Suri asked Tian Yu for help. Tian Yu was afraid that they would merge with each other, which would be even more harmful. He should fight the first evil and encourage those who do good, in order to show ethnic minorities that they should seek the truth in China.

古文：单将锐卒，深入虏庭，胡人众多，钞军前后，断截归路。
现代文：于是率领精锐部队，深入敌后，前后包围，断绝了退路。
English: As a result, he led the elite troops, went deep behind the enemy, surrounded them, and cut off the escape route.

古文：豫乃进军，去虏十馀里结屯营，多聚牛马粪然之，从他道引去。
现代文：田豫继续进军，大约在离敌营十里开外的路程安营扎寨，收聚了好多牛马粪，把它们点燃，自己率兵从旁路撤走。
English: Tian Yu continued to advance, and set up camp about ten miles away from the enemy camp. He collected a lot of cow and horse manure, lit them on fire, and led his soldiers away from the bypass.

古文：胡见烟火不绝，以为尚在，去，行数十里乃知之。
现代文：敌人见烟火不熄，以为田豫还在，等田豫他们走了十几里，敌人才发现，于是又派兵追赶，直至马城，把马城围个水泄不通。
English: When the enemy saw that the fireworks did not go out, they thought that Tian Yu was still there. After waiting for Tian Yu, they walked more than ten miles before the enemy found them, so they sent soldiers to chase them until they reached Macheng. They surrounded Macheng with a wall of water.

古文：追豫到马城，围之十重，豫密严，使司马建旌旗，鸣鼓吹，将步骑从南门出，胡人皆属目往赴之。
现代文：田豫秘密布置，让司马高举战旗，击鼓，率步兵从南门出击。
English: Tian Yu secretly arranged for Sima to hold high the battle flag, beat the drums, and lead the infantry to attack from the south gate.

古文：豫将精锐自北门出，鼓噪而起，两头俱发，出虏不意，虏众散乱，皆弃弓马步走，追讨二十馀里，僵尸蔽地。
现代文：敌人都被吸引过去。田豫率领精兵强将从北门冲出，鼓声四起，两头夹击，出其不意，将敌人的包围冲散，他们丢下武器马匹，撒腿而逃。田豫率兵追杀了二十多里，尸横遍野。
English: The enemy were all drawn in. Tian Yu, leading the elite soldiers, would rush out of the north gate. Drums were beating on all sides, and the two sides clashed. They took the enemy by surprise and broke the enemy's encirclement. They dropped their weapons and horses and ran away. Tian Yu and his soldiers chased the enemy for more than twenty miles, and the corpses were strewn all over the countryside.

古文：又乌丸王骨进桀黠不恭，豫因出塞案行，单将麾下百馀骑入进部。
现代文：又有乌丸王骨进狂傲不恭。田豫出塞巡视，只带了百余名骑手进入骨进营地。
English: There was also the Ukimaru king, Bone Jin, who was arrogant and disrespectful. Tian Yu went out to inspect the camp, and only took more than a hundred riders into the Bone Jin camp.

古文：进逆拜，遂使左右斩进，显其罪恶以令众。
现代文：骨进拜迎时，田豫命令手下人斩杀骨进，当众公布他的罪状。
English: When Bone Jin paid homage, Tian Yu ordered his subordinates to kill Bone Jin and publicly announce his crime.

古文：山贼高艾，众数千人，寇钞，为幽、冀害，豫诱使鲜卑素利部斩艾，传首京都。
现代文：骨进部下全都吓得不敢动。田豫把骨进的弟弟推举出来作了乌丸王。从此胡人非常敬畏田豫。山间强盗高艾，聚合了几千人马，常常抢掠烧杀，成为幽、冀两州的公害。田豫诱使鲜卑首领素利斩杀了高艾，将其首级传送到京城。
English: All of Okenjin's subordinates were too scared to move. Tian Yu promoted Okenjin's younger brother, Tsuen, to become the King of Kumaru. Since then, the Hu people have been very much in awe of Tian Yu. The mountain bandit, Gao Ai, gathered several thousand horses, often robbed and burned, and became a public nuisance in the two states of Yu and Ji. Tian Yu induced the lowly leader, Suri, to kill Gao Ai, and sent his head to the capital.

古文：封豫长乐亭侯。
现代文：田豫被封为长乐享侯。
English: Tian Yu was given the title of "Changle enjoyer."

古文：为校尉九年，其御夷狄，恒摧抑兼并，乖散强猾。
现代文：他任校尉有九年之久，抗御少数民族部落的反叛，经常采取控制少数民族之间的兼并，同时使用离间计挑拨其相互关系的方法削弱他们的实力。
English: He served as a lieutenant for nine years, resisting the rebellion of ethnic minority tribes, often taking control of the annexation between ethnic minorities, and weakening their strength by using distraction to provoke their interrelationships.

古文：凡逋亡奸宄，为胡作计不利官者，豫皆构刺搅离，使凶邪之谋不遂，聚居之类不安。
现代文：凡是那些为胡人谋利而对中国构成威胁的人，田豫都能设计使其阴谋破产，并让他们不得安宁。
English: All those who pose a threat to China for the benefit of the Hu people can be designed by Tian Yu to bankrupt their plots and make them restless.

古文：事业未究，而幽州刺史王雄支党欲令雄领乌丸校尉，毁豫乱边，为国生事。
现代文：很多事情尚未做完，可是幽州刺史王雄的追随者想让王雄任乌丸校尉，于是诋毁田豫，说他在边境无事生非。
English: A lot of things have not been done yet, but the followers of Yuzhou assassin Wang Xiong wanted to make Wang Xiong the captain of Wumaru, so they slandered Tian Yu, saying that he had nothing to do with the border.

古文：遂转豫为汝南太守，加殄夷将军。
现代文：于是田豫又被任命为汝南太守，加殄夷将军封号。
English: As a result, Tian Yu was also appointed as the governor of Yunnan and given the title of General of Qianyi.

古文：太和末，公孙渊以辽东叛，帝欲征之而难其人，中领军杨暨举豫应选。
现代文：太和末年，公孙渊在辽东反叛。朝廷想派人领兵征讨，一时又找不出合适人选。
English: At the end of the Taihe era, Gongsun Yuan rebelled in Liaodong. The imperial court wanted to send someone to recruit soldiers, but could not find a suitable candidate.

古文：乃使豫以本官督青州诸军，假节，往讨之。
现代文：中领军杨暨推荐田豫，于是任命田豫以汝南太守职都督青州诸军事，持朝廷符节，前往征讨。
English: Yang Jie, the leader of the central army, recommended Tian Yu, so he appointed Tian Yu to be the military governor of Qingzhou, holding the imperial insignia, and went to fight.

古文：会吴贼遣使与渊相结，帝以贼众多，又以渡海，诏豫使罢军。
现代文：这时，东吴派人与公孙渊相勾结。魏明帝曹睿认为敌人强大，又要渡海打仗，于是下诏让田豫停止进军。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wu sent people to collude with Gongsun Yuan. Wei Ming Emperor Cao Rui thought that the enemy was strong and wanted to cross the sea to fight, so he issued an edict to stop Tian Yu from marching.

古文：豫度贼船垂还，岁晚风急，必畏漂浪，东随无岸，当赴成山。
现代文：田豫认为敌船将要返回，加之天晚风急，敌人害怕风浪，漂到东边又无岸，肯定会在成山靠岸的，而成山没有藏船的地方，只能沿海岸停泊。
English: Tian Yu thought that the enemy ship would return. In addition, the wind was very strong in the evening, and the enemy was afraid of the wind and waves. It drifted to the east and had no shore. It would definitely dock in Chengshan. Chengshan had no place to hide the ship, so it could only anchor along the coast.

古文：成山无藏船之处，辄便循海，案行地势，及诸山岛，徼截险要，列兵屯守。
现代文：他巡察山势，阻住险要路段，列兵把守。于是进入成山，登上汉武旧观。
English: He inspected the mountain situation, blocked the dangerous section of the road, and the soldiers guarded it. So he entered Chengshan and ascended the Hanwu Old View.

古文：自入成山，登汉武之观。贼还，果遇恶风，船皆触山沈没，波荡著岸，无所蒙窜，尽虏其众。
现代文：敌船返回，无路可逃，果然遇到狂风，很多船都触礁沉没，敌兵随波浪爬到岸上，魏军抓获了很多俘虏。
English: The enemy ships returned, there was no way to escape, and they encountered a strong wind. Many ships hit the rocks and sank. The enemy soldiers crawled ashore with the waves. The Wei army captured many prisoners.

古文：初，诸将皆笑於空地待贼，及贼破，竞欲与谋，求入海钩取浪船。
现代文：起初，很多将领都嘲笑田豫在这里空等敌人。等敌人被击败后，他们又都争相出谋划策，请求追到海上去截取船只。
English: At first, many generals ridiculed Tian Yu for waiting for the enemy in the sky. After the enemy was defeated, they all scrambled to come up with a plan, requesting to chase it out to sea to intercept the ship.

古文：豫惧穷虏死战，皆不听。
现代文：田豫担心那些可走的士兵会决一死战，不同意他们的意见。
English: Tian Yu was worried that those soldiers who could walk would fight to the death, and did not agree with their opinion.

古文：初，豫以太守督青州，青州刺史程喜内怀不服，军事之际，多相违错。
现代文：起初，田豫以汝南太守身份都督青州诸军事，青州刺史程喜很不服气。
English: At the beginning, Tian Yu was the military governor of Qingzhou with the status of the governor of Yunnan. Cheng Xi, the military governor of Qingzhou, was very dissatisfied.

古文：喜知帝宝爱明珠，乃密上： 豫虽有战功而禁令宽弛，所得器仗珠金甚多，放散皆不纳官。 
现代文：在制定军事方针时，两人常常有分歧，程喜知道明帝喜欢珠宝，于是秘密奏表说： 田豫虽创立战功，但纪律松弛，俘获了很多兵器、珠宝，都散在众人之手而不上缴官府。 
English: When formulating military policies, the two often had disagreements. Cheng Xi knew that Emperor Ming liked jewelry, so he secretly made a report saying: Although Tian Yu created military exploits, his discipline was slack. He captured a lot of weapons and jewelry, which were scattered in the hands of many people without being handed over to the government.

古文：由是功不见列。
现代文：因此田豫的战功没有得到朝廷的表彰。
English: As a result, Tian Yu's war exploits were not commended by the imperial court.

古文：后孙权号十万众攻新城，征东将军满宠欲率诸军救之。
现代文：后来，孙权率领号称十万的浩浩大军，进攻新城。征东将军满宠想率大军前去解救。
English: Later, Sun Quan led a huge army, said to be 100,000 strong, to attack the new city. The general of the Eastern Expedition was full of desire to lead the army to rescue.

古文：豫曰： 贼悉众大举，非徒投射小利，欲质新城以致大军耳。
现代文：田豫说： 敌人此举进攻，显然不是为小利而来，而是想借进攻新城作幌子，诱使我大军出战。
English: Tian Yu said, "The enemy obviously did not come to make a small profit from this attack, but wanted to use the attack on Xincheng as a cover to lure my army into battle.

古文：宜听使攻城，挫其锐气，不当与争锋也。
现代文：应当让他们攻城，杀杀他们的锐气，不应当与他们正面交锋。
English: They should be allowed to attack the city, kill their spirit, and should not be confronted head-on.

古文：城不可拔，众必罢怠；罢怠然后击之，可大克也。
现代文：城池攻不下来，敌人就会感到疲惫，我们便可乘机反击敌人，一定会大获全胜。
English: If we can't take the castle, the enemy will be tired, and we can take the opportunity to counterattack the enemy, and we will surely win a complete victory.

古文：若贼见计，必不攻城，势将自走。
现代文：如果敌人能预见此计，他们就不会攻城而是自动撤走。
English: If the enemy had foreseen this, they would not have attacked the city, but would have retreated.

古文：若便进兵，適入其计。
现代文：如果我们进军，正好中了他们的计。
English: If we go in, we'll play right into their hands.

古文：又大军相向，当使难知，不当使自画也。 
现代文：大军动向，要叫对方琢磨不透，不应当听任敌人调动。 
English: If you want to keep the other side guessing about the movement of a large army, you should not allow the enemy to move it.

古文：豫辄上状，天子从之。会贼遁走。
现代文：田豫上书说明想法，明帝同意他的意见，敌人只好退走。
English: Tian Yu wrote a letter explaining his thoughts, Emperor Ming agreed with his opinion, and the enemy had no choice but to retreat.

古文：后吴复来寇，豫往拒之，贼即退。
现代文：后来，敌人又来进攻，田豫迎面出击，敌人又退走。
English: Later, the enemy attacked again, Tian Yu counterattacked, and the enemy retreated.

古文：诸军夜惊，云： 贼复来！ 
现代文：突然，在夜里军营大乱，说： 敌人又来了。 
English: Suddenly, in the middle of the night, the camp was in turmoil, saying: The enemy is coming again.

古文：豫卧不起，令众 敢动者斩 。
现代文：田豫仍躺着不动，命令部下： 有敢动摇军心者必杀。 
English: Tian Yu still lay motionless, ordering his subordinates: Anyone who dares to shake the military spirit must be killed.

古文：有顷，竟无贼。
现代文：不久，发现根本没有军情。
English: Soon, it was discovered that there was no military situation at all.

古文：景初末，增邑三百，并前五百户。
现代文：景初末年，增加田豫食邑三百户，加上以前的，共八百户。
English: At the end of the first half of the year, 300 households in Tianyu Food Town were added, bringing the total to 800 households.

古文：正始初，迁使持节护匈奴中郎将，加振威将军，领并州刺史。
现代文：正始初年，升迁为持符节护匈奴中郎将，加振威将军封号，任并州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the first year, he was promoted to the general of the Xiongnu, the general of the Xiongnu, the general of the Xiongnu, the general of the Xiongnu, the general of the Xiongnu, and the general of the Xiongnu.

古文：外胡闻其威名，相率来献。
现代文：外域的少数民族久闻田豫的威名，相继前来进贡。
English: Foreign ethnic minorities, who had long heard of Tian Yu's prestige, came one after another to pay tribute.

古文：州界宁肃，百姓怀之。
现代文：州郡内社会治安良好，百姓十分感念他。
English: The social order in the county is good, and the people are very fond of him.

古文：徵为卫尉。屡乞逊位，太傅司马宣王以为豫克壮，书喻未听。
现代文：后又升为卫尉，他反复乞求逊位，太傅司马懿认为田豫精力还饱满，给他写信，没有答应。
English: After that, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guards. He repeatedly begged to be demoted. Grand Master Sima Yao thought that Tian Yu was still full of energy and wrote to him, but he did not agree.

古文：豫书答曰： 年过七十而以居位，譬犹钟鸣漏尽而夜行不休，是罪人也。 
现代文：田豫又写信给司马懿说： 年过七十而仍占据官位，就好像钟鸣漏尽，而仍在夜里行走，是要伤害人的。 
English: Tian Yu also wrote to Sima Yu, saying, "To be over seventy years old and still hold an official position is like the bell ringing out, but still walking at night, is to hurt people.

古文：遂固称疾笃。
现代文：于是坚决辞职。
English: So he resolutely resigned.

古文：拜太中大夫，食卿禄。
现代文：征拜为太中大夫，俸禄与九卿相同。
English: He was recruited to be a doctor of the imperial court, and his salary was the same as that of the nine nobles.

古文：年八十二薨。
现代文：死时八十二岁。
English: He was eighty-two when he died.

古文：子彭祖嗣。
现代文：他的儿子彭祖继承爵位。
English: His son Peng Zu succeeded to the title.

古文：豫清俭约素，赏赐皆散之将士。
现代文：田豫清俭约素，凡朝廷的赏赐都分给部下。
English: Tian Yu was thrifty and frugal, and all the rewards of the imperial court were distributed to his subordinates.

古文：每胡、狄私遗，悉簿藏官，不入家；家常贫匮。
现代文：每当少数民族和有人私下赠与东西时，都记录在册，收进官府，不放在家里，家里常常清贫。
English: Whenever ethnic minorities or others privately donate something, it is recorded and received by the government, rather than kept at home, which often leads to poverty.

古文：虽殊类，咸高豫节。
现代文：即使那些和田豫不和的人，也都钦佩田豫高尚的节操。
English: Even those who are at odds with Tian Yu admire his noble self-restraint.

古文：嘉平六年，下诏褒扬，赐其家钱谷。
现代文：嘉平六年，朝廷下诏表彰田豫，赐给他们家钱粮。
English: In the sixth year of Jiaping, the imperial court issued an edict to commend Tian Yu and gave them family money and grain.

古文：语在徐邈传。
现代文：这些情况，在《徐邈传》中有记载。
English: This incident is also recorded in "The Biography of Xu Bei."

古文：牵招字子经，安平观津人也。
现代文：牵招传，牵招，字子经，安平观津人。
English: Anping Guanzhong, Anping Guanzhong, Anping Guanzhong.

古文：年十馀岁，诣同县乐隐受学。
现代文：十多岁时跟同县乐隐求学。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he went to school with Le Yin of the same county.

古文：后隐为车骑将军何苗长史，招随卒业。
现代文：后来，乐隐在车骑将军何苗幕下任长史，牵招跟随他以便结束学业。
English: Later, Le Yin served under the general He Miao for a long time, and was persuaded to follow him to finish his studies.

古文：值京都乱，苗、隐见害，招俱与隐门生史路等触蹈锋刃，共殡敛隐尸，送丧还归。
现代文：这时京城大乱，何苗、乐隐被杀。牵招和乐隐的另一学生史路一起冒着生命危险，将老师乐隐的尸首收殓起来，送回家里安葬。
English: At this time, the capital city was in turmoil, and He Miao and Le Yin were killed. Tuan Zha and another student of Le Yin, Shi Lu, risked their lives together to collect the corpse of the teacher Le Yin and sent it home to be buried.

古文：道遇寇钞，路等皆悉散走。贼欲斫棺取钉，招垂泪请赦。
现代文：路上遇有强盗抢劫，史路等人都逃跑了，强盗想劈开棺材取钉，牵招含泪求情，感动了强盗，竟放走了他。
English: There was a robbery on the road. Shi Lu and others fled. The robber wanted to break open the coffin to get the nails. He begged for mercy with tears. The robber was moved and let him go.

古文：贼义之，乃释而去。由此显名。
现代文：牵招由此而知名。
English: This is how the game became famous.

古文：冀州牧袁绍辟为督军从事，兼领乌丸突骑。
现代文：冀州牧袁绍召牵招为督军从事，并兼任乌丸突骑。
English: Jizhou herdsman Yuan Shao was engaged in recruiting as a military commander, and also served as a Wu Maru rider.

古文：绍舍人犯令，招先斩乃白，绍奇其意而不见罪也。
现代文：袁绍的亲信违犯命令，牵招先斩后奏，袁绍很欣赏他的果断，没有追究此事。
English: Yuan Shao's cronies disobeyed orders, plotting first and executing later. Yuan Shao appreciated his decisiveness and did not pursue the matter.

古文：绍卒，又事绍子尚。
现代文：袁绍死后，他又追随袁绍之子袁尚。
English: After Yuan Shao's death, he followed Yuan Shao's son Yuan Shang.

古文：建安九年，太祖围邺。
现代文：建安九年，魏太祖曹操包围邺城。
English: In the ninth year of Jian'an, Cao Cao, the great-grandfather of the Wei Dynasty, besieged Lucheng.

古文：尚遣招至上党，督致军粮。
现代文：袁尚派牵招到上党去督办军粮。
English: Yuan Shang sent an envoy to the upper party to supervise the military grain.

古文：未还，尚破走，到中山。
现代文：未等牵招回来，袁尚便败逃到中山。
English: Without waiting to be called back, Yuan Shang fled to Zhongshan.

古文：时尚外兄高幹为并州刺史，招以并州左有恒山之险，右有大河之固，带甲五万，北阻强胡，劝幹迎尚，并力观变。
现代文：当时袁尚外兄高干任并州刺史。牵招认为，并州地势极好，左边有恒山作为天险，右边有大河可以固守，又拥兵五万，北边有强大的胡兵，所以他劝高干把袁尚迎过来，联合起来应付时变。
English: At that time, Yuan Shang's elder brother Gao Gan was in charge of the annexation of the state. Tuan Zhao believed that the annexation of the state was in an excellent position. On the left there was the Hengshan Mountain as a natural hazard, on the right there was a large river that could be defended, and there were fifty thousand soldiers, and on the north there were powerful Hu soldiers. Therefore, he advised Gao Gan to welcome Yuan Shang and unite to cope with the changing times.

古文：幹既不能，而阴欲害招。
现代文：高干不仅没同意，反想设计害死牵招。
English: Gao Gan not only did not agree, but thought that the design would be fatal.

古文：招闻之，间行而去，道隔不得追尚，遂东诣太祖。
现代文：牵招知情后，暗自逃去。因为距袁尚太远，于是向东逃奔曹操。
English: After knowing about the recruitment, he secretly fled. Because he was too far away from Yuan Shang, he fled to Cao Cao in the east.

古文：太祖领冀州，辟为从事。
现代文：曹操自任冀州牧，任牵招为从事。
English: Cao Cao appointed himself as the pastor of Jizhou and engaged in recruiting.

古文：太祖将讨袁谭，而柳城乌丸欲出骑助谭。
现代文：曹操想征讨袁谭，但是柳城乌丸想出兵协助袁谭。
English: Cao Cao wanted to recruit Yuan Tan, but Liucheng Wumaru wanted to send troops to help Yuan Tan.

古文：太祖以招尝领乌丸，遣诣柳城。
现代文：曹操认为，牵招曾经任过乌丸突骑，于是派他到了柳城。
English: Cao Cao believed that Tianzhao had once been in charge of the Black Horse cavalry, so he sent him to Liucheng.

古文：到，值峭王严，以五千骑当遣诣谭。
现代文：这时正好峭王也严备待战，准备了五千骑兵援助袁谭。
English: At this time, Qiao Wang was also ready for battle and prepared five thousand cavalry to aid Yuan Tan.

古文：又辽东太守公孙康自称平州牧，遣使韩忠赍单于印绶往假峭王。
现代文：同时，辽东太守公孙康自称平州牧，派韩忠带着单于的印绶来到峭王营，想授以官爵。
English: At the same time, the governor of Liaodong Province, Sun Kang, who called himself the governor of Pingzhou, sent Han Zhong to Qiao Wangying with the seal of Shan Yu, hoping to be awarded a peerage.

古文：峭王大会群长，忠亦在坐。
现代文：峭王召集人马会合，韩忠也在场。
English: Qiao Wang convened a personnel meeting, and Han Zhong was also present.

古文：峭王问招： 昔袁公言受天子之命，假我为单于；今曹公复言当更白天子，假我真单于；辽东复持印绶来。
现代文：峭王问牵招： 从前，袁绍说他受天子之命，任命我为单于；而今曹操也说受天子之命任我为真单于。同时，辽东太守又拿着印绶来。
English: Qiao Wang asked: Once upon a time, Yuan Shao said that he was ordered by the Son of Heaven to appoint me as the only one; but now Cao Cao also said that he was ordered by the Son of Heaven to appoint me as the only one. At the same time, the Liaodong governor also came with the seal.

古文：如此，谁当为正？ 
现代文：这样看来，谁该是正宗呢？ 
English: In this light, who should be authentic?

古文：招答曰： 昔袁公承制，得有所拜假；中间违错，天子命曹公代之，言当白天子，更假真单于，是也。辽东下郡，何得擅称拜假也？ 
现代文：牵招回答说： 从前袁绍承天子命令，可以有所拜封，但后来发生变故，天子命令曹公取而代之。他说上书朝廷，拜您为真单于，是正宗，辽东是下属部，哪有权称封拜呢？ 
English: He replied, "In the past, Yuan Shao followed the order of the Son of Heaven, so he could have a seal, but later there was a change, and the Son of Heaven ordered Cao Gong to take it instead. He said that he would submit a letter to the imperial court, saying, "Your worship is truly unique, it is authentic, and Liaodong is a subordinate department, who has the right to call it a seal?"

古文：忠曰： 我辽东在沧海之东，拥兵百万，又有扶馀、濊貊之用；当今之势，强者为右，曹操独何得为是也？ 
现代文：韩忠说： 我们辽东在大海东边，拥百万大军，又有扶余、氵岁貊的支持。今天的形势是强者为王，就是曹操也没有资格自称正宗！ 
English: Han Zhong said: We, Liaodong, are on the eastern side of the sea, have a million-strong army, and have the support of Fuyu and Shunyi. Today's situation is that the strong are king, and even Cao Cao is not qualified to claim to be the authentic one!

古文：招呵忠曰： 曹公允恭明哲，翼戴天子，伐叛柔服，宁静四海，汝君臣顽嚚，今恃险远，背违王命，欲擅拜假，侮弄神器，方当屠戮，何敢慢易咎毁大人？ 
现代文：牵招斥责韩忠说： 曹公允恭明哲，拥戴天子，讨伐叛兵，安抚各地，让四海安宁。而你们的君臣则只倚靠边远天险，违抗王命，还想擅权封拜，给国家丢脸，竟还敢抵毁曹公！ 
English: Han Zhong scolded and rebuked: "Cao Gongyong supported the heavenly son, fought against the rebels, pacified various regions, and made the four seas peaceful. But your princes and ministers only rely on remote natural hazards, defy the king's order, and still want to have the power to banish and humiliate the country, yet they dare to defy Cao Gong!

古文：便捉忠头顿筑，拔刀欲斩之。
现代文：便将韩忠头往墙上撞，拔刀要杀了他。
English: He then slammed Han Zhong's head into the wall and pulled out a knife to kill him.

古文：峭王惊怖，徒跣抱招，以救请忠，左右失色。
现代文：峭王惊恐万状，光着脚赶紧拖住牵招，请求饶韩忠一命，身边的人也都吓得不知所措，牵招退回座位上，向峭王说以利弊得失及成败之理。
English: King Koga was terrified. He quickly dragged his bare feet to hold the rope and begged for Han Zhong's life. The people around him were also overwhelmed with fear. King Koga retreated to his seat and told King Koga about the pros and cons of success and failure.

古文：招乃还坐，为峭王等说成败之效，祸福所归，皆下席跪伏，敬受敕教，便辞辽东之使，罢所严骑。
现代文：在场的人都离开座位，跪下来聆听。
English: Everyone in the audience left their seats and knelt down to listen.

古文：太祖灭谭於南皮，署招军谋掾，从讨乌丸。
现代文：峭王辞退了辽东的使者，从此罢兵，不再援助袁谭。曹操消灭了袁谭，任牵招为军谋掾，随从征讨乌丸。
English: King Qiao dismissed the envoy from Liaodong and henceforth withdrew his troops and no longer aided Yuan Tan. Cao Cao eliminated Yuan Tan and appointed Zhuo Zha as a military strategist to accompany him in the conquest of Wuyuan.

古文：至柳城，拜护乌丸校尉。
现代文：到了柳城，任护乌丸校尉。
English: When he arrived at Yanagi, he was assigned to guard Captain Kumaru.

古文：还邺，辽东送袁尚首，县在马市，招睹之悲感，设祭头下。
现代文：回到邺城，辽东把袁尚的脑袋送来，悬挂在马市。牵招见状，十分悲痛，在首级下设祭坛。
English: Back in Lucheng, Liaodong sent Yuan Shang's head to be hung in Ma City. He was deeply saddened and set up an altar under the head.

古文：太祖义之，举为茂才。
现代文：曹操为牵招的义气所感动，推举他为茂才。
English: Cao Cao was moved by his loyalty and recommended him to Mao Cai.

古文：从平汉中，太祖还，留招为中护军。
现代文：随曹军平定汉中，曹操回来后，留下牵招为中护军。
English: After Cao Cao's army subdued Han, Cao Cao came back and left Chu Zha as the middle protector.

古文：事罢，还邺，拜平虏校尉，将兵督青、徐州郡诸军事，击东莱贼，斩其渠率，东土宁静。
现代文：平定汉中后，牵招回到邺城任平虏校尉，率兵都督青州、徐州诸军事。击败东莱叛兵，杀死首领，东部疆域得以安宁。
English: After the middle of the Han Dynasty was pacified, he was recruited to return to Shicheng as a lieutenant of Pingru, and led the troops of the military governors of Qingzhou and Xuzhou. He defeated the Donglai rebels, killed the leader, and the eastern territory was peaceful.

古文：文帝践阼，拜招使持节护鲜卑校尉，屯昌平。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕即位，派牵招为持节护鲜卑校尉，屯兵昌平。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi ascended to the throne, and dispatched an envoy to recruit a low-ranking lieutenant of the Jishu Protectorate and a garrison of Changping.

古文：是时，边民流散山泽，又亡叛在鲜卑中者，处有千数。
现代文：当时，边地居民多流散在山间河谷，还有逃入鲜卑部落的，有几千人。
English: At that time, the outlying residents were mostly scattered in the mountain valleys, and there were also several thousand people who fled to the Xianbei tribe.

古文：招广布恩信，招诱降附。
现代文：牵招发布告示，劝说人们回到家园。
English: They are issuing notices to persuade people to return to their homes.

古文：建义中郎将公孙集等，率将部曲，咸各归命；使还本郡。
现代文：建义中郎将公孙集等率部下归附，让他们回到本郡。
English: Jianyi Zhongro attached his subordinates such as Gongsun Ji, and let them return to the county.

古文：又怀来鲜卑素利、弥加等十馀万落，皆令款塞。
现代文：又对鲜卑素利、弥加等十余万部民加以安抚，让他们在边塞安顿下来。
English: He also pacified more than a hundred thousand people, such as the Xianbei, Suri, and Yiga, and allowed them to settle down in the border fortress.

古文：大军欲征吴，召招还，至，值军罢，拜右中郎将，出为雁门太守。
现代文：魏国大军要攻打东吴，将牵招招回。回来后，魏军又取消出征计划，于是牵招被任为右中郎将，出任雁门太守。
English: The Wei army wanted to attack Dongwu, so they called Tianzhao back. After returning, the Wei army canceled the expedition plan, so Tianzhao was appointed as the right middle commander and served as the governor of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：郡在边陲，虽有候望之备，而寇钞不断。招既教民战陈，又表复乌丸五百馀家租调，使备鞍马，远遣侦候。
现代文：此郡地处边境，虽有官兵把守，但常有掠抢之事发生，牵招就把当地群众招集起来，教他们如何战备，又上表要求乌丸五百余家出赋租，备好鞍马，派他们深入侦查。
English: This county is located on the border, and although it is guarded by officers and soldiers, there are often incidents of looting. Therefore, the local people were summoned and taught how to prepare for war, and more than 500 households in Wumaru were required to pay rent, prepare saddle horses, and send them to investigate.

古文：虏每犯塞，勒兵逆击，来辄摧破，於是吏民胆气日锐，荒野无虞。
现代文：敌人每有进犯，就派兵迎击，只要他们敢来，就打败他们。因此，无论官兵百姓，都大振胆气，四野日渐安宁。
English: Whenever the enemy attacked, they would send troops to meet the attack, and if they dared to come, they would defeat them. Therefore, both officers and soldiers, as well as the people, were greatly encouraged, and the countryside became increasingly peaceful.

古文：又构间离散，使虏更相猜疑。
现代文：牵招又用离间计离间敌人。
English: He also used the tactic of distraction to drive the enemy apart.

古文：鲜卑大人步度根、泄归泥等与轲比能为隙，将部落三万馀家诣郡附塞。
现代文：鲜卑首领步度根、泄归泥等与轲比能有矛盾，于是他们率三万多户百姓来到郡里，请求归附。
English: There was a contradiction between the leaders of the Xianbei, who wanted to uproot the roots and return the land to the mud, and the Qibin, so they led more than thirty thousand people to the county to ask for annexation.

古文：敕令还击比能，杀比能弟苴罗侯，及叛乌丸归义侯王同、王寄等，大结怨雠。
现代文：牵招下令还击轲比能，杀死了轲比能的弟弟苴罗侯。轲比能与乌丸归义侯王同、王寄等，结下怨仇。
English: Tsuchizaki gave the order to strike back at Shibi Neng and killed Shiro, Shibi Neng's younger brother. Shibi Neng and Umaru fell out with each other, resulting in a bitter feud.

古文：是以招自出，率将归泥等讨比能於云中故郡，大破之。
现代文：因此，牵招又亲自率领归泥等攻打轲比能，在云中故郡打败轲比能。
English: Therefore, he personally led and led the attack on the mud and so on, and defeated Zou Bi Neng in Yunzhong County.

古文：招通河西鲜卑附头等十馀万家，缮治陉北故上馆城，置屯戍以镇内外，夷虏大小，莫不归心，诸叛亡虽亲戚不敢藏匿，咸悉收送。
现代文：牵招又与河西鲜卑等十余万家相联系，整治陉北故城上馆城，在此屯戍兵马，威震内外，远近胡人，都心悦诚服。那些叛变逃亡的人，家属都不敢窝藏，将他们交送出来。
English: It has also been linked with more than one hundred thousand families such as Hexi Xianbei to rectify Shangzhuang City, the old city in northern Anhui Province. Soldiers and horses have been stationed here, and Hu people from both inside and outside the country, and from far and near, have been sincerely convinced. The families of those who have defected and fled do not dare to hide them, and will hand them over.

古文：於是野居晏闭，寇贼静息。
现代文：于是远近安宁，盗贼再也没有出没。
English: As a result, there was peace near and far, and thieves no longer haunted the area.

古文：招乃简选有才识者，诣太学受业，还相授教，数年中庠序大兴。
现代文：牵招又挑选有才识的人，送他们到太学读书，然后叫他们再回故里，传授他人。
English: Recruit and select talented people, send them to study in Taiwan, and then ask them to return to their hometowns to teach others.

古文：郡所治广武，井水咸苦，民皆担辇远汲流水，往返七里。
现代文：几年间，学校如雨后春笋般兴盛起来。郡治设在广武，井水又咸又苦，当地人推车挑担，到很远的河边挑水，往返七里。
English: The county seat is located in Guangwu, and the well water is salty and bitter. Locals pull carts to fetch water from a distant river, a seven-mile round trip.

古文：招准望地势，因山陵之宜，凿原开渠，注水城内，民赖其益。
现代文：牵招勘察地形，根据山势，开凿河渠，引水入城，百姓深受其益。
English: The people benefited greatly from the survey of the terrain, according to the mountain situation, digging canals, and bringing water into the city.

古文：明帝即位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：魏明帝即位，赐牵招为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wei Ming ascended to the throne, and gave Tsuchizake the title of Guanai Hou.

古文：太和二年，护乌丸校尉田豫出塞，为轲比能所围於故马邑城，移招求救。
现代文：太和二年护乌丸校尉田豫出塞，在原马邑城被轲比能所包围，向牵招求救。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taihe era, the ward of Wumaru, Captain Tian Yu, was besieged in the original Ma'i city by the Zoubinengs, and called for help from the Tsui Zhao.

古文：招即整勒兵马，欲赴救豫。
现代文：牵招整兵待发，但并州官吏根据通例禁止牵招出兵。
English: However, state officials are prohibited from conscripting soldiers in accordance with the general practice.

古文：并州以常宪禁招，招以为节将见围，不可拘於吏议，自表辄行。
现代文：牵招认为持节的大将被包围，情况危急，不能再拘泥所谓吏议而见死不救。于是上表朝廷，随即出发。
English: The situation was critical, and it was no longer possible to stick to the so-called officials' discussion and see no way out. Therefore, the imperial court was summoned, and they immediately set off.

古文：又并驰布羽檄，称陈形势，云当西北掩取虏家，然后东行，会诛虏身。
现代文：又发布羽檄，纵论形势，说他们要从西北偷袭敌人老窝，然后向东进军，与敌人交锋。
English: They also issued a feather duster, despite the situation, saying that they would sneak attack the enemy's nest from the northwest, and then march to the east to clash with the enemy.

古文：檄到，豫军踊跃。
现代文：羽檄发布后，田豫州的军队跃跃欲试。
English: After the release of feathers, Tianyuzhou's army was eager to try.

古文：又遗一通於虏蹊要，虏即恐怖，种类离散。军到故平城，便皆溃走。
现代文：又向敌人要塞发布檄文，敌人顿感恐惧，纷纷离散，大军攻到平城，敌人崩溃即逃。
English: He also issued a warning to the enemy fortress. The enemy suddenly felt fear and scattered. The large army attacked Pingcheng, and the enemy collapsed and fled.

古文：比能复大合骑来，到故平州塞北。
现代文：轲比能又云集骑兵来到平州塞北。
English: Zou Bineng also gathered cavalry and came to the northern part of Pingzhou.

古文：招潜行扑讨，大斩首级。
现代文：牵招秘密行军突袭，砍下很多敌人的脑袋。
English: He led a secret raid and cut off the heads of many of his enemies.

古文：招以蜀虏诸葛亮数出，而比能狡猾，能相交通，表为防备，议者以为县远，未之信也。
现代文：牵招认为西蜀敌将诸葛亮多次出击，而轲比能狡猾，他们一定会有勾结，于是上表请求有所预防。
English: He thought that the enemies of West Shuxu would attack Zhuge Liang many times, while Zou Bi could be cunning, and they would definitely collude, so he asked for prevention in the above table.

古文：时比能已还漠南，招与刺史毕轨议曰： 胡虏迁徙无常。
现代文：很多人认为他们彼此相距遥远，都不相信此说。诸葛亮在祁山时，果然派人和轲比能联系。轲比能来到北地石城，与诸葛亮的军队相呼应。皇帝命令牵招率兵出击。
English: Many people think that they are far away from each other, but they do not believe this. When Zhuge Liang was in Shaoshan, he sent people to contact Zou Bi Neng. Zou Bi Neng came to Hebei Shicheng, echoing Zhuge Liang's army. The emperor ordered to recruit and lead soldiers to attack.

古文：若劳师远追，则迟速不相及。若欲潜袭，则山溪艰险，资粮转运，难以密办。
现代文：当时轲比能正回到汉南，牵招和并州刺史毕轨商议道： 胡人迁移不定，如果派兵穷追，恐难以赶上。如果偷袭，山险路远，军需供应不上，也难以成功。
English: At that time, Zou Bineng was returning to Hannan, and they discussed how to complete the history of the war and the annexation of the state: the Hu people's migration is uncertain, if they send troops to chase, it may be difficult to catch up. If they make a sneak attack, the mountain is far away, the military supply is not available, and it is difficult to succeed.

古文：可使守新兴、雁门二牙门，出屯陉北，外以镇抚，内令兵田，储畜资粮，秋冬马肥，州郡兵合，乘衅征讨，计必全克。 
现代文：可以让兵力守在新兴、雁门两个关口，再出兵屯守陉北，对外可以起镇抚作用，对内可以派兵种田储蓄粮食。等秋冬之际，粮足马肥，聚合各路人马，乘机攻讨，定能取胜。 
English: It is possible to keep the troops at the emerging and the two gates of the Wild Goose Gate, and then dispatch troops to guard the north of Gan. It can play a calming role to the outside world, and it can send troops to the inside to grow and save grain. In the autumn and winter, when the grain is short and the horse is fat, people from all walks of life will gather and take the opportunity to attack and win.

古文：未及施行，会病卒。
现代文：计划还未能施行，牵招就病死了。
English: The plan has not yet been implemented, and the recruiter died of illness.

古文：招在郡十二年，威风远振。
现代文：牵招在郡里任职长达十二年，威名远扬。
English: Tsuzuki served in the county for twelve years, and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：其治边之称，次于田豫，百姓追思之。
现代文：他治理边郡，功名仅次于田豫，颇得百姓感念。
English: He governed Bian County, and his achievements were second only to Tian Yu. He was greatly admired by the people.

古文：而渔阳傅容在雁门有名绩，继招后，在辽东又有事功云。
现代文：渔阳傅容在雁门也有名望，功继牵招，在辽东又创立军功。
English: Yuyang Fu Rong also has a reputation in the Wild Goose Gate, and he has created military achievements in Liaodong.

古文：招子嘉嗣。次子弘，亦猛毅有招风，以陇西太守随邓艾伐蜀有功，咸熙中为振威护军。
现代文：牵招的长子牵嘉继承爵位，次子牵弘，酷像父亲，勇猛果断，任陇西太守，随邓艾讨伐西蜀，创立军功。咸熙中任振威护军。
English: Tsuchizhao's eldest son, Tsuchijia, inherited the title of nobility, and his second son, Tsuchihiro, resembled his father very much, was brave and decisive, served as the governor of Western Gansu, fought against Western Shu with Deng Ai, and created military exploits. He served as Zhenwei's bodyguard in the middle of the Han Dynasty.

古文：嘉与晋司徒李胤同母，早卒。
现代文：牵嘉与晋司徒李胤同母，早逝。
English: Tsuika was born to the same mother as Jin Shi disciple Li Yin, who died young.

古文：郭淮字伯济，太原阳曲人也。
现代文：郭淮传，郭淮，字伯济，太原阳曲人。
English: Guo Huai Chuan, Guo Huai, Zhe Bo Zi, Taiyuan Yang Qu Ren.

古文：建安中举孝廉，除平原府丞。
现代文：建安中被推举为孝廉，任平原府丞。
English: In Jian'an, he was promoted to Xiaolian and appointed as the governor of Pingyuan.

古文：文帝为五官将，召淮署为门下贼曹，转为丞相兵曹议令史，从征汉中。
现代文：曹丕为五官将，任郭淮为门下贼曹，又转任为丞相兵曹议令史，随曹军征伐汉中。
English: Cao Pi was the general of the five officials, Guo Huai was appointed as the subordinate thief Cao, and he was also transferred to be the minister of war Cao Ri Rongshi, and followed Cao's army to conquer Han.

古文：太祖还，留征西将军夏侯渊拒刘备，以淮为渊司马。
现代文：曹操回洛阳后，留下征西将军夏侯渊抵御刘备，任郭淮为司马。
English: After Cao Cao returned to Luoyang, he left General Xia Houyuan to resist Liu Bei and appointed Guo Huai as his successor.

古文：渊与备战，淮时有疾不出。
现代文：夏侯渊与刘备作战，郭淮有病未能成行。
English: Xia Houyuan fought with Liu Bei, but Guo Huai was too ill to go.

古文：渊遇害，军中扰扰，淮收散卒，推荡寇将军张郃为军主，诸营乃定。
现代文：夏侯渊被杀，军中大惊，郭淮收集散兵，推举荡寇将军张郃负责，各部军营才安定下来。
English: Xia Houyuan was killed, the army was shocked, Guo Huai collected scattered soldiers, promoted the bandit general Zhang Qian to be responsible, and the military camps of all departments settled down.

古文：其明日，备欲渡汉水来攻。
现代文：第二天，刘备想渡汉水进攻。
English: The next day, Liu Bei wanted to attack across the Han River.

古文：诸将议众寡不敌，备便乘胜，欲依水为陈以拒之。
现代文：各位将领认为敌我兵力悬殊，刘备会乘胜而击，于是诸将都想依汉水作阵来狙击刘备。
English: The generals thought that the disparity between the strength of the enemy and ours was great, and Liu Bei would take advantage of the victory, so all the generals wanted to attack Liu Bei according to Han Shui.

古文：淮曰： 此示弱而不足挫敌，非算也。
现代文：郭淮说： 这是向敌人示弱，不能击败敌人，这不是上策。
English: Guo Huai said: This is to show weakness to the enemy, can not defeat the enemy, this is not the best policy.

古文：不如远水为陈，引而致之，半济而后击，备可破也。 
现代文：不如撤离岸边，在远处设阵，诱使敌人前来，等他们渡到河中央再发起进攻，一定可以打败刘备。 
English: It is better to evacuate the shore, set up a camp in the distance, induce the enemy to come, and wait for them to cross to the middle of the river and then launch an attack. Liu Bei can be defeated.

古文：既陈，备疑不渡，淮遂坚守，示无还心。
现代文：于是排好战阵。刘备疑心重重，不敢强渡。郭淮布署军队，坚决死守，没有一点撤退的意思。
English: As a result, they lined up for battle. Liu Bei was suspicious and did not dare to force his way through. Guo Huaibo's troops resolutely defended themselves and had no intention of retreating.

古文：以状闻，太祖善之，假郃节，复以淮为司马。
现代文：此事上报以后，曹操很赞许，任张郃为持节都督，又任郭淮为司马。
English: After this matter was reported, Cao Cao was very approving, and appointed Zhang Ye as the governor of Jixi, and Guo Huai as Sima.

古文：文帝即王位，赐爵关内侯，转为镇西长史。又行征羌护军，护左将军张郃、冠军将军杨秋讨山贼郑甘、卢水叛胡，皆破平之。
现代文：曹丕即位后，赐郭淮为关内侯，转为镇西长史以及征羌护军，协助左将军张郃、冠军将军杨秋讨伐山盗郑甘及卢水叛乱的胡人，大获全胜。
English: After Cao Pi's accession to the throne, Guo Huai was given the title of Guan Nei Hou, and he was transferred to the Long History of the West of the Town and the Conscription and Enlistment Protection Army, and assisted the Left General Zhang Jun and the Champion General Yang Qiu to fight the mountain thief Zheng Gan and the Hu people of the Lushui Rebellion, and won a complete victory.

古文：关中始定，民得安业。
现代文：关中于是安定，百姓得以安居乐业。
English: As a result, Guanzhong was stabilized, and the people were able to live and work in peace.

古文：黄初元年，奉使贺文帝践阼，而道路得疾，故计远近为稽留。
现代文：黄初元年，郭淮奉命前来祝贺曹丕登基，在路上得病，所以迟了一些。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor, Guo Huai was ordered to come to congratulate Cao Pi on his accession to the throne. He got sick on the way, so he was a little late.

古文：及群臣欢会，帝正色责之曰： 昔禹会诸侯於涂山，防风后至，便行大戮。
现代文：等到群臣欢会时，曹丕严肃地说： 从前大禹在涂山召会诸侯，防风来晚了，结果被杀。
English: While waiting for the group of ministers to celebrate, Cao Pi said solemnly: Once upon a time, Dayu was in Tuishan to hold a meeting for the lords. He was too late to prevent the wind from blowing, and as a result, he was killed.

古文：今溥天同庆而卿最留迟，何也？ 
现代文：而今普天同庆，你却来迟，为什么？ 
English: And now everyone is celebrating, but you are late. Why?

古文：淮对曰： 臣闻五帝先教导民以德，夏后政衰，始用刑辟。
现代文：郭淮答道： 我听说五帝首先用德来开导臣民。夏后时期朝政衰败，才开始用刑。
English: Guo Huai replied: I heard that the five emperors first used virtue to enlighten their subjects. It was only after the decline of the imperial government in the summer that they began to use punishment.

古文：今臣遭唐虞之世，是以自知免於防风之诛也。 
现代文：而今我生逢唐虞盛世，因此知道自己不会遭受防风那样的杀戮。 
English: But now I was born in the golden age of Tang Yu, so I know I won't be killed like Fengfen.

古文：帝悦之，擢领雍州刺史，封射阳亭侯，五年为真。
现代文：曹丕听了很高兴，升任郭淮为领雍州刺史，封为射阳亭侯，五年后授以实职。
English: Cao Wei was very pleased to hear this. Guo Huai was promoted to be the territorial governor of Yongzhou, and he was given the title of Mayor of Shayangting. Five years later, he was given a full-time position.

古文：安定羌大帅辟虒反，讨破降之。
现代文：安定羌将领辟鱖反叛，被郭淮击败。
English: The leader of the Anding Rebellion was defeated by Guo Huai.

古文：每羌、胡来降，淮辄先使人推问其亲理，男女多少，年岁长幼；及见，一二知其款曲，讯问周至，咸称神明。
现代文：每当羌、胡有人来降，郭淮总是让人询问他们亲戚的情况，比如男女多少、年岁长幼等。等见到他们，已略知他们的心意，关怀备至，人们都称他为神明的官吏。
English: Whenever Zhai and Hu were visited, Guo Huai would always have people inquire about their relatives, such as the number of men and women, and the ages of their children and grandchildren. When he saw them, he already knew a little about their intentions and was so caring that people called him a divine official.

古文：太和二年，蜀相诸葛亮出祁山，遣将军马谡至街亭，高详屯列柳城。
现代文：太和二年，西蜀丞相诸葛亮率兵出祁山，派将军马谡守街亭，高详守列柳城。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taihe era, the Western Shu chancellor Zhuge Liang led an army out of Lushan, sent the general Ma Jun to guard the street pavilion, and carefully guarded Liucheng.

古文：张郃击谡，淮攻详营，皆破之。
现代文：张郃攻街亭，郭淮攻列柳城，均获胜利。
English: Zhang Ye attacked Jie Ting, Guo Huai attacked Liucheng, and both were victorious.

古文：又破陇西名羌唐虒於枹罕，加建威将军。
现代文：在木包罕攻破陇西名羌唐鱖，于是郭淮被加封建威将军。
English: Guo Huai was promoted to General of Feudal Jianwei after defeating the Western famous warlord Tang Jun in Mubo.

古文：五年，蜀出卤城。
现代文：太和五年，西蜀出卤城。
English: In the 5th year of the Taihe era, Xishu emerged from the halogen city.

古文：是时，陇右无谷，议欲关中大运，淮以威恩抚循羌、胡，家使出谷，平其输调，军食用足，转扬武将军。
现代文：当时，陇西粮食紧缺，一些人主张从关中运送。郭淮恩威并施，让羌、胡人出粮食以供军需。郭淮又转为扬武将军。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of grain in Shaanxi Province, and some people advocated transporting grain from Guanzhong. Guo Huai concurred with them, and asked the Yan and Hu people to provide grain for military needs. Guo Huai also became Yangwu General.

古文：青龙二年，诸葛亮出斜谷，并田于兰坑。
现代文：青龙二年，诸葛亮出斜谷，在兰坑处屯田。
English: In the second year of Qinglong, Zhuge emerged from the valley and settled in the Lankeng area.

古文：是时司马宣王屯渭南；淮策亮必争北原，宜先据之，议者多谓不然。
现代文：当时司马懿屯兵渭南。郭淮估计诸葛亮一定会争夺北原，主张先占领，很多人对此不以为然。
English: At that time, Sima Qian was stationed in the south of Yunnan. Guo Huai estimated that Zhuge Liang would certainly compete for the North Plains and advocated the first occupation. Many people did not agree with this.

古文：淮曰： 若亮跨渭登原，连兵北山，隔绝陇道，摇荡民、夷，此非国之利也。 
现代文：郭淮说： 如果诸葛亮跨过渭水登上北原，就可以连兵北山，断绝陇道，惊吓臣民和胡人，此乃国家安危之大患。 
English: Guo Huai said, "If Zhuge Liang crosses the Surabaya River and climbs to the North Plains, he will be able to link up with soldiers on the North Mountain, cut off the Surabaya Road, and frighten the subjects and Hu people. This is a great danger to national security.

古文：宣王善之，淮遂屯北原。
现代文：司马懿同意这种观点，于是让郭淮屯兵北原。
English: Sima Yao agreed with this view, so he let Guo Huai send troops to Beiyuan.

古文：堑垒未成，蜀兵大至，淮逆击之。
现代文：战壕还没修好，蜀军压境，郭淮奋力回击。
English: The trenches were not yet repaired, the Shu army pressed the border, and Guo Huai fought back.

古文：后数日，亮盛兵西行，诸将皆谓欲攻西围，淮独以为此见形於西，欲使官兵重应之，必攻阳遂耳。
现代文：过了几天，诸葛亮率大军西行。诸将领都认为诸葛亮想攻西围。只有郭淮一人认为，这是诸葛亮虚张声势，是要让魏军大举回应，而他一定会进攻阳遂。
English: A few days later, Zhuge Liang led a large army westward. The generals all thought that Zhuge Liang wanted to attack the Western Circuit. Only Guo Huai thought that this was Zhuge Liang's bluff, to let the Wei army respond in a big way, and he would certainly attack Yang Sui.

古文：其夜果攻阳遂，有备不得上。
现代文：那天夜里，蜀军果然进攻阳遂。因为城中有防备，所以诸葛亮的谋算没有成功。
English: That night, the Shu army did indeed attack Yang Sui. Because there were defenses in the city, Zhuge Liang's plan did not succeed.

古文：正始元年，蜀将姜维出陇西。
现代文：正始元年，蜀将姜维出兵陇西。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Shu dispatched Jiang Wei to Shaanxi.

古文：淮遂进军，追至强中，维退，遂讨羌迷当等，按抚柔氐三千馀落，拔徙以实关中。
现代文：郭淮进军，追至强中。姜维撤退后，郭淮又讨伐羌族迷当等部，安抚氐族人，迁移三千多户百姓到关中地区。
English: Guo Huai marched into the army and chased it to Qiangzhong. After Jiang Wei's retreat, Guo Huai again fought against the Yao and other tribes, pacified the Yao people, and relocated more than three thousand households to the Guanzhong area.

古文：迁左将军。
现代文：转任左将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of General of the Left.

古文：凉州休屠胡梁元碧等，率种落二千馀家附雍州。
现代文：凉州休屠胡人梁元碧等率二千多家归附雍州。
English: More than 2,000 people from Liangzhou, including Xiutu Hu and Liang Yuanbi, were annexed to Yongzhou.

古文：淮奏请使居安定之高平，为民保障，其后因置西州都尉。
现代文：郭淮奏请让这些人居住在安定郡的高平，为保障他们的安全，其后设置西州都尉。
English: Guo Huaixiao please let these people live in Gaoping, Anding County, in order to ensure their safety, and then set up the West State Captain.

古文：转拜前将军，领州如故。五年，夏侯玄伐蜀，淮督诸军为前锋。
现代文：郭淮又被任前将军。正始五年，夏侯玄伐蜀，郭淮率军为前锋。
English: Guo Huai was also appointed as a former general. At the beginning of the fifth year, Xia Hou Xuan was in Shu, Guo Huai led the army as a striker.

古文：淮度势不利，辄拔军出，故不大败。
现代文：郭淮估计形势对己不利，就撤军出走，避免了重大损失。
English: Guo Huai estimated that the situation was unfavorable to himself, withdrew his troops and fled, avoiding major losses.

古文：还假淮节。
现代文：回师后明帝授郭淮持符节。
English: After returning to his teacher, Emperor Ming bestowed Guo Huai with the Fu Festival.

古文：八年，陇西、南安、金城、西平诸羌饿何、烧戈、伐同、蛾遮塞等相结叛乱，攻围城邑，南招蜀兵，凉州名胡治无戴复叛应之。
现代文：正始八年，陇西、南安、金城、西平诸羌饿何、烧戈、伐同、蛾遮塞等联合起来反叛，包围城镇，南招蜀兵协助。凉州名胡治无戴也举兵反叛。
English: In the first eight years, Shaanxi Province, Nan'an Province, Jincheng Province, and Xiping Province united to rebel, besieged towns, and enlisted Shu soldiers from the south to assist them. Liangzhou, also known as Huji Mudei, also raised an army to rebel.

古文：讨蜀护军夏侯霸督诸军屯为翅。
现代文：讨蜀护军夏侯霸率诸军屯兵于为翅。
English: Xia Houba, the leader of the Shu Protectorate, led the troops in the battle.

古文：淮军始到狄道，议者佥谓宜先讨定枹罕，内平恶羌，外折贼谋。
现代文：郭淮刚到狄道，很多人认为应当首先讨平木包罕，这样对内则平定恶羌，对外则可以挫败西蜀的计谋。
English: As soon as Guo Huai arrived in Dido, many people thought that the first thing to do was to settle the issue of the wooden package, so that the internal situation would be calmed down, and the external situation would be able to defeat the West Shu's scheme.

古文：淮策维必来攻霸，遂入沨中，转南迎霸。
现代文：郭淮估计姜维一定会进攻夏侯霸，于是进入氵风中，转兵向南，接迎夏侯霸。
English: Guo Huai estimated that Jiang Wei would certainly attack Xia Houba, so he went into the wind and turned south to meet Xia Houba.

古文：维果攻为翅，会淮军適至，维遁退。
现代文：姜维果然进攻为翅，郭淮军队正好抵达，姜维逃去。
English: Jiang Wei did attack, Guo Huai's army arrived just in time, and Jiang Wei fled.

古文：进讨叛羌，斩饿何、烧戈，降服者万馀落。
现代文：进而郭淮讨伐诸叛羌，杀死饿何、烧戈，投降的人有几万。
English: In addition, Guo Huai fought against all the traitors, killed Hung Ho and burned Go, and tens of thousands of people surrendered.

古文：九年，遮塞等屯河关、白土故城，据河拒军。
现代文：正始九年，遮塞等屯兵河关、白土故城，依据河险抵抗。
English: At the beginning of the ninth year, the blockades and other troops of Heguan and Baotou Old Town, according to the river risk resistance.

古文：淮见形上流，密於下渡兵据白土城，击，大破之。
现代文：郭淮假装从上流出兵，却秘密派兵从下流渡河，占据白土城，发动进攻，大破敌兵。
English: Guo Huai pretended that soldiers were flowing out from the upper stream, but secretly sent soldiers to cross the river from the lower stream, occupied the White Earth City, launched an attack, and defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：治无戴围武威，家属留在西海。
现代文：治无戴包围武威，家属留在西海。
English: Wuwei was besieged, and his family remained in the West Sea.

古文：淮进军趋西海，欲掩取其累重，会无戴折还，与战於龙夷之北，破走之。
现代文：郭淮率军逼近西海，想偷袭军队家属，正好治无戴又率兵折回，两军在龙夷之北相遇，治无戴失败后逃走。
English: Guo Huai and his army approached the West Sea and wanted to raid the families of the army, but Zhiwu Dai and his soldiers turned back. The two armies met in the north of Longyi. Zhiwu Dai failed and fled.

古文：令居恶虏在石头山之西，当大道止，断绝王使。
现代文：令居土匪在石头山西边活动猖獗，常断截道路，追杀王使。
English: Lingering bandits are rampant in the west side of Stone Mountain, often cutting off roads and chasing Wang.

古文：淮还过讨，大破之。
现代文：郭淮追击，获得胜利。
English: Guo Huai chased and won.

古文：姜维出石营，从强川，乃西迎治无戴，留阴平太守廖化於成重山筑城，敛破羌保质。
现代文：姜维出兵石营，向强川，西迎治无戴。留下阴平太守廖化在成重山修筑城堡，收取诸羌散兵做为人质。
English: Jiang Wei set out from the military camp and marched to Qiangchuan, west of Yingji. He left Yinping's governor Liao Hua to build a castle on Chengzhuang Mountain and take Zhuye's scattered soldiers as hostages.

古文：淮欲分兵取之。
现代文：郭淮想兵分两路。
English: Guo Huai wanted to split the soldiers into two groups.

古文：诸将以维众西接强胡，化以据险，分军两持，兵势转弱，进不制维，退不拔化，非计也，不如合而俱西，及胡、蜀未接，绝其内外，此伐交之兵也。
现代文：诸位将领认为，姜维向西连接强大的胡兵，廖化则守据天险，如果兵分两路，定会削弱兵力，前进无法牵制姜维，后退又攻不下廖化所守之城，不如集中兵力一起向西开进，趁胡、蜀两兵未能接上联系之前，各个击破，这是上策。
English: The generals believed that Jiang Wei was heading west to link up with the powerful Hu soldiers, while Liao Hua was guarding against the natural danger. If the soldiers were divided into two groups, it would definitely weaken the troops. They would not be able to contain Jiang Wei if they advanced, and they would not be able to capture the city guarded by Liao Hua if they retreated. It would be better to concentrate the troops and head west together. It was the best strategy to take advantage of the fact that the two soldiers from Hu and Shu could not connect, and to break through each of them.

古文：淮曰： 今往取化，出贼不意，维必狼顾。
现代文：郭淮说： 今派兵攻打廖化，可以出其不意，姜维肯定要有所顾忌。
English: Guo Huai said, "Sending troops to attack Liaohua now may take people by surprise. Jiang Wei should definitely be cautious.

古文：比维自致，足以定化，且使维疲於奔命。
现代文：等姜维赶回来，廖化已被平定，而且可以使姜维疲于奔命。
English: By the time Jiang Wei returned, Liaohua had been pacified, and Jiang Wei could be exhausted from running for his life.

古文：兵不远西，而胡交自离，此一举而两全之策也。 
现代文：姜维的军队不向西接应胡人，胡人自然会撤离。这才是一举两全的上策。 
English: If Jiang Wei's army does not move westward to meet the Hu people, the Hu people will naturally withdraw. This is the best of both worlds.

古文：乃别遣夏侯霸等追维於沓中，淮自率诸军就攻化等。
现代文：于是派夏侯霸等在沓中等地追剿姜维，自己则率大军强攻廖化。
English: As a result, he sent Xia Houba and others to pursue Jiang Wei, while he himself led a large army to attack Liaohua.

古文：维果驰还救化，皆如淮计。
现代文：姜维果然率师来营救廖化，正如郭淮所预料的那样。
English: Jiang Wei did indeed lead his division to rescue Liaohua, just as Guo Huai had expected.

古文：进封都乡侯。
现代文：郭淮因功被封为都乡侯。
English: Yes, I was promoted to the post of capital township mayor.

古文：嘉平元年，迁征西将军，都督雍、凉诸军事。
现代文：嘉平元年，郭淮升征西将军，都督雍州凉州诸军事。
English: In the first year of Jiaping, Guo Huai was promoted to the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Yongzhou and the military of Liangzhou.

古文：是岁，与雍州刺史陈泰协策，降蜀牙门将句安等於翅上。
现代文：这年，与雍州刺史陈泰合计，在为翅迫使蜀牙门将句安等投降。
English: This year, with the help of the Yongzhou assassin Chen Tai, he forced Shuya goalkeeper Guan An to surrender.

古文：二年，诏曰： 昔汉川之役，几至倾覆。
现代文：嘉平二年，皇帝下诏： 以前在汉川战役中，全军差点覆没。
English: In the second year of Jiaping, the emperor issued an edict: Previously, in the Battle of Hanchuan, the entire army was almost annihilated.

古文：淮临危济难，功书王府。
现代文：郭淮临危不惧，军功记在史策。
English: Guo Huai is not afraid of danger, and his military exploits are recorded in history.

古文：在关右三十馀年，外征寇虏，内绥民夷。
现代文：在关右三十多年，对外征讨敌寇，对内安抚臣民。
English: During his more than thirty years in Kansai, he fought foreign invaders and pacified his subjects at home.

古文：比岁以来，摧破廖化，禽虏句安，功绩显著，朕甚嘉之。今以淮为车骑将军、仪同三司，持节、都督如故。 
现代文：近年来，摧折廖化，生擒句安，功绩卓著，我特别嘉赏他，任郭淮为车骑将军，仪同三司，持节、都督一如既往。 
English: In recent years, Guo Huai's achievements have been outstanding. I especially commend him for appointing Guo Huai as the General of Chariot and Cavalry, the General of Ceremonies, the General of Festivals, and the General of the Capital as always.

古文：进封阳曲侯，邑凡二千七百八十户，分三百户，封一子亭侯。
现代文：晋封郭淮为阳曲侯，食邑二千七百八十户，又分出三百户给他的一个儿子，封为亭侯。
English: Guo Huai of the Jin Dynasty was given the title of Yang Qu Hou, and there were 2,780 households in the food village. Another 300 households were given to one of his sons, who was given the title of Ting Hou.

古文：正元二年薨，追赠大将军，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：正元二年，郭淮去世，朝廷追赠他为大将军，谥号贞侯。
English: In the second year of the first century, Guo Huai died, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of grand general.

古文：子统嗣。
现代文：儿子郭统继承爵位。
English: Guo's son Guo Tong inherited the title.

古文：统官至荆州刺史，薨。
现代文：郭统官至荆州刺史。
English: Guo Tongguan to Jingzhou stabbing history.

古文：子正嗣。
现代文：死后，郭统的儿子郭正继承爵位。
English: His son Cai Zheng inherited the title.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，以淮著勋前朝，改封汾阳子。
现代文：咸熙中，设五等爵位，因为郭淮功著前朝，故改封其为汾阳子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, Guo Huai Gong was given the fifth-class title of nobility. Because Guo Huai Gong wrote in the previous dynasty, he was given the title of the Yangzi of Xianxi.

古文：评曰：满宠立志刚毅，勇而有谋。
现代文：评：满宠立志刚毅，有勇有谋。
English: Comment: He is full of determination, courageous and resourceful.

古文：田豫居身清白，规略明练。
现代文：田豫居身清白，规略明练。
English: Tian Yu lived a clean life and was well disciplined.

古文：牵招秉义壮烈，威绩显著。
现代文：牵招秉义壮烈，功绩卓著。
English: He is strong in upholding justice, and his achievements are outstanding.

古文：郭淮方策精详，垂问秦、雍。
现代文：郭淮计谋精确缜密，名声传播秦、雍。
English: Guo Huai's strategy was precise and meticulous, and his fame spread to Qin and Yong.

古文：而豫位止小州，招终於郡守，未尽其用也。
现代文：田豫的官位只是小州的官吏，牵招只作到郡守，实在是大材小用呵！
English: Tian Yu's official rank is only that of a small state official, and he was only promoted to county governor, so it's really no big deal!

