古文：武王有疾，周公作《金縢》。
现代文：武王身体有恙，周公作《金縢》，请代武王死。
English: King Wu was ill, and Zhou Gong, the author of "The Golden Calf," died in King Wu's place.

古文：既克商二年，王有疾，弗豫。
现代文：周灭商后的第二年，武王重病，身体不适。
English: In the second year after Zhou killed the merchants, King Wu fell seriously ill.

古文：二公曰： 我其为王穆卜。 
现代文：太公、召公说： 我们为王恭敬地卜问吉凶吧！ 
English: The great-grandfather, summoning the king, said: Let us respectfully pray for the king.

古文：周公曰： 未可以戚我先王？ 
现代文：周公说： 不可以向我们先王祷告吗？ 
English: Zhou Gong said, "Couldn't you pray to our forefather?"

古文：公乃自以为功，为三坛同墠。
现代文：周公就把自身作为抵押，清除一块土地，在祭场上筑起三座祭坛。
English: Zhou Gong used himself as collateral, cleared a piece of land and built three altars on the festival site.

古文：为坛于南方，北面，周公立焉。
现代文：又在三坛的南方筑起一座台子。
English: A platform was also built to the south of the three altars.

古文：植璧秉珪，乃告太王、王季、文王。
现代文：周公面向北方站在台上，手持玉珪，然后向太王、王季、文王祷告。
English: Zhou Gong stood on the stage facing the north, holding a jade scepter, and then prayed to the king, Wang Ji, and King Wen.

古文：史乃册，祝曰： 惟尔元孙某，遘厉虐疾。
现代文：史官将周公祷告的词写在了典册上，祝词说： 你们的长孙姬发，得了很严重的病。
English: The historian wrote the words of Zhou Gonglu's prayer in the handbook, saying: Your eldest grandson, Ji Fa, has a very serious illness.

古文：若尔三王是有丕子之责于天，以旦代某之身。
现代文：假若你们三位先王这时在天上有助祭的职责，就让我姬旦代替他去吧！
English: If at this time your three forefathers are in heaven performing their priestly duties, then let me, Kidan, go in his place.

古文：予仁若考能，多材多艺，能事鬼神。
现代文：我柔顺又乖巧伶俐，多才多艺，善于奉事鬼神。
English: I am pliable and well-behaved, versatile, and good at serving ghosts and gods.

古文：乃元孙不若旦多材多艺，不能事鬼神。
现代文：你们的长孙不如我多材多艺，也不能奉事鬼神。
English: Your eldest grandson is not as talented as I am, nor can he serve the gods.

古文：乃命于帝庭，敷佑四方，用能定尔子孙于下地。四方之民罔不祗畏。
现代文：而且他在天帝那里接受了任命，正在统治四方，因此能够在人间安定你们的子孙，天下的老百姓也无不敬畏他。唉！
English: Moreover, he received an appointment from the Heavenly Emperor and is ruling the four directions, so he is able to stabilize your children and grandchildren on earth, and the common people all over the world fear him. Alas!

古文：呜呼！无坠天之降宝命，我先王亦永有依归。
现代文：不要丧失上天降给的宝贵使命，我们的先王也就永远有所归依。
English: Do not lose the precious mission given to you by Heaven, and our forefather will always be converted.

古文：今我即命于元龟，尔之许我，我其以璧与珪归俟尔命；尔不许我，我乃屏璧与珪。 
现代文：现在我就要通过龟卜来接受你们的命令了，如果你们答应，我就拿着璧和珪死去，等待你们的命令；你们不答应，我就收起璧和珪，不敢再请了。 
English: Now I'm going to accept your orders through the turtle. If you agree, I'll die with the spade and shovel, waiting for your orders. If you don't agree, I'll put away the spade and shovel, and I won't dare to ask for more.

古文：乃卜三龟，一习吉。
现代文：于是卜问三龟，占卜结果都重复出现吉兆。
English: As a result, he asked the three turtles for divination, and the results of divination all repeated good omens.

古文：启籥见书，乃并是吉。
现代文：周公说： 根据兆形，王的病不会有什么危险。
English: Zhou Gong said: According to the omens, Wang's illness will not be dangerous.

古文：公曰： 体！王其罔害。予小子新命于三王，惟永终是图；兹攸俟，能念予一人。 
现代文：我新向三位先王祷告，只图国运长远；现在期待的，是先王能够俯念我的诚心。 
English: My new prayer to the three emperors is only for the long-term prosperity of the country; what I expect now is that the emperors can remember my sincerity.

古文：公归，乃纳册于金滕之匮中。
现代文：周公回去，把册书放进金属束着的匣子中。
English: Zhou Gong went back and put the book into the metal-bound box.

古文：王翼日乃瘳。
现代文：第二天，周武王的病就好了。
English: The next day, King Zhou Wu's illness was cured.

古文：武王既丧，管叔及其群弟乃流言于国，曰： 公将不利于孺子。 
现代文：武王死后，管叔和他的几个弟弟就在国内散布谣言。说： 周公将会对成王不利。 
English: After the death of King Wu, Uncle Guan and his several younger brothers spread rumors in the country, saying: Zhou Gong will be unfavorable to Cheng Wang.

古文：周公乃告二公曰： 我之弗辟，我无以告我先王。 
现代文：周公就告诉太公、石公说： 我不摄政，我将无辞告我先王。 
English: Zhou Gong then told Tai Gong and Shi Gong: "If I do not become regent, I will not resign as the former king."

古文：周公居东二年，则罪人斯得。
现代文：周公留在东方两年，罪人就捕获了。
English: Zhou Gong stayed in the East for two years, and the criminals were caught.

古文：于后，公乃为诗以贻王，名之曰《鸱鴞》。
现代文：后来，周公写了一首诗送给成王，叫它为《鸱鸮》。
English: Later, Zhou Gong wrote a poem and gave it to Cheng Wang, calling it "Cherry Blossom."

古文：王亦未敢诮公。
现代文：结果，成王只是不敢责备周公。
English: As a result, Cheng Wang just did not dare to blame Zhou Gong.

古文：秋，大熟，未获，天大雷电以风，禾尽偃，大木斯拔，邦人大恐。
现代文：秋天，百谷成熟，还没有收获，天空出现雷电与大风。庄稼都倒伏了，大树都被拔起，国人非常恐慌。
English: In autumn, when the grain is ripe but the harvest is yet to be reaped, thunder and lightning and high winds appear in the sky. Crops are toppled, large trees are uprooted, and the Chinese people are very panicked.

古文：王与大夫尽弁以启金滕之书，乃得周公所自以为功代武王之说。
现代文：周成王和大夫们都戴上礼帽，打开金属束着的匣子，于是得到了周公以自身为质、请代武王的祝辞。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang and the doctors all put on their ceremonial hats and opened the metal-bound box, whereupon they received Zhou Gong's congratulatory message on behalf of King Wu, using himself as a guarantor.

古文：二公及王乃问诸史与百执事。
现代文：太公、召公和成王就询问众史官以及许多办事官员。
English: Taigong, Zhaogong and Chengwang questioned all the historians and many officials.

古文：对曰： 信。
现代文：他们回答说： 确实的。唉！
English: Zhai Zheng replied, "Keep your word."

古文：噫！公命我勿敢言。 
现代文：周公告诫我们不能说出来。 
English: Zhou announced that we must not speak out.

古文：王执书以泣，曰： 其勿穆卜！
现代文：成王拿着册书哭泣，说： 不要敬卜了！
English: Cheng Wang held the book and wept, saying, "Don't worship!

古文：昔公勤劳王家，惟予冲人弗及知。
现代文：过去，周公勤劳王室，我这年轻人来不及了解。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong diligently worked for the royal family, which I, a young man, was too late to understand.

古文：今天动威以彰周公之德，惟朕小子其新逆，我国家礼亦宜之。 
现代文：现在上天动怒来表彰周公的功德，我小子要亲自去迎接，我们国家的礼制也应该这样。 
English: Now that the heavens are angry to commend Zhou Gong's merits, my son wants to meet him in person, and our country's etiquette should be the same.

古文：王出郊，天乃雨，反风，禾则尽起。
现代文：成王走出郊外，天就下着雨，风向也反转了，倒伏的庄稼又全部伸起来。
English: Cheng Wang went out of the suburbs, the sky rained, the wind direction also reversed, and the fallen crops all stood up again.

古文：二公命邦人凡大木所偃，尽起而筑之。岁则大熟。
现代文：太公、召公命令国人。凡大树所压的庄稼，要全部扶起来，又培好根，这一年的年成却是个大丰收。
English: Taigong (Grand Duke) and Zhao Gong (Court Marshal) ordered the Chinese people to pull up all the crops that were weighed down by the big trees, and to grow good roots. This year's harvest was a bumper one.

