古文：季氏将伐颛臾，冉有、季路见于孔子，曰： 季氏将有事于颛臾。 
现代文：季氏将要讨伐颛臾。冉有、子路去拜见孔子说： 季氏准备攻打颛臾了。 
English: Ran Yu Zi Lu went to see Confucius and said, "The Ji clan is preparing to attack the Yao clan.

古文：孔子曰： 求，无乃尔是过与？
现代文：孔子说： 冉有，这难道不是你的过错吗？
English: Confucius said: Ran, isn't this your fault?

古文：夫颛臾，昔者先王以为东蒙主，且在邦域之中矣，是社稷之臣也。何以伐为？ 
现代文：颛臾从前是周天子让它主持东蒙的祭祀的，而且已经在鲁国的疆域之内，是国家的臣属啊，为什么要讨伐它呢？ 
English: In the past, Zhou Tianzi had it preside over the Eastern Mongolian sacrificial rites, and it was already within the territory of Lu, it was a state subject, why fight it?

古文：冉有曰： 夫子欲之，吾二臣者皆不欲也。 
现代文：冉有说： 季孙大夫想去攻打，我们两个人都不愿意。 
English: Ran You said, "Dr. Ji Sun wanted to attack, but neither of us wanted to.

古文：孔子曰： 求，周任有言曰： 陈力就列，不能者止。 
现代文：孔子说： 冉有，周任有句话说： 尽自己的力量去负担你的职务，实在做不好就辞职。 
English: Confucius said: Ran, Zhou Ren has a saying: Do your best to shoulder your duties, if you really can't do it, resign.

古文：危而不持，颠而不扶，则将焉用彼相矣？
现代文：有了危险不去扶助，跌倒了不去搀扶，那还用辅助的人干什么呢？
English: If you don't help someone who is in danger, or if you don't help someone who has fallen down, then what is the use of an assistant?

古文：且尔言过矣，虎兕出于柙，龟玉毁于椟中，是谁之过与？ 
现代文：而且你说的话错了。老虎、犀牛从笼子里跑出来，龟甲、玉器在匣子里毁坏了，这是谁的过错呢？ 
English: And what you said is wrong. The tiger and rhinoceros ran out of the cage, and the tortoise shell and jade ware were destroyed in the box. Whose fault is this?

古文：冉有曰： 今夫颛臾固而近于费，今不取，后世必为子孙忧。 
现代文：冉有说： 现在颛臾城墙坚固，而且离费邑很近。现在不把它夺取过来，将来一定会成为子孙的忧患。 
English: Ran You said: Now that the city walls are strong and Fei Yue is very close, if we don't take it over now, it will definitely be a problem for our descendants in the future.

古文：孔子曰： 求，君子疾夫舍曰欲之而必为之辞。
现代文：孔子说： 冉有！君子痛恨那些不说自己想那样做却一定要另找借口的人。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman hates those who do not say that they want to do that, but must find another excuse.

古文：丘也闻，有国有家者，不患寡而患不均，不患贫而患不安。
现代文：我听说，对于诸侯和大夫，不怕贫穷而怕财富不均；不怕人口少而怕不安定。
English: I have heard that for princes and doctors, they are not afraid of poverty, but of wealth inequality; they are not afraid of a small population, but of instability.

古文：盖均无贫，和无寡，安无倾。
现代文：因为财富均衡就没有贫穷，和睦团结就不觉得人口少，境内安定就不会有倾覆的危险。
English: Because of the balance of wealth, there will be no poverty, harmony and solidarity will not feel that the population is small, and domestic stability will not be in danger of overturning.

古文：夫如是，故远人不服则修文德以来之，既来之，则安之。
现代文：像这样做，远方的人还不归服，那就再修仁义礼乐的政教来招致他们。
English: In this way, if people in faraway places still refuse to submit, then we should invite them by cultivating the politics and religion of benevolence, righteousness and propriety.

古文：今由与求也相夫子，远人不服而不能来也，邦分崩离析而不能守也，而谋动干戈于邦内。
现代文：他们来归服了，就让他们安心生活。现在，仲由和冉有你们辅佐季孙，远方的人不归服却又不能招致他们；国家分崩离析却不能保全守住；反而谋划在国内动用武力。
English: They came to surrender, so let them live in peace. Now, Zhongyuan and Ran are supported by you and your descendants. People in far away countries do not surrender, but they cannot invite them; countries are falling apart, but they cannot be preserved; instead, they are planning to use force in the country.

古文：吾恐季孙之忧不在颛臾，而在萧墙之内也。 
现代文：我恐怕季孙的忧患不在颛臾，而在他自己的宫墙之内呢！ 
English: I'm afraid Kishon's sorrows are not in the cocoon, but within his own palace walls!

古文：孔子曰： 天下有道，则礼乐征伐自天子出；天下无道，则礼乐征伐自诸侯出。
现代文：孔子说： 世道清明，那么制作礼乐和发令征伐的权力都出自天子。世道混乱，那么制作礼乐和发令征伐的权力都出自诸侯。
English: Confucius said: If the world is clear, then the power to make music and to command conquest comes from the Son of Heaven. If the world is chaotic, then the power to make music and to command conquest comes from the princes.

古文：自诸侯出，盖十世希不失矣；自大夫出，五世希不失矣；陪臣执国命，三世希不失矣。
现代文：由诸侯作主决定，大概经过十代很少有不垮台的、由大夫决定，经过五代很少有不垮台的；由陪臣执掌国家政权，经过三代很少有不垮台的。
English: It is decided by the lords, and after about ten generations, there are very few that do not collapse; it is decided by the doctors, and after five generations, there are very few that do not collapse; it is decided by the vassals, and after three generations, there are very few that do not collapse.

古文：天下有道，则政不在大夫；天下有道，则庶人不议。 
现代文：天下有道，国家政权就不会落在大夫手中。天下有道，老百姓也就不会议论国家政治了。 
English: If there is virtue in the world, the state power will not fall into the hands of doctors. If there is virtue in the world, the common people will not discuss national politics.

古文：孔子曰： 禄之去公室五世矣，政逮于大夫四世矣，故夫三桓之子孙微矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲁国王室失去国家政权已经有五代了，政权落在大夫之手已经四代了，所以鲁桓公的三家子孙都衰微了。 
English: Confucius said: It has been five generations since the Lu royal family lost state power, and four generations since the power fell into the hands of doctors. Therefore, the three descendants of Lu Huan have all declined.

古文：孔子曰： 益者三友，损者三友。
现代文：孔子说： 有益的朋友有三种，有害的朋友有三种。
English: Confucius said: There are three kinds of beneficial friends and three kinds of harmful friends.

古文：友直、友谅、友多闻，益矣；友便辟、友善柔、友便佞，损矣。 
现代文：与正直的人交朋友，与诚实的人交朋友，与见多识广的人交朋友，是有益处的。
English: It is good to have friends who are honest, to have friends who are honest, and to have friends who are well-informed.

古文：孔子曰： 益者三乐，损者三乐。
现代文：与走歪门邪道的人交朋友，与谗媚奉迎的人交朋友，与花言巧语的人交朋友，是有害的。 
English: It is harmful to make friends with those who are crooked, with those who flatter, and with those who are smooth talkers.

古文：乐节礼乐、乐道人之善、乐多贤友，益矣；乐骄乐、乐佚游、乐宴乐，损矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 使人受益的有三种爱好，使人受损的也有三种爱好。爱好行事以礼乐为节度，爱好称道别人的优点，爱好多结交有贤德的朋友，都会受益；爱好骄矜傲慢，爱好闲散游荡，爱好沉迷酒食，都会受损。 
English: Confucius said: There are three kinds of hobbies that benefit people, and there are also three kinds of hobbies that harm people. Hobbies to act with etiquette as moderation, hobbies to praise the merits of others, and hobbies to make more virtuous friends will all benefit; hobbies to be proud and arrogant, hobbies to be idle, and hobbies to indulge in drinking and eating will all be damaged.

古文：孔子曰： 侍于君子有三愆：言未及之而言谓之躁，言及之而不言谓之隐，未见颜色而言谓之瞽。 
现代文：孔子说： 侍奉在君子旁边陪他说话，要注意避免犯三种过失：话没有轮到他说却说了，这是急躁；话轮到他说却不说，这叫隐瞒；未曾察言观色就开口，这是瞎子。 
English: Confucius said, "When a servant speaks beside a gentleman, he should be careful not to commit the following three offenses: if he speaks before it is his turn to speak, he is impetuous; if he speaks before it is his turn to speak, he is secretive; if he speaks before he has considered the matter, he is blind."

古文：孔子曰： 君子有三戒：少之时，血气未定，戒之在色；及其壮也，血气方刚，戒之在斗；及其老也，血气既衰，戒之在得。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子有三种戒忌：年少时，血气不定，要戒除女色；等到到壮年了，血气方刚，需要戒除善斗的心理；等到到老年的时候，血气衰弱了，要戒贪。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has three kinds of taboos: when he is young, his blood is unstable, and he must abstain from womanizing; when he is middle-aged, his blood is strong, and he needs to abstain from the mentality of good fighting; when he is old, his blood is weak, and he must abstain from greed.

古文：孔子曰： 君子有三畏：畏天命，畏大人，畏圣人之言。
现代文：孔子说： 君子有三种敬畏：敬畏天命，敬畏王公大人，敬畏圣人的言论。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has three kinds of reverence: reverence for heaven, reverence for princes, and reverence for the sayings of saints.

古文：小人不知天命而不畏也，狎大人，侮圣人之言。 
现代文：小人不知道天命不可违抗，所以不敬畏它，轻视王公大人，侮慢圣人的言论。 
English: The villain does not know that it is impossible to disobey the will of heaven, so he does not fear it, despises princes, and insults the words of saints.

古文：孔子曰： 生而知之者上也，学而知之者次也；困而学之又其次也。困而不学，民斯为下矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 生来就知道的，是上等；经过学习后才知道的，是次等；遇到困惑疑难才去学习的，是又次一等了；遇到困惑疑难仍不去学习的，这种老百姓就是下等的了。 
English: Confucius said, "Those who are born with knowledge are superior; those who learn after learning are inferior; those who learn after encountering difficulties are inferior; and those who do not learn after encountering difficulties are inferior."

古文：孔子曰： 君子有九思：视思明，听思聪，色思温，貌思恭，言思忠，事思敬，疑思问，忿思难，见得思义。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子有九种思考：看的时候要思考看明白了没，听的时要思考听清楚了没，待人接物时，要想想脸色是否温和，样貌是否恭敬，说话时要想想是否忠实，做事时要想想是否严肃认真，有疑难时要想着询问，气愤发怒时要想想可能产生的后患，看见可得的要想想是否合于义。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has nine kinds of thinking: when looking, he should think about whether he has understood; when listening, he should think about whether he has heard clearly; when treating people and objects, he should think about whether his face is gentle, whether his appearance is respectful; when speaking, he should think about whether he is faithful; when doing things, he should think about whether he is serious; when in doubt, he should think about inquiring; when angry, he should think about the possible consequences; and when seeing what is available, he should think about whether it is justified.

古文：孔子曰： 见善如不及，见不善如探汤；吾见其人矣。
现代文：孔子说： 看到善良的行为，就担心达不到，看到不善良的行动，就好像把手伸到开水中一样赶快避开。
English: Confucius said: "If you see a good deed, you will be worried that you will not be able to achieve it. If you see an unkind action, you should avoid it as if you were putting your hand in boiling water."

古文：吾闻其语矣。
现代文：我见到过这样的人，也听到过这样的话。
English: I've seen people like that and heard things like that.

古文：隐居以求其志，行义以达其道；吾闻其语矣，未见其人也。 
现代文：以隐居避世来保全自己的志向，依照义而贯彻自己的主张。我听到过这种话，却没有见到过这样的人。 
English: I have heard of such a man, but I have never seen one, who hid himself from the world in order to preserve his integrity and to do what was right.

古文：齐景公有马千驷，死之日，民无德而称焉；伯夷、叔齐饿于首阳之下，民到于今称之。
现代文：齐景公有四千匹马，他去世的时候，百姓们觉得他没有什么德行可以称颂。伯夷、叔齐饿死在首阳山下，百姓们到现在还在称颂他们。
English: Qi Jing Gong had four thousand horses, and when he died, the people felt that he had no virtue to praise. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi starved to death at the foot of Shouyang Mountain, and the people are still praising them.

古文：其斯之谓与？ 
现代文：说的就是这个意思吧。
English: That's what I mean.

古文：陈亢问于伯鱼曰： 子亦有异闻乎？ 
现代文：陈亢问伯鱼： 你在你父亲那里听到过不同的教诲吗？ 
English: Chen Yao asked Bo Yu: Did you hear different teachings from your father?

古文：对曰： 未也。
现代文：伯鱼回答说： 没有。
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文：尝独立，鲤趋而过庭，曰： 学《诗》乎？ 
现代文：有一次我父亲曾独自站在庭院中，我快步跑过时，父亲说： 学《诗》了吗？ 我回答说： 没有。 
English: Once, my father was standing alone in the courtyard, and as I ran past at a brisk pace, he said, "Have you studied "Poetry" yet?"

古文：对曰： 未也。 
现代文：他说： 不学《诗》就不会应对说话。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文： 不学《诗》，无以言。 鲤退而学《诗》。他日，又独立，鲤趋而过庭，曰： 学《礼》乎？ 
现代文：我便退下来学《诗经》。另一天，父亲又独立院中，我又快步跑过时，父亲问： 学《礼记》了吗？ 
English: The next day, when my father was in the independent school again, and I was running past at a fast pace, my father asked, "Have you studied the Book of Etiquette?"

古文：对曰： 未也。  不学《礼》，无以立。 
现代文：我回答： 没有。 不学《礼记》就无法立足于社会啊！ 
English: I replied, "No. Without studying the "Book of Etiquette," you can't gain a foothold in society!"

古文：鲤退而学《礼》。
现代文：我便退下来学《礼记》。
English: So I retreated to study "The Book of Etiquette."

古文：闻斯二者。 
现代文：只听到过这两次教诲。 
English: I have only heard these two teachings.

古文：陈亢退而喜曰： 问一得三，闻《诗》，闻《礼》，又闻君子之远其子也。 
现代文：陈亢下来高兴地说： 我问一个问题，却得到三个收获，听到了学《诗经》的道理和学《礼记》的道理，还听到了君子对待自己的儿子与别人的孩子相同的事情。 
English: Chen Xuan down happily said: I asked a question, but got three harvests, heard the reason for learning the "Book of Songs" and the reason for learning the "Book of Rites," and also heard the gentleman treat his son the same as other people's children.

古文：邦君之妻，君称之曰夫人，夫人自称曰小童；邦人称之曰君夫人，称诸异邦曰寡小君；异邦人称之亦曰君夫人。
现代文：国君的妻子，国君称她为夫人，夫人自称为小童，国人称她为君夫人；对他国人则称她为寡小君，他国人也称她为君夫人。
English: The wife of the sovereign, the sovereign calls her the wife, the wife calls herself the child, the compatriots call her the wife of the sovereign; the other compatriots call her the little prince, and the other compatriots also call her the wife of the sovereign.

