古文：○高宗六八年春正月戊子朔，帝在建康。丙申，减临安府夏税折输钱。
现代文：绍兴八年春正月初一，高宗在建康。初九，减去临安府夏税折输钱。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of spring in Shaoxing, Gaozong was in Jiankang. On the ninth day of the first month, minus Lin'an's summer tax rebate.

古文：戊戌，张守罢。
现代文：十一日，张守罢职。
English: On the 11th day, Zhang Shou resigned.

古文：辛丑，伪齐知寿州宋超率兵民来归。
现代文：十四日，伪齐寿州知州宋超率军民来归顺朝廷。
English: On the 14th, the pseudo-Qizhou Zhizhou Song Chao led the army and people to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：蔡州提辖白安时杀金将兀鲁，执其守刘永寿来降。
现代文：蔡州提辖白安时杀死金军将领兀鲁，俘虏蔡州守臣刘永寿来投降朝廷。
English: When Caizhou took control of Bai'an, he killed the general of the Golden Army, Jilu, and captured Caizhou's vassal Liu Yongshou to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：诏以方议和好，禁沿海州郡遣人过淮招纳。
现代文：下诏因刚刚与金朝通好和议，禁止沿海州郡派人渡过淮河招纳叛降。
English: The following edict forbade the coastal prefectures from sending people across the Huai River to invite the rebels to surrender, because they had just made peace with the Kim dynasty.

古文：丁未，大阅张俊军。
现代文：二十日，大规模检阅张俊的军队。
English: On the 20th, there was a large-scale inspection of Zhang Jun's army.

古文：戊申，以兵部侍郎胡世将为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：二十一日，任命兵部侍郎胡世将为四川安抚制置使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Hu Shih, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed as the envoy to pacify Sichuan.

古文：二月戊午，刘锜入见。
现代文：二月初二，刘倚朝见高宗。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Liu Jichao met with Gao Zong.

古文：减建康府夏税折输钱，蠲民户逋租、和市科调。
现代文：减去建康府夏税折输钱，免除民户欠租、和买、科调。
English: Subtract Jiankang Prefecture's summer tax loss, and exempt private households from rent arrears, purchase, and science adjustment.

古文：庚申，日中有黑子。
现代文：初四，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：以吕颐浩为江东安抚制置大使兼行宫留守。
现代文：任命吕颐浩为江东安抚制置大使兼行宫留守。
English: Appointed Lv Yinghao as the ambassador of the Jiangdong pacification system and stayed at the palace.

古文：壬戌，岳飞乞增兵，不许。癸亥，帝发建康。
现代文：初六，岳飞请求增加军队，高宗没有同意。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, Yuefei requested to increase the number of troops, but Gaozong did not agree.

古文：丙寅，以胡安国《春秋传》成书，进宝文阁直学士。
现代文：初七，高宗从建康出发。初十，因胡安国撰写成春秋传，升为宝文阁直学士。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Gao Zong started from Jiankang. In the tenth year of junior high school, he was promoted to the direct bachelor of Baoweng because he wrote the Spring and Autumn Annals.

古文：戊寅，帝至临安。
现代文：二十二日，高宗到达临安。
English: On the 22nd, Gaozong arrived in Lin'an.

古文：己卯，以户部尚书章谊为江东安抚制置大使兼行宫留守，吕颐浩为醴泉观使。
现代文：二十三日，任命户部尚书章谊为江东安抚制置大使兼行宫留守，吕颐浩为醛泉观使。
English: On the 23rd, Shang Shuzhangyi of the Household Department was appointed as the ambassador for the pacification of the East River and stayed at the palace, and Lv Yinghao was appointed as the inspector of aldehydes.

古文：甲申，减绍兴府和市绢万匹。
现代文：二十八日，减去绍兴府一万匹和买绢。
English: On the 28th, 10,000 horses from Shaoxing were subtracted from the total.

古文：三月己丑，以知南外宗正事仲儡嗣濮王。
现代文：三月初四，任命知南外宗正事仲儡为嗣攫王。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, Zhenan Gaizong appointed Zhengji Zhongrou as the heir to the throne.

古文：庚寅，以礼部尚书刘大中参知政事，兵部尚书王庶为枢密副使。
现代文：初五，任命礼部尚书刘大中为参知政事，兵部尚书王庶为枢密副使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liu Datong of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was appointed to be a member of the Council of State, and Wang Rong of the Ministry of Military Affairs was appointed to be a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：壬辰，复以秦桧为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：初七，又任命秦桧为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he also appointed Qin Zang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shang Shumen's subordinate Ping Zhangji and Privy Envoy.

古文：甲午，陈与义罢。
现代文：初九，陈与义罢职。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Chen Youyi resigned.

古文：戊戌，增夔州路路分都监一员，修治关隘，练义兵。
现代文：十三日，增设夔州路分都监一名，主管修治关隘，训练义兵。
English: On the 13th, an additional Bozhou Road Sub-district Supervisor was appointed to be in charge of repairing and controlling the pass and training the volunteers.

古文：己亥，蠲农器及牛税。
现代文：十四日，免除农器税及牛税。
English: On the 14th, agricultural equipment tax and cattle tax were exempted.

古文：以李天祚为静海军节度使、交趾郡王。
现代文：任命李天柞为静海军节度使、交趾郡王。
English: He appointed Li Tianyao as the naval envoy of Jing and the king of Jiaozi County.

古文：壬寅，定以故相韩忠彦配享徽宗庙廷。
现代文：十七日，确定用已故宰相韩忠彦配享徽宗庙庭。
English: On the 17th, it was decided that the late Prime Minister Han Tadahiko would be given the imperial family's temple garden.

古文：丁未，蠲所过州县民积欠税赋。
现代文：二十二日，免除高宗所经过州县百姓积年拖欠税赋。
English: On the 22nd, the Gaozong Institute exempted the people of Zhoushan County who have been delinquent in paying taxes for years.

古文：戊申，蠲江西、湖南诸州月椿钱各万缗。
现代文：二十三日，免除江西、湖南各州一万络月椿钱。
English: On the 23rd, the provinces of Jiangxi and Hunan were exempted from the 10,000 yuan monthly fee.

古文：己酉，命考核川、陕宣抚司便宜所授官，冒滥尤甚者悉与裁减。
现代文：二十四日，命令考核川、陕宣抚司自行任命授除的官员，假冒滥行特别严重的全部裁减。
English: On the 24th, it ordered the assessment of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Department to appoint and dismiss officials on their own, and to reduce all officials who were particularly serious in fraud and abuse.

古文：夏四月庚申，初置户部和籴场于临安。
现代文：夏四月初五，在临安初次设置户部和来场。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of summer, the home club and visiting team were set up for the first time in Lin'an.

古文：壬戌，遣王庶巡视江、淮边防。
现代文：初七，派遣王庶巡行视察江、淮地区边境防务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Shiao sent a patrol to inspect the border defense in the Jiang and Huai regions.

古文：丁丑，复置六路发运司。
现代文：二十二日，重新设置六路发运司。
English: On the 22nd, the Sixth Route Shipping Division was re-established.

古文：癸未，诏三衙管军轮宿禁中。
现代文：二十八日，下诏三衙管军轮流在皇宫守卫。
English: On the 28th day of the following month, the troops of the Three Regiments of Yeoman Warders took turns to guard the palace.

古文：五月庚戌，诏镇江府募横江军千人。
现代文：五月庚戊日，下诏镇江府招募一千名横江军。
English: In May, Zhenjiang Province issued an order to recruit 1,000 soldiers from the Hengjiang Army.

古文：窜内侍罗亶于海岛。
现代文：贬窜内侍罗到海南。
English: The disgraced chambermaid Luo went to Hainan.

古文：庚子，禁贫民不举子，其不能育者给钱养之。
现代文：十六日，禁止贫民不养育子女，其中无力抚养的，官府供给钱粮抚养。
English: On the 16th, it was forbidden for the poor not to raise their children, and if they were unable to do so, the government would provide them with money and grain.

古文：壬寅，贬刘子羽为单州团练副使、漳州安置。
现代文：十八日，刘子羽贬为单州团练副使，潭州安置。
English: On the 18th, Liu Zi Yu was demoted to the vice-envoy of single-state group training and resettled in Tanzhou.

古文：丁未，金国使乌陵思谋、石庆充与王伦等偕来。
现代文：二十三日，金国使臣乌陵思谋、石庆充与王伦等人一起来到朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, the envoys of the State of Jin, Uling Szumo, Shi Qingchong, Wang Lun and others came to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，以资政殿学士叶梦得为江东安抚制置大使。
现代文：二十四日，任命资政殿学士叶梦得为江东安抚制置大使。
English: On the 24th, Ye Mengde, a Scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed as the Ambassador for the Peaceful Settlement of the Korean Peninsula.

古文：己酉，王庶至淮南，檄张宗颜将兵七千屯庐州，巨师古三千屯太平州，分韩世忠军屯泗州及天长县。
现代文：二十五日，王庶到达淮南，命令张宗颜率兵七千驻屯庐州，巨师古率三千军队屯驻太平州，分出韩世忠的部分军队屯驻泅州和天长县。
English: On the 25th, Wang Shizhu arrived in Huainan, and ordered Zhang Zongyan to lead 7,000 soldiers to be stationed in Bozhou, the great master Gu to lead 3,000 troops to be stationed in Taiping, and some of Han Shizhong's troops to be stationed in Bozhou and Tianchang County.

古文：六月壬戌，赐衍圣公孔玠衢州田五顷，奉先圣祠事。
现代文：六月初八，赐给衍圣公孔瞥州田地五顷，用来祭祀先圣。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, five hectares of farmland in Kongbetsu were given to the descendants of the saint, to be used for the worship of the saint.

古文：癸亥，赵鼎上《重修哲宗实录》。
现代文：初九，赵鼎进呈重修哲宗实录。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Zhao Dingjin presented a real record of the re-education of the philosopher.

古文：壬申，赐礼部进士黄公度以下三百九十五人及第、出身。
现代文：十八日，赐给礼部进士黄公度以下三百九十五人及第、出身。
English: On the 18th, it was given to three hundred and ninety-five people and their ranks and origins from the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：王庶自淮南还入见。
现代文：王庶从淮南回到朝廷朝见高宗。
English: Wang Shiao returned from Huainan to the imperial court to see Gao Zong.

古文：乙亥，以中护军统制张宗颜知庐州，命刘锜率兵移屯镇江府。
现代文：二十一日，任命中护军统制张宗颜为庐州知州；命令刘倚率兵移屯镇江府。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Zongyan, the commander-in-chief of the Central Protective Army, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou Chizhou; Liu Yi was ordered to lead the troops to relocate to Zhenjiang.

古文：丁丑，乌陵思谋、石庆充入见。
现代文：二十三日，乌陵思谋、石庆充朝见高宗。
English: On the 23rd, Ulin Sipo and Shi Qingchong went to see Gao Zong.

古文：秋七月乙酉朔，复命王伦及蓝公佐奉迎梓宫。
现代文：秋七月初一，又命令王伦和蓝公佐奉迎徽宗梓宫。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, he also ordered Wang Lun and Lan Guanzhao to go to the Zongzi Palace.

古文：录司马光曾孙伋补承务郎。
现代文：录用司马光曾孙司马吸，补官为承务郎。
English: The great-grandson of Sima Guang, Sima Su, was hired as an assistant.

古文：辛亥，彗出东方。
现代文：二十七日，彗星出现在东方。
English: On the 27th, the comet appeared in the east.

古文：八月戊午，诏： 日者遣使报聘邻国，期还梓宫。
现代文：八月初五，下诏： 近日派遣使臣出使金国，希望徽宗的梓宫能够回国。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the following edict was issued: Envoys have recently been dispatched to the State of Kim, and it is hoped that the Empress Dowager of the Huizong Dynasty can return to the country.

古文：尚虑边臣未谕，遂驰戎备，以疑众心。
现代文：现在还担心边臣没能理解朝廷的用意，于是松弛军事防备，使众心不安。
English: Now they are also worried that the border guards failed to understand the intentions of the imperial court, so they relaxed their military preparedness, making everyone uneasy.

古文：其各严饬属城，明告部曲，临事必戒，无忘捍御。 
现代文：再次命令边臣严格治理所管辖的城市，明确告诉所属军队，遇到事情必须警惕，不要忘记抵御侵略。 
English: He once again ordered the frontiersmen to strictly govern the cities under their jurisdiction, and clearly told the affiliated troops that they must be vigilant in the event of an incident, and not to forget to resist aggression.

古文：甲子，蠲江东路月椿钱万三千缗有奇。
现代文：十一日，免除江东路一万三千多络月椿钱。二十四日，彗星消失。
English: On the 11th day, more than 13,000 rupees were exempted from Jiangdong Road. On the 24th day, the comet disappeared.

古文：丁丑，彗灭。遣监察御史李寀宣谕江西，措置盗贼。
现代文：派遣监察御史李朋到江西传达解释皇帝命令，想办法镇压盗贼。
English: Li Peng, the inspector-general, was sent to Jiangxi to convey the explanation of the emperor's order and to find a way to suppress the thieves.

古文：冬十月丁巳，刘大中罢。
现代文：冬十月初四，刘大中罢职。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Liu Da Zhong resigned.

古文：甲戌，赵鼎罢。
现代文：二十一日，赵鼎罢职。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Ding resigned.

古文：乙亥，日中有黑子。
现代文：二十二日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 22nd, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丁丑，金国使张通古、萧哲与王伦皆来。
现代文：二十四日，金国使臣张通古、萧哲与王伦一起来到宋境。
English: On the 24th, Jin envoys Zhang Tonggu and Xiao Zhe came to Song with Wang Lun.

古文：韩世忠乞奏事行在，不许。
现代文：韩世忠请求到行在奏事，高宗不同意。
English: Han Shizhong requested to go to the court to file a case, but Gao Zong did not agree.

古文：戊寅，枢密副使王庶乞免签书和议文字，累疏求去，不许。
现代文：二十五日，枢密副使王庶请求免除签书和议文字职务，多次上疏请求离职，高宗没有批准。
English: On the 25th, the vice-minister of the privy council, Wang Zhe, requested to be exempted from the duties of signing documents and discussing texts, and repeatedly requested to leave the post, but Gao Zong did not approve.

古文：十一月甲申，以翰林学士承旨孙近参知政事。
现代文：十一月初二，任命翰林学士承旨孙近为参知政事。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Suncheng was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：丙戌，遣大理寺丞薛倞、朱斐诣广南路决滞狱。
现代文：初四，派遣大理寺承薛惊、朱斐到广南路处理积滞下来的案件。
English: On the fourth day of the first semester, Cheng Xuejun and Zhu Fei from Dali Temple were sent to Guangnan Road to deal with the backlog of cases.

古文：戊戌，王伦入见。
现代文：十六日，王伦朝见高宗。
English: On the 16th, Wang Lun met with Gao Zong.

古文：己亥，复以伦为国信计议使，中书舍人苏符副之，符辞以疾。
现代文：十七日，重新任命王伦为国信计议使，中书舍人苏符为副使，苏符因病推辞。
English: On the 17th, Wang Lun was re-appointed as the Guoxin and Strategic Envoy, and the Chinese envoy Su Fu was appointed as the deputy envoy. Su Fu resigned due to illness.

古文：庚子，以孙近兼权同知枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命孙近兼代理同知枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Sun Ch'ien was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：辛丑，诏： 金国遣使入境，欲朕屈己就和，命侍从、台谏详思条奏。 
现代文：十九日，下诏： 金国派遣使臣到我国，想要肤屈膝求和，命令侍从、台谏仔细考虑向朝廷陈述意见。 
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Kim Guo dispatched an envoy to our country and, wanting to bend the knee to sue for peace, ordered his attendants, the Taiwans, to carefully consider presenting their opinions to the imperial court.

古文：从官张焘、晏敦复、魏矼、曾开、李弥逊、尹焞、梁汝嘉、楼炤、苏符、薛徽言、御史方廷实皆言不可。
现代文：侍从官张煮、晏敦复、骊正、曾开、李弥逊、尹淳、梁汝嘉、楼沼、苏符、薛徽言，御史方廷实都说不可屈膝求和。
English: The attendants Zhang Ni, Zou Dunfu, Zou Zheng, Zeng Kai, Li Mison, Yin Jun, Liang Ru Jia, Lou Numa, Su Fu, Xue Hui Yan, and the historian Fang Tingshi all said that they should not bend their knees to seek peace.

古文：甲辰，王庶罢。
现代文：二十二日，王庶罢职。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Shiao resigned.

古文：辛亥，以枢密院编修官胡铨上书直谏，斥和议，除名、昭州编管。
现代文：二十九日，枢密院编修官胡锉因上书直言极谏，痛斥议和，被除掉名籍，昭州编管。
English: On the 29th, the editor-in-chief of the Privy Council, Hu Wei, was removed from his post because of his extremely blunt speech and harsh criticism of the peace.

古文：壬子。改差监广州都盐仓。
现代文：三十日，改差监广州都盐仓。
English: On the 30th, the Correction Supervisor Guangzhou Du Yancang left.

古文：十二月甲寅，以赵鼎为醴泉观使。
现代文：十二月初二，任命赵鼎为醛泉观使。
English: On the 2nd day of December, Zhao Ding was appointed as the inspector of aldehydes.

古文：乙卯，以宗正少卿冯楫为国信计议副使。
现代文：初三，任命宗正少卿冯蝴为国信计议副使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he appointed Zong Zheng Shaoqing Feng Bao as the deputy envoy of Guoxin.

古文：己未，以吏部尚书李光参知政事。
现代文：初七，任命吏部尚书李光为参知政事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Guang, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：戊辰，王伦言金使称 诏谕江南 ，其名不正。
现代文：十六日，王伦说金朝使臣称 诏谕江南 ，其说法不符合正统。
English: On the 16th, Wang Lun said that the envoys of the Kim dynasty called the edict "Jiangnan," which is not in line with the orthodoxy.

古文：秦桧以未见国书，疑为封册。
现代文：秦桧以为没有见到国书，怀疑是封册。
English: Qin Hui thought that he did not see the state book, suspecting that it was a sealed book.

古文：帝曰： 朕嗣守祖宗基业，岂受金人封册。 癸酉，馆职胡珵、朱松、张扩、凌景夏、常明、范如圭上书，极论不可和。
现代文：高宗说： 肤继承祖宗基业，难道要受金国封册了二十一日，馆职官胡呈、朱松、张扩、凌景夏、常明、范如圭联名上书，坚决反对议和。
English: Gao Zong said: "Is it really necessary to be sealed by the State of Jin after inheriting the ancestral inheritance? On the 21st, the officials of the museum, Hu Cheng, Zhu Song, Zhang Zhan, Ling Jing Xia, Chang Ming and Fan Rugui jointly signed a letter to resolutely oppose the peace talks.

古文：甲戌，以端明殿学士韩肖胄签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，任命端明殿学士韩肖青为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd, Han Xiaoqing, a graduate of Duanming Palace, was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor.

古文：乙亥，命肖胄等为金国奉表报谢使。
现代文：二十三日，命令韩肖青等人为金国奉表报谢使。
English: On the 23rd, Han Xiaoqing and others were ordered to present a letter of thanks to the envoy.

古文：丙子，张通古、萧哲至行在，言先归河南地，徐议余事。
现代文：二十四日，张通古、萧哲到达行在，说先归还河南地，其他事情慢慢商议。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Tonggu and Xiao Zhe arrived and said that they would first return the Henan land and slowly discuss other matters.

古文：以监察御史施廷臣为侍御史，权吏部尚书张焘、侍郎晏敦复以廷臣主和议而升用，执奏不行。
现代文：任命监察御史施廷臣为侍御史，代理吏部尚书张煮、侍郎晏敦复因施廷臣主张议和而得到升官任用，提出意见，不能任命他升官。
English: Appointed the inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, Shing-sensei, as the attendant of the Imperial Household Agency. The acting officials, Shang-shu Zhang-ni and the attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, Zou Dun-fu, were promoted because Shing-sensei advocated peace, and they raised their opinions that he could not be promoted.

古文：御史中丞勾龙如渊、右谏议大夫李谊、殿中侍御史郑刚中凡再至都堂，及宰执议取国书。
现代文：御史中承勾龙如渊、右谏议大夫李谊、殿中侍御史郑刚中前后共两次到政事堂，与宰执商议怎样接受国书。
English: In the middle of the history, Zhenghong Longru Yuan, the right-hand eunuch Li Rui, and the palace attendant Zheng Gang went to the government hall twice to discuss with the chief executive how to accept the imperial edict.

古文：丁丑，诏： 金国使来，尽割河南、陕西故地，通好于我，许还梓宫及母兄亲族，余无需索。
现代文：二十五日，下诏： 这次金朝使臣来，全部归还河南、陕西故地，与我国讲和通好，答应归还梓宫和母兄亲族，其他的没有要求。 
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: This time, the envoys of the Kim dynasty came to return all the ancestral lands of Henan and Shaanxi, to talk peace and goodwill with our country, and promised to return Zi Gong and her mother and brother and relatives. There was no other request.

古文：令尚书省榜谕。 
现代文：命令尚书省张贴这则诏书。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Education to post the edict.

古文：庚辰，帝不御殿。
现代文：二十八日，高宗没到宫殿。
English: On the 28th, Gao Zong did not come to the palace.

古文：以方居谅阴，难行吉礼，命秦桧摄冢宰，受书以进。
现代文：高宗因正在居丧守孝，不能跪拜接受国书，命令秦桧作为六卿之首，代高宗跪拜接受国书，然后进呈高宗。
English: Gao Zong, who could not kneel down to receive the imperial edict because he was in mourning, ordered Qin Yu, as the head of the six nobles, to kneel down to receive the imperial edict on behalf of Gao Zong, and then present it to Gao Zong.

古文：是月，虚恨蛮犯嘉州忠镇砦。
现代文：这个月，虚恨蛮攻打嘉州忠镇寨。
English: This month, Hsiang Hsiang brutally attacked Jiazhou Zhong Zhenzhai.

古文：是岁，始定都于杭。
现代文：这一年，正式确定杭州作为国都。
English: This year, Hangzhou was officially designated as the national capital.

古文：九年春正月壬午朔，帝在临安。
现代文：绍兴九年春正月初一，高宗在临安。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of Shaoxing, Gaozong was in Lin'an.

古文：丙戌，以金国通和，大赦。
现代文：初五，因金国通和讲好，大赦全国。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, due to Kim's peace overtures, a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：河南新复州军官吏并不易置，蠲其民租税三年，徭役五年。
现代文：河南新收复州军官吏一律不更换，免除这些地区百姓租税三年，摇役五年。
English: Henan's newly recovered Fuzhou officers and officials will not be replaced, and the people in these areas will be exempted from taxes for three years and forced labor for five years.

古文：以王伦同签书枢密院事，充奉护梓宫、迎请皇太后、交割地界使。
现代文：任命王伦为同签书枢密院事，担任奉护徽宗梓宫、迎请皇太后、交割地界使。
English: Wang Lun was appointed as a privy councillor of the same signature, and served as a courtier of Huizong Zizi Palace, an envoy to welcome the empress dowager, and an envoy to hand over the territorial boundaries.

古文：戊子，遣判大宗正事士亻褭、兵部侍郎张焘诣河南修奉陵寝。
现代文：初七，派遣判大宗正事赵士可、兵部侍郎张煮到河南修奉陵寝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhao Shike, a major official, and Zhang Nini, a servant of the military department, were sent to Henan to practice Buddhism and sleep in a mausoleum.

古文：庚寅，赐刘光世号和众辅国功臣，张俊加少傅、安民靖难功臣，韩世忠为少师，张浚复左宣奉大夫。
现代文：初九，赐给刘光世和众辅国功臣的称号，张俊加衔少傅、赐安民靖难功臣称号，韩世忠为少师，张浚恢复为左宣奉大夫。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the title of Liu Guangxu and all the auxiliary national heroes was given to Liu Guangxu, Zhang Jun was given the title of Junior Master, Han Shizhong was given the title of Junior Master, and Zhang Jun was reinstated as Zuo Xuanbong Doctor.

古文：辛卯，以尹焞为徽猷阁待制、提举万寿观兼侍读，焞力辞不拜。
现代文：初十，任命尹停为徽酞阁待制，提举万寿观兼侍读，尹笋享坚决推辞不接受任命。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Yin De was appointed as a Huiyang Pavilion trainee, and the concept of longevity and attendance were proposed. Yin Yuxuan resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：壬辰，加岳飞、吴玠并开府仪同三司，杨沂中太尉。
现代文：十一日，岳飞、吴加衔为开府仪同三司，杨沂中为太尉。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yue Fei and Wu Jia were given the titles of Kaifu Yi and San Si, and Yang Yao Zhong was promoted to the rank of Taifu.

古文：癸巳，建皇太后宫。
现代文：十二日，建筑皇太后宫。
English: On the 12th, the construction of the Empress Dowager's Palace began.

古文：甲午，金宿州守臣赵荣来归。
现代文：十三日，金朝宿州守臣赵荣来归顺朝廷。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Rong, the vassal of the prefectural governor of Jin Dynasty, surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：丙申，金主诏谕河南诸州以割地归我之意。
现代文：十五日，金主下诏河南各州表明割地归宋的诚意。
English: On the 15th, the emperor issued an edict to the states of Henan to show their sincerity in returning the land to the Song Dynasty.

古文：改发运经制司为经制司，命户部长贰一人领使，仍置副或判官。
现代文：发运经制司改为经制司，命令户部正副长官一人领导，依旧设置副官或判官。
English: The Ministry of Shipping was changed to the Ministry of Economic Affairs, and it was ordered that the head and deputy head of the Household Department should lead alone, and an adjutant or judge was still set up.

古文：戊戌，以王伦为东京留守，郭仲荀为副，户部侍郎梁汝嘉兼江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广路经制使，司农卿霍蠡为判官。
现代文：十七日，任命王伦为东京留守，郭仲荀为副留守，户部侍郎梁汝嘉兼江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广路经制使，司农卿霍蠢为判官。
English: On the 17th, Wang Lun was appointed as a Tokyo resident, Guo Zhongyu as a deputy resident, the head of the household, Liang Rujia, Keng Jiang, Huai, Jing, Zhe, Yao, and Guanglu, and the Secretary of Agriculture, Huo Yu, as a judge.

古文：己亥，以吴玠为四川宣抚使。
现代文：十八日，任命吴为四川宣抚使。
English: On the 18th, Wu was appointed as the new ambassador to Sichuan.

古文：二月癸丑，以徽猷阁待制周聿为陕西宣谕使，监察御史方廷实宣谕三京、淮北。
现代文：二月初二，任命徽酞阁待制周幸为陕西宣谕使，监察御史方廷实到淮北、三京传达解释皇帝命令。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Zhou Xing was appointed as the envoy to Shaanxi to supervise the envoy Fang Tingshi to convey the explanation of the emperor's order to Huaibei and Sanjing.

古文：丁巳，以郭仲荀为太尉、东京同留守。
现代文：初六，任命郭仲荀为太尉、东京同留守。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Guo Zhongya was appointed as a second lieutenant, and he stayed in Tokyo.

古文：慕洧寇环州。
现代文：慕消攻打环州。
English: MCC attacks Huanzhou.

古文：戊午，以知金州郭浩为陕西宣抚判官。
现代文：初七，任命金州知州郭浩为陕西宣抚判官。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Guo Hao of Jinzhou Zhizhou was appointed as the Shaanxi proclamation judge.

古文：壬戌，以李纲为湖南路安抚大使，张浚知福州，寻复资政殿大学士，为福建路安抚大使。
现代文：十一日，任命李纲为湖南路安抚大使，张浚为福州知州，不久复职为资政殿大学士，为福建路安抚大使。
English: On the 11th, Li Gang was appointed as the ambassador of pacification in Hunan Province, Zhang Jun as the ambassador of pacification in Fuzhou and Zhizhou, and soon he was reinstated as the academician of the Capital University of China and the ambassador of pacification in Fujian Province.

古文：命周聿、方廷实蒐访隐士。
现代文：命令周幸、方廷实搜罗寻访隐士。
English: He ordered Zhou Xing and Fang Ting to search for and visit the hermit.

古文：甲子，均定诸州县月桩钱。
现代文：十三日，均衡制定各州县月椿钱数额。
English: On the 13th, the amount of monthly camellia money in each state and county was formulated in a balanced manner.

古文：己巳，以郭浩为陕西宣谕使。
现代文：十八日，任命郭浩为陕西宣谕使。
English: On the 18th, Guo Hao was appointed as the envoy to Shaanxi.

古文：壬申，命修《徽宗实录》。
现代文：二十一日，命令撰修撇宗实录。
English: On the 21st, he ordered the compilation of a true record of the Abandoned Sect.

古文：癸酉，诏盗贼已经招安而复啸聚者，发兵加诛毋赦。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：盗贼已经被招安，又重新聚集叛乱的，发兵镇压诛杀，不予赦免。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: the thieves had been recruited, and those who rebelled were re-gathered, the army was dispatched to suppress the fighting and killing, and no amnesty was granted.

古文：是月，日中有黑子，月余乃没。
现代文：这个月，太阳中出现黑子，一个多月才消失。
English: This month, a sunspot appeared in the sun and took more than a month to disappear.

古文：江西统制官李贵以其军归杨沂中。
现代文：江西统制官李贵率所部军队归属杨沂中。
English: Li Gui, the governor of Jiangxi, led the troops of the headquarters, which belonged to Yang Huizhong.

古文：三月丁亥，以和州防御使璩为保大军节度使，封崇国公。
现代文：三月初七，任命和州防御史赵朦为保大军节度使，封为崇国公。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Zhao Miao, the defense secretary of He Prefecture, was appointed as the envoy of the National Defense Commission of the People's Republic of China, and he was named the Prince of the State.

古文：丙申，王伦受地于金，得东西南三京、寿春、宿、亳、曹、单州及陕西、京西之地。
现代文：十六日，王伦从金朝手中接受归还的土地，得到东西南三京、寿春、宿州、毫州、曹州、单州以及陕西、京西等地。
English: On the 16th, Wang Lun accepted the return of land from the hands of the Kim dynasty, and obtained the East, West, South Sanjing, Shuchun, Shuzhou, Maozhou, Caozhou, and Shanzhou, as well as Shaanxi and West Beijing.

古文：兀还祁州。
现代文：兀回到祁州。
English: He returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：己亥，分河南为三路，废拱州。
现代文：十九日，划分河南为三路，废罢拱州。
English: On the 19th, the division of Henan into three provinces was abolished.

古文：辛丑，以翰林学士楼炤签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，任命翰林学士楼招为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 21st, Hanlin College was appointed as a signatory to the Privy Council.

古文：甲辰，伪齐知开封府郑亿年上表待罪，召赴行在。
现代文：二十四日，伪齐开封知府上书承认过错，弹勃自己，高宗召他到行在。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the pseudo-Qi issued a letter to the prefectural government admitting his mistake and excusing himself. Gaozong summoned him to the palace.

古文：丁未，正伪齐所改州县名。
现代文：二十七日，将伪齐所改州县名全部改复旧名。
English: On the 27th, all the names of counties and prefectures changed by the pseudo-Qi were restored to their old names.

古文：是春，夏人陷府州。
现代文：这年春天，夏军攻陷府州。
English: In the spring of that year, the Xia army captured Fuzhou.

古文：夏四月庚戌朔，吕颐浩薨。
现代文：夏四月初一，吕颐浩逝世。
English: On the first day of April, Lv Yinghao passed away.

古文：辛亥，命楼炤宣谕陕西诸路。
现代文：初二，命令楼招到陕西各路传达解释诏令。
English: On the second day of the first month, the command post was summoned to Shaanxi to convey the interpretation of the edict.

古文：壬午，金鄜延路经略使关师古上表待罪，命知延安府。
现代文：壬午日，金朝延路经略使关师古上表自勃，承认过错，高宗任命他为延安知府。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, Gaozong appointed Guan to the Yan'an Prefecture.

古文：癸丑，落赵鼎奉国军节度使为特进，仍知泉州。
现代文：初四，贬降奉国军节度使赵鼎为特进，仍为泉州知州。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Zhao Ding's belittling of the National Day of the People's Republic of China made him a special envoy, but he was still Quanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：金陕西诸路节制使张中孚上表待罪，命为检校少保、宁国军节度使、知永兴军、节制陕西诸路军马。
现代文：金朝陕西各路节制使张中孚上表自勃，承认过错，命令他为检校少保、宁国军节度使、永兴知军，调遣管束陕西各路军马。
English: The restraint of all roads in Shaanxi during the Kim dynasty made Zhang Zhongfu show his face, admit his fault, and ordered him to be the inspector of the school, the inspector of the Ning National Army, and the Yongxing Zhijun, and to dispatch and control the military horses of all roads in Shaanxi.

古文：甲子，以观文殿学士孟庾为西京留守，资政殿学士路允迪南京留守。
现代文：十五日，任命观文殿学士孟庚为西京留守，资政殿学士路允迪为南京留守。
English: On the 15th, Meng Geng, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, was appointed to stay in West Beijing, and Lu Yundi, a scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed to stay in Nanjing.

古文：丙寅，金秦凤经略使张中彦上表待罪，命知渭州。
现代文：十七日，金朝秦凤路经略使张中彦上表自勃，承认过错，朝廷任命他为渭州知州。
English: On the 17th, the Qin and Feng emperors sent Zhang Zhongyan to confess his wrongdoings, and the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：以孙近兼权同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命孙近兼代理同知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Sun Chian and acting Tongzhi as Privy Councillors.

古文：壬申，移寿春府治淮北旧城。
现代文：二十三日，寿春府治迁移到淮北旧城。
English: On the 23rd, Shuchun Fuzhi moved to the old city of Huaibei.

古文：癸酉，诏新复诸路监司、帅臣按劾官吏之残民者。
现代文：二十四日，下诏新近收复地区各路监司、帅臣考核审查残害百姓的官吏。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued to reinstate the supervisors of all roads in the region and the officials who had harmed the people.

古文：韩世忠、张俊入见。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊朝见高宗。
English: Han Shizhong and Zhang Junchong meet Gao Zong.

古文：五月庚寅，奉迎东京钦先、孝思殿累朝御容赴临安。
现代文：五月十一日，奉迎东京钦先殿、孝思殿历朝神主遗像到临安。
English: On May 11th, the remains of statues of deities from the Kinshinden and Koshiden shrines in Tokyo arrived in Lin'an.

古文：辛卯，复命江、淮守臣二年为任。
现代文：十二日，重新下命江、淮守臣的任期为二年。
English: On the 12th, Jiang and Huai Shoucheng were reappointed for a two-year term.

古文：乙未，复置淮东提举茶盐司。
现代文：十六日，重新设置淮东路提举茶盐司。
English: On the 16th, the tea and salt department was re-established on Huadong Road.

古文：癸卯，复召募耆长法。
现代文：二十四日，恢复招募鲁长法。
English: On the 24th, the recruitment of the Lu Chang method was resumed.

古文：丙午，鄜延副将李世辅部兵三千自凤翔来归，赐名显忠。
现代文：二十七日，延副将李世辅率所部兵三千人从凤翔来归顷，赐名为显忠军。
English: On the 27th, Yan's second-in-command, Li Shifu, returned from Fengxiang with 3,000 soldiers, and they were given the name the Xianzhong Army.

古文：六月庚戌，皇后邢氏崩于五国城。
现代文：六月初二，皇后邢氏在五国城逝世。
English: On June 2nd, Empress Dowager Cixi passed away in the Five Kingdoms.

古文：辛亥，夏国主乾顺卒。
现代文：初三，夏国主乾顺逝世。
English: On the third day of the first month, the ruler of Xia, Qian Shun, passed away.

古文：壬子，楼炤以东京见卒四千四百人为忠锐三将。
现代文：初四，楼沼把东京现有士兵四千四百人编为忠锐三将。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, Lou Numa promoted the 4,400 soldiers currently stationed in Tokyo to the rank of loyal three generals.

古文：庚申，盗入邵武军。
现代文：十二日，盗贼进人邵武军。
English: On the 12th, the thieves entered Shao Wu Jun.

古文：壬戌，以新复州县官吏怀不自安，降诏开谕。
现代文：十四日，因新近收复地区州县官吏心怀不安，下诏开导。
English: On the 14th, due to the uneasiness of state and county officials in the newly recovered areas, the following edification was issued.

古文：己巳，吴玠薨。
现代文：二十一日，吴逝世。
English: On the 21st, Wu passed away.

古文：壬申，楼炤承制以李显忠为护国军承宣使、枢密行府前军都统制，率部兵及夏国招抚使王枢赴行在。
现代文：二十四日，楼招秉承朝廷命令任命李显忠为护国军承宣使、枢密行府前军都统制，率领统帅的军队及夏国招抚使王枢到行在。
English: On the 24th, Lou Zhao, adhering to the order of the imperial court, appointed Li Xianzhong as the successor of the National Defense Force and the envoy of the proclamation, and led the army of the commander-in-chief and Xia Guo Zhaofu to send the king to the capital.

古文：癸酉，澧州军事推官韩紃坐上书论讲和非计，送循州编管。
现代文：二十五日，遭州军事推官韩到因上书议论讲和不是正确的策略，被送到循州编管。
English: On the 25th, he was sent to Xuzhou by the military commander of Xuzhou, Han Zuo, because he had written a letter arguing that reconciliation was not a correct strategy.

古文：乙亥，以孟庾兼东京留守。
现代文：二十七日，任命孟庚兼东京留守。
English: On the 27th, Meng Gengken was appointed to stay in Tokyo.

古文：王伦自东京赴金国议事。
现代文：王伦从东京前往金国商议有关事情。
English: Wang Lun traveled from Tokyo to the People's Republic of China to discuss the matter.

古文：楼炤承制以杨政为熙河经略使，吴璘为秦凤经略使，仍并听四川宣抚司节制；郭浩为鄜延经略使、同节制陕西军马。
现代文：楼招秉承朝廷命令任命杨政为熙河经略使，吴瞒为秦凤经略使，仍然服从四川宣抚司的调遣和管束；郭浩为延经略使，同节制陕西军马。
English: Adhering to the order of the imperial court, Lou Zhao appointed Yang Zheng as the deputy envoy of the Heihe Consulate, Wu Zhe as the deputy envoy of the Qin Feng Consulate, still subject to the dispatch and control of the Sichuan Consul General; Guo Hao as the deputy envoy of the Yanjing Consulate, with the restraint of the Shaanxi Military Horse.

古文：丙子，分宣抚司兵四万人出屯熙、秦，六千人隶郭浩，留吴玠精兵二万人屯兴元府、兴、洋二州。
现代文：二十八日，分出宣抚司兵四万人出屯熙、秦，六千人隶属郭浩，留下吴精锐部队二万人屯驻兴元府、兴州、洋州。
English: On the 28th, 40,000 soldiers of the Xuanfu Division were sent to Tunxi and Qin, 6,000 were subordinated to Guo Hao, leaving 20,000 Wu elite troops stationed in Xingyuanfu, Xingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：戊寅，置钱引务于永兴军。
现代文：三十日，在永兴军设置钱引务。
English: On the 30th, the Yongxing Army was set up to collect money.

古文：是月，抚州钤辖伍俊谋据桃源复叛，湖北安抚薛弼召诛之。
现代文：这个月，抚州铃辖伍俊阴谋策划占据桃源举行叛乱，湖北安抚薛弼杀死了他。
English: This month, Hubei pacifier Xue Jun killed Fuzhou's Lingyu Wu Jun, who was plotting to occupy Taoyuan and stage a rebellion.

古文：秋七月甲申，以文臣为新复诸县令。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命文臣为新近收复各县县令。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wenchen was appointed as the newly restored county magistrate.

古文：丙戌，东京耆老李茂松、寇璋等二百人奉表称贺，皆引见，补官遣还。
现代文：初八，东京老人李茂松、寇璋等二百人奉表祝贺，都得到高宗召见，授官后回到家乡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, two hundred people, including Tokyo old men Li Maosong and Kou Ye, received congratulations from Gao Zong and returned to their hometowns.

古文：复置都水南、北丞各一员。
现代文：重新设置都水南北承各一名。
English: Re-establish the north-south water mains, one for each side.

古文：丁亥，金人拘王伦于中山。
现代文：初九，金军在中山拘禁王伦。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Chinese army detained Wang Lun in Zhongshan.

古文：丙申，命详验刘豫伪官，换给告身。
现代文：十八日，命令详细查验刘豫统治地区的伪官，更换委任救书。
English: On the 18th, it ordered a detailed inspection of the fake officials in the areas ruled by Liu Yu, and the replacement of the letters of appointment.

古文：乙巳，给还伪齐所没民间资产。
现代文：二十七日，给还伪齐所没收的民间资产。
English: On the 27th, the civil assets confiscated by the pseudo-Qi were returned.

古文：以胡世将兼权主管四川宣抚司。
现代文：任命胡世将兼代理主管四川宣抚司。
English: Appointed Hu Shijian and acting head of the Sichuan Propaganda Department.

古文：八月己酉，复淮南诸州学官。
现代文：八月初二，恢复淮南各州学官。
English: On the second day of August, the resumption of academic officials in Huainan.

古文：庚戌，赐陕西诸军冬衣，绢十五万匹。
现代文：初三，赐给陕西各军冬衣和十五万匹绢。
English: On the third day of the first month, winter coats and 150,000 donkeys were given to the armies of Shaanxi.

古文：命前川、陕宣抚司便宜所补官，限一年自陈，换给告身。
现代文：命令前川、陕宣抚司自行决定授任的官吏，限一年自己向官府报告，更换委任救书。
English: It was ordered that officials who were appointed at the discretion of the Maekawa and Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Bureau should report to the government office within one year and change their appointment letters.

古文：丙辰，金国以挞懒主和割地，疑其二心，杀之。
现代文：初九，金国因挞懒主张讲和割地，怀疑他对金国不忠，杀死了他。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Kim Guo, who was too lazy to advocate peace and partition, suspected him of being disloyal to Kim Guo and killed him.

古文：壬戌，蠲成都、潼川路岁输对籴等米五十四万石、水运钱七十九万缗。
现代文：十五日，免除成都路、憧川路每年输纳的五十四万石对来等米、七十九万络水运钱。
English: On the 15th, the annual payment of 540,000 koku of rice and 790,000 rupees of water to Chengdu Road and Longchuan Road was exempted.

古文：己巳，命陕西复行铁钱。
现代文：十八日，拨给陕西购买军储的新法度碟、紫衣师号钱二百万络。
English: On the 18th, 2 million rupees were allocated to Shaanxi for the purchase of new law discs and purple-clothed soldiers for military reserves.

古文：庚午，遣苏符等使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十二日，命令陕西重新流通使用铁钱。二十三日，派遣苏符等出使金国，祝贺正旦。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Shaanxi to reintroduce the use of iron money, and on the 23rd, he dispatched Soviet and other embassies to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：乙亥，遣前知宿州赵荣、知寿州王威俱还金国。
现代文：二十八日，派遣前宿州知州赵荣、寿州知州王威都回到金国。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Rong and Wang Wei were sent back to Jin.

古文：以关师古为行营中护军前军统制。
现代文：任命关师古为行营中护军前军统制。
English: Guan Shigu was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the middle camp of the escorting troops.

古文：九月己卯，命鄜延、秦凤、熙河路招纳蕃部熟户及陷没夏国军民。
现代文：九月初二，命令延、秦凤、熙河路招纳蕃部熟户以及陷没夏国的军民。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Yan, Qin Feng and Xihe Road were ordered to recruit Shibe's acquaintances as well as the soldiers and civilians trapped in Xia.

古文：丙戌，封叔士亻褭为齐安郡王。
现代文：初九，封叔赵士可为齐安郡王。
English: At the age of nine, his uncle Zhao Shikai became the king of Qi'an County.

古文：庚寅，罢经制司，令提刑兼领常平事。
现代文：十三日，废罢经制司，命令提刑兼领常平事务。
English: On the 13th, he abolished the Office of the Chief Editor of the Bible, and ordered that he be punished and removed from his post.

古文：甲午，名皇太后殿曰慈宁。
现代文：十七日，称皇太后殿为慈宁殿。
English: On the 17th, the palace of the Empress Dowager was renamed Jining Palace.

古文：丙申，以威州防御使温济告韩世忠阴事勒停、南剑州编管。
现代文：十九日，威州防御使温济因告韩世忠有隐秘的事情而被勒令停职，南剑州编管。
English: On the 19th, Wenzhou Defense ordered Wen Ji to be suspended for accusing Han Shizhong of having a secret affair, and he became the governor of Southern Jianzhou.

古文：世忠又奏欲杀之，诏移万安军。
现代文：韩世忠又上奏要杀掉他，下诏移南安军编管。
English: Han Shizhong also issued a proclamation to kill him, and then ordered the Nan'an Army to be placed under his command.

古文：己亥，郭仲荀率东京兵五千至镇江。
现代文：二十二日，郭仲荀率领东京五千军队到镇江。
English: On the 22nd, Guo Zhongyao led 5,000 troops from Tokyo to Zhenjiang.

古文：冬十月辛亥，诏侍从官各举所知二人。
现代文：冬十月初四，下诏侍从官各自推举所熟知人才二名。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, two well-known talents were elected by the lower officials.

古文：王伦见金主于御林子，被拘于河间，遣其副蓝公佐先归。
现代文：王伦在御林子进见金主，被拘禁在河间，派副使蓝公佐先回国。
English: Wang Lun went to see the owner of the money in Mirinzi and was detained in Hema. He sent a deputy envoy, Lan Gongsa, to return to China first.

古文：甲寅，王枢入见，并其俘百九十人皆纵遣还夏国。
现代文：初七，王枢朝见高宗，放还他所俘虏的一百九十人回到夏国。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the crown prince met with Gaozong and released the one hundred and ninety people he had captured back to Xia.

古文：己未，蠲阶、成、岷、凤四州民税之半。
现代文：十二日，免除阶、成、山民、凤四州百姓赋税的一半。
English: On the 12th, half of the tax was exempted from the people of Shifang, Chengdu, Shandong and Foshan.

古文：戊辰，慈宁宫成。
现代文：二十一日，慈宁殿修成。
English: On the 21st, Jining Palace was completed.

古文：甲戌，日中有黑子。
现代文：二十七日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 27th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丙子，赐李显忠军钱十万缗。
现代文：二十九日，赐给李显忠军十万络钱。
English: On the 29th, he gave 100,000 rupees to Lee Hsien Loong's loyal troops.

古文：是月，岳飞入见。
现代文：这个月，岳飞朝见高宗。
English: This month, Yue Fei saw Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：十一月戊寅朔，赐吴玠家钱三万缗，以其弟璘为龙神卫四厢都指挥使。
现代文：十一月初一，赐给吴家三万络钱，任命他的弟弟吴瞒为龙、神卫四厢都指挥使。
English: On the first day of November, he gave 30,000 rupees to the Wu family and appointed his brother Wu Zhe as the dragon and the four guards as the commanders.

古文：申命刑部大理官编次刑名断例。
现代文：申明刑部大理官按照顺序编撰刑名断例。
English: It is affirmed that the chief justice of the Criminal Law Department will compile the sentences in accordance with the order.

古文：癸未，嗣濮王仲儡薨。
现代文：初六，嗣攫王赵仲儡逝世。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, the heir to the throne, King Zhao Zhongyou, passed away.

古文：己丑，诏三省官属详覆在京通用令。
现代文：十二日，下诏三省官属详细检查在京城的通用令。
English: On the 12th, officials from the three provinces made a detailed inspection of the general order in Beijing.

古文：追复张所为直龙图阁。
现代文：追复张所为直龙图阁。
English: The place for the pursuit and recovery of Zhang is the Zhilong Pavilion.

古文：十二月甲寅，命续编《绍兴因革礼》。
现代文：十二月初八，命令接续编撰绍兴因革字巨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, it was ordered to continue to compile the Shaoxing Revolution.

古文：甲子，李光罢。
现代文：十八日，李光罢职。
English: On the 18th, Li Guang resigned.

古文：戊辰，命续修《元丰会要》。
现代文：二十二日，命令续修玩丰会要。
English: On the 22nd, the order was given to resume the play.

古文：兀留苏符等于东京，谋复取河南。
现代文：兀在东京拘留苏符等人，企图重新攻取河南。
English: He detained Su Fu and others in Tokyo in an attempt to recapture Henan.

古文：十年春正月丙戌，遣莫将等充迎护梓宫、奉迎两宫使。
现代文：绍兴十年春正月初十，派遣莫将等人担任迎护梓宫、奉迎两宫使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the tenth year of Shaoxing's Spring, Mo Zheng and others were dispatched to serve as envoys to the Zi Palace and the two palaces.

古文：辛卯，李纲薨。
现代文：十五日，李纲逝世。
English: On the 15th, Li Gang passed away.

古文：甲辰，以显谟阁直学士、提举醴泉观郑亿年复资政殿学士，奉朝请。
现代文：二十八日，命令显漠阁直学士、提举醛泉观郑亿年恢复资政殿学士职衔，棒禄相当于朝请郎。
English: On the 28th, it was ordered that the direct bachelor of Xianba Pavilion and the honorary bachelor of Zheng Yuanzhong should be reinstated, and the stipend should be equivalent to that of the invited guest.

古文：二月戊申，命陕西复募蕃汉弓箭手。
现代文：二月初三，命令陕西重新招募蕃汉弓箭手。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, he ordered Shaanxi to re-enlist the archers of the Han Dynasty.

古文：诏赃吏罪抵死，情犯甚者，奏取旨。
现代文：下诏：贪赃罪至于处死，情况严重的，上奏听取诏旨。
English: The following edict: As for the punishment of death for the crime of embezzlement, the situation is serious, and the edict should be reported to the emperor.

古文：辛亥，雨雹。
现代文：初六，降冰雹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：以刘锜为东京副留守，李显忠南京副留守。
现代文：任命刘倚为东京副留守，李显忠为南京副留守。
English: Liu Jie was appointed as deputy governor of Tokyo, and Li Hsien Chung was appointed as deputy governor of Nanjing.

古文：壬子，命两宗正官各举所知宗室二人。
现代文：初七，命令两宗正官分别推举所知宗室人才二名。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the two officials to separately nominate two well-known family members.

古文：癸丑，展省试期一年。
现代文：初八，省试推迟一年举行。
English: On the eighth day of the new year, provincial exams were postponed for a year.

古文：壬戌，诏新复州军蒐举隐逸，诸路经理屯田。
现代文：十七日，下诏新近收复州军搜访推举隐逸人士，各路经营屯田。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued to newly recovered absconders who had been visited and selected by the state army, and all roads were operated as military garrisons.

古文：丁卯，罢史馆，以日历归秘书省，置监修国史官。
现代文：二十二日，废罢史馆，将日历归并到秘书省负责，设置监修国史官。
English: On the 22nd, the National History Museum was abolished, the calendar was merged into the responsibility of the Ministry of Secretaries, and a national historian was set up to supervise.

古文：以孟庾知开封府，为东京留守；仇悆知河南府、西京留守。
现代文：任命孟庚为开封知府、东京留守；仇昵为河南知府、西京留守。
English: Meng Geng was appointed governor of Kaifeng and stayed in Tokyo; Zeni was appointed governor of Henan and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：癸酉，罢吏部审量宣和滥赏。
现代文：二十八日，停止吏部审核宣和以来滥赏问题。
English: On the 28th, the Personnel Department stopped reviewing the issue of excessive rewards since the declaration of peace.

古文：三月甲申，封阏伯为商丘宣明王。
现代文：三月初九，封阔伯为商丘宣明王。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the year, Guo Bo was crowned as the King of Merchants in Shenming Hill.

古文：戊子，增印钱引五百万缗，付宣抚司市军储。
现代文：十三日，增加印制五百万络钱引，拨给宣抚司购买军储。
English: On the 13th, the printing of five million rupees was increased and allocated to the Publicity Department for the purchase of military reserves.

古文：川、陕宣抚副使胡世将屡言金人必渝盟，宜为备。
现代文：川、陕宣抚副使胡世将多次陈述金军一定会背弃盟约，应该有所防备。
English: Hu Shiyou, the vice-envoy of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Proclamation, repeatedly stated that the Chinese army would definitely renege on the treaty and should be prepared.

古文：己丑，罢诸路增置税场。
现代文：十四日，废罢各路增置税场。
English: On the 14th, the abolition of all roads and the addition of tax stations.

古文：韩世忠、张俊入见。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊朝见高宗。
English: Han Shizhong and Zhang Junchong meet Gao Zong.

古文：始罢内教。
现代文：初次停止在皇城内训练士兵。
English: For the first time, the training of soldiers in the imperial city was stopped.

古文：复营建康行宫。
现代文：重新营建建康行宫。
English: Rebuild the Kanggang Palace.

古文：丙申，苏符自东京还。
现代文：二十一日，苏符从东京回国。
English: On the 21st, Su Fu returned from Tokyo.

古文：丁酉，命川、陕宣抚司军事不及待报者，听随宜措置。
现代文：二十二日，命令川、陕宣抚司军事情况来不及上报朝廷，允许自己根据当时的情况处理。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the Sichuan and Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Department to report the military situation to the imperial court before it was too late, and allowed himself to deal with it according to the situation at that time.

古文：己亥，以郭浩知永兴军兼节制陕西诸路军马，杨政徙知兴元府。
现代文：二十四日，任命郭浩为永兴知军兼调遣管束陕西各路军马，杨政调任兴元知府。
English: On the 24th, Guo Hao was appointed as Yongxing's military commander and commander of all military forces in Shaanxi Province, and Yang Zheng was appointed as the governor of Xingyuan.

古文：是月，命胡世将与夏人议入贡，夏人不报。
现代文：这个月，命令胡世将与夏国商议进贡，夏国没有回答。
English: This month, Hu Shih ordered to discuss the tribute with Xia Guo, but Xia Guo did not reply.

古文：夏四月丙午，访求亡逸历书及精于星历者。
现代文：夏四月初二，寻访征求遗失的历书以及精通星历的人。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, they went in search of lost almanacs and astrologers.

古文：辛酉，以张中孚为醴泉观使，中彦提举祐圣观，赵彬为兵部侍郎。
现代文：十七日，任命张中孚为醛泉观使，中彦提举圣观，赵彬为兵部侍郎。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Zhongfu was appointed as the envoy of Yuqing Quan, Nakahiko raised Shengkun, and Zhao Bin was appointed as the attendant of the military department.

古文：癸亥，命部使者岁举廉吏一人。
现代文：十九日，命令各地的使者每年推举廉吏一人。
English: On the 19th, he ordered emissaries from all over the country to nominate one corrupt official each year.

古文：庚午，复四川诸州学官。
现代文：二十六日，恢复四川各州学官。
English: On the 26th, the academic officials of each prefecture in Sichuan were reinstated.

古文：壬申，韩肖胄罢。
现代文：二十八日，韩肖青罢职。
English: On the 28th, Han Xiaoqing resigned.

古文：五月己卯，金人叛盟，兀等分四道来攻。
现代文：五月初六，金朝背弃盟约，兀等人率军分四路来进攻。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, the Kim dynasty reneged on the treaty, and Yu and others led the army to attack in four directions.

古文：甲申，名徽宗御制阁曰敷文。
现代文：十一日，称徽宗御制阁为敷文阁。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was renamed Shibunkaku.

古文：乙酉，兀入东京，留守孟庾以城降，知兴仁府李师雄、知淮宁府李正民及河南诸州继降。
现代文：十二日，兀进人东京，留守孟庚据城投降，兴仁知府李师雄、淮宁知府李正民和河南各州接着投降。
English: On the 12th, Meng Geng, who was in Tokyo, surrendered, followed by Li Shuxiong of Xingren Prefecture, Li Zhengmin of Huaining Prefecture, and the states of Henan.

古文：丙戌，金人陷拱州，守臣王慥死之。
现代文：十三日，金军攻陷拱州，守臣王性战死。
English: On the 13th, the Golden Army invaded and occupied Gongzhou, and Shou Sheng Wang died in the battle.

古文：撒离曷自河中趋永兴军，陕西州县官皆降。
现代文：撒离易从河中攻向永兴军，陕西州县都投降。
English: Saliyi attacked Yongxing Army from the middle of the river, and all the counties in Shaanxi Province surrendered.

古文：丁亥，金人陷南京，留守路允迪降。
现代文：十四日，金军攻陷南京，留守路允迪投降。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army captured Nanjing, leaving Lu Yun Di to surrender.

古文：刘锜引兵至顺昌府。
现代文：刘倚率兵到顺昌府。
English: Liu Jie led the troops to Shunchang Prefecture.

古文：己丑，金人陷西京，留守李利用、副总管孙晖皆弃城走，钤辖李兴率兵拒战，不克。
现代文：十六日，金军攻陷西京，留守李利用、副总管孙晖都弃城逃走，铃辖李兴率兵抵抗，没有获胜。
English: On the 16th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied West Beijing. Li Rong, who was left behind, and Sun Ying, the vice-governor, both abandoned the city and fled. Li Xing, the governor of Lingwu, led the troops in resistance, but did not win.

古文：辛卯，胡世将自河池遣泾原经略使田晟以兵三千人迎敌金人。
现代文：十八日，胡世将从河池派遣径源经略使田晨率三千军队迎战金军。
English: On the 18th, Hu Shih would dispatch Chi Yuan from Hechi to send 3,000 troops led by Tian Chen to fight against the Jin army.

古文：京、湖宣抚司忠义统领李宝败金人于兴仁府境上。
现代文：京、湖宣抚司忠义统领李宝在兴仁府境上打败金军。
English: Li Bao, the loyal commander of the Beijing and Lake Xuanfu Division, defeated the Golden Army on the territory of Xingren Prefecture.

古文：癸巳，知亳州王彦先叛降于金。
现代文：二十日，毫州知州王彦先叛变投降金军。
English: On the 20th, Wanzhou Chizhou Wang Yanshan mutinied and surrendered to the Golden Army.

古文：金人陷永兴军，趋凤翔。
现代文：金军攻陷永兴军，向凤翔进攻。
English: The Chinese army captured the Yongxing army and attacked Fengxiang.

古文：丁酉，命胡世将移陕西之右护军还屯蜀口。
现代文：二十四日，命令胡世将把陕西的右护军迁还屯驻蜀口。
English: On the 24th, Hu Shimin ordered the Right Protection Army in Shaanxi to be moved back to Shuqou.

古文：以福建、广东盗起，命两路监司出境共讨。
现代文：因福建、广东盗贼兴起，命令两路监司出境共同讨伐。
English: Due to the rise of thieves in Fujian and Guangdong, the supervisors of the two provinces were ordered to go abroad to fight together.

古文：己亥，命刘光世为三京招抚处置使，以援刘锜。
现代文：二十六日，命令刘光世为三京招抚处置使，救援刘倚军。
English: On the 26th, Liu Guangxing was ordered to act as an envoy to Sanjing and rescue Liu Yingjun.

古文：庚子，以吴璘同节制陕西诸路军马，听胡世将便宜黜陟、处置军事。
现代文：二十七日，任命吴瞒同节制陕西各路军马，允许胡世将自行裁决官吏升降、处理军事事务。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Wu Zhengtong to control the military horses of all roads in Shaanxi, and allowed Hu Shimin to make his own decisions on the promotion and demotion of officials and the handling of military affairs.

古文：辛丑，金人犯凤翔府之石壁砦，吴璘遣统制姚仲等拒却之。
现代文：二十八日，金军攻打凤翔府的石壁寨，吴瞒派遣统制姚仲等打退金军。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army attacked the stone wall village of Fengxiangfu, and Wu Zhen dispatched the commander Yao Zhong and others to beat back the Chinese army.

古文：金人围耀州，郭浩遣兵救之，金兵解去。
现代文：金军攻打耀州，郭浩派兵救援，金军退去。
English: The Chinese army attacked Yaozhou, Guo Hao sent soldiers to rescue, and the Chinese army retreated.

古文：壬寅，金人围顺昌府，三路都统葛王褒以大军继至，刘锜力战，败之。
现代文：二十九日，金军围攻顺昌府，三路都统葛王娜率大军赶到，刘倚率军力战，打败金军。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army besieged Shunchangfu. Ge Wangna, the leader of the three-way capital unification, arrived with a large army. Liu Yi led the military force to defeat the Chinese army.

古文：六月甲辰朔，以韩世忠太保，张俊少师，岳飞少保，并兼河南、北诸路招讨使。
现代文：六月初一，任命太保韩世忠、少师张俊、少保岳飞都兼河南、北招讨使。初二，刘纂抓遣阎充在顺昌的李村打败金军。
English: On the first day of June, Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun, and Yuefei were appointed as envoys of Henan Province and North China respectively. On the second day of the first month of the year, Liu Cao sent Yan Cheng to Li Cun in Shunchang to defeat the Chinese army.

古文：乙巳，刘锜遣将阎充战败金人于顺昌之李村。丙午，命两浙、江东、福建诸州团结弓弩手。
现代文：初三，命令两浙、江东、福建各州教阅弓弩手。
English: On the third day of the new year, the two states of Zhejiang, Jiangdong and Fujian were ordered to teach archery.

古文：以仇悆为沿海制置使。
现代文：任命仇昵为沿海制置使。
English: Appointment of Vengeance as Coastal Commissioner.

古文：诏将佐士卒能立奇功者，赏以使相节钺官告，临军给受。
现代文：下诏：将领士兵能立奇功者，奖赏给使相节锁的委任状，临军授给。
English: The following edict: If a general or soldier is able to perform miraculous feats, he will be rewarded with a letter of appointment, which will be given to him by the army.

古文：丁未，罢建康府行宫营缮。
现代文：初四，停止营建建康府行宫。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, construction of the Kangfu Travelling Palace was stopped.

古文：戊申，以刘锜为沿淮制置使。
现代文：初五，任命刘倚为沿淮制置使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liu Jie was appointed as the envoy of the Jianghuai system.

古文：己酉，吴璘遣统制李师颜等战败金人于扶风，拔之。
现代文：初六，吴瞒派遣统制李师颜等在扶风打败金军，攻取扶风。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Wu Zhen dispatched Li Shiyan, the regent, to defeat the Jin army and capture Fufeng.

古文：壬子，兀及宋叛将孔彦舟、郦琼、赵荣等帅众十余万攻顺昌府，刘锜率将士殊死战，大败之。
现代文：初九，兀与宋叛将孔彦舟、丽仔琼、赵荣等率兵十余万攻打顺昌府，刘倚率领将士拼死战斗，大败金军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Gong and Song rebels led more than 100,000 soldiers, including Kong Yanzhou, Lizai Qiong, and Zhao Rong, to attack Shunchangfu, and Liu Jie led the soldiers to fight to the death, defeating the Golden Army.

古文：初，秦桧奏命锜择利班师，锜不奉诏，战益力，遂能以寡胜众。
现代文：开始，秦桧上奏命令刘倚选择有利时机班师，刘倚没有奉命，只是更加努力地作战，于是以少胜多。
English: At the beginning, Qin Yu ordered Liu Jie to choose a favorable time for the formation. Liu Jie did not follow the order, but fought harder, so it was a win-win situation.

古文：乙卯，顺昌围解，兀还。
现代文：十二日，顺昌围解除，兀退回。
English: On the 12th, the siege of Shunchang was lifted, and the cormorants returned.

古文：以知平江府梁汝嘉兼浙西沿海制置使。
现代文：任命平江知府梁汝嘉兼浙西沿海制置使。
English: Liang Rujia, the governor of Pingjiang, was appointed as the chief envoy to the western coast of Zhejiang.

古文：丙辰，岳飞将牛皋及金人战于京西，败之。
现代文：十三日，岳飞军将领牛皋与金军在京西交战，打败金军。
English: On the 13th, the general of Yuefei's army, Niutao, fought with the Chinese army in West Beijing and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：己未，刘光世进军和州。
现代文：十六日，刘光世军进到和州。
English: On the 16th, Liu Guangshi's army marched into Hezhou.

古文：郭浩遣统制郑建充攻破金人于醴州，复其城。
现代文：郭浩派遣统制郑建充在醛州攻破金军，收复州城。
English: Guo Hao dispatched the commanding officer Zheng Jianchong to defeat the Jin army in Aldezhou and recover the state capital.

古文：壬戌，诏诸司钱物量留经费外，悉发以赡军。
现代文：十九日，下诏各司钱物留下适当数量做必要经费开支外，其余的全部上交用来供给军队开支。
English: On the 19th day of the following month, all departments were ordered to set aside an appropriate amount of money and goods for the necessary expenses, and the rest of the money and goods were to be handed over to the army.

古文：楼炤以父丧去位。
现代文：楼招因父亲去世离职。
English: Lou Zhao resigned from his post due to his father's death.

古文：甲子，撒离曷攻青溪岭，鄜延经略使王彦率兵战败之，撒离曷还屯凤翔。
现代文：二十一日，撒离易攻打青溪镇，延经略使王彦率兵战败金军，撒离易退还屯驻凤翔。
English: On the twenty-first day, Saliyi attacked Qingxi Town, and after a short delay, Wang Yan led the troops to defeat the Jin Army, and Saliyi returned to Fengxiang.

古文：命士亻褭主奉濮王祠事。
现代文：命令赵士可主管祭祀攫王事务。
English: He ordered Zhao Shikai to be in charge of the affairs of the sacrificial rites for the king.

古文：张俊遣左护军都统制王德援刘锜，德暂至顺昌，值围已解，复还庐州。
现代文：张俊派遣左护军都统制王德救援刘倚，王德刚到顺昌，恰逢顺昌围解除，又退回到庐州。
English: Zhang Jun dispatched the left escort to control Wang De and rescue Liu Yi. Wang De just arrived in Shunchang, coincided with the lifting of the siege of Shunchang, and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：遣司农少卿李若虚诣岳飞军谕指班师，飞不听。
现代文：派遣司农少卿李若虚到岳飞军传达班师的命令，岳飞没有听从。
English: Li Ruohu, the Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was dispatched to Yuefei's army to convey the squad leader's order, but Yuefei did not obey.

古文：丙寅，下诏抚谕顺昌府官吏兵民。
现代文：二十三日，下诏抚慰顺昌府吏兵民。
English: On the 23rd, he issued an imperial edict to comfort the officers, soldiers and people of Shunchang.

古文：庚午，以刘锜为武泰军节度使、侍卫马军都虞候。
现代文：二十七日，任命刘倚为武泰军节度使、侍卫马军都虞候。
English: On the 27th, Liu Jie was appointed as the military envoy of the Wu Tai Army and the guard of the Ma Army.

古文：韩世忠遣统制王胜、背嵬将成闵率兵至淮阳军南，与金人遇，击败之。
现代文：韩世忠派遣统制王胜、亲卫军将领成阂率兵到淮阳军南，与金军相遇，打退金军。
English: Han Shizhong dispatched Wang Sheng, the commander-in-chief, and Gen. Cheng Yu, the commander of the Imperial Guard, to the south of the Huaiyang Army, where they met the Chinese army and drove it back.

古文：是月，金人围庆阳府，权守臣宋万年固守，金人不能下。
现代文：这个月，金军围攻庆阳府，代理守臣宋万年顽强镇守，金军没能攻下。
English: This month, the Golden Army besieged Qingyang Prefecture, and the acting guard vassal Song Wan Nian tenaciously defended the town. The Golden Army failed to capture it.

古文：岳飞领兵援刘锜，与金人战于蔡州，败之，复蔡州。
现代文：岳飞率兵救援刘倚，在蔡州与金军交战，打败金军，收复蔡州。
English: Yuefei led the soldiers to rescue Liu Jie, fought with the Chinese army in Caizhou, defeated the Chinese army, and recovered Caizhou.

古文：闰月癸酉朔，张俊遣统制宋超败金人于永城县朱家村。
现代文：闰六月初一，张俊派遣统制宋超在永城县朱家村打败金军。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, Zhang Jun dispatched the general Song Chao to defeat the Jin army in Zhujia Village, Yongcheng County.

古文：甲戌，追孟庾、路允迪官，徙家属远郡。
现代文：初二，追贬孟庚、路允迪官职，把他们的家属迁到边远地区。
English: On the second day of the new year, Meng Geng and Lu Yun Di were demoted and their families were relocated to remote areas.

古文：丙子，诏三衙管军及观察使已上，各举智略勇猛、材堪将帅者二人。
现代文：初四，下诏三衙管军及观察使以上官员，各自推举具备智略勇谋可以担任将帅的人才二名。
English: On the fourth day of the junior high school year, the superintendent of the army and the supervising officer of the above-mentioned officials each nominated two talents who had the wisdom and courage to serve as generals.

古文：金人犯泾州，守臣曲汲弃城去，经略使田晟率兵来救，金人败走。
现代文：金军攻打径州，守臣曲汲弃城逃走，经略使田晨来救援，金军退走。
English: The gold army attacked Jingzhou, and the defenders abandoned the city and fled. Tian Chen came to the rescue, and the gold army retreated.

古文：甲申，晟及金人再战于泾州，败之，金人引归凤翔。
现代文：十二日，田晨在径州又与金军交战，打败金军，金军退归凤翔。
English: On the 12th, Tian Chen fought with the Chinese army again in Jingzhou, defeated the Chinese army, and the Chinese army retreated to Fengxiang.

古文：乙酉，降陕西杂犯死罪，释流以下囚。
现代文：十三日，减轻陕西杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放流刑以下的囚犯。
English: On the 13th, the death sentences of Shaanxi minor criminals were reduced, and the prisoners who were sentenced to less than exile were released.

古文：丙戌，以胡世将为端明殿学士，吴璘为镇西节度使，杨政武当节度使，郭浩奉国节度使。
现代文：十四日，任命胡世将为端明殿学士，吴瞒为镇西节度使，杨政为武当节度使，郭浩为奉国节度使。
English: On the 14th, Hu Shih was appointed as the academician of Duanming Palace, Wu Zhe as the festival envoy of Zhenxi, Yang Zheng as the festival envoy of Wudang, and Guo Hao as the festival envoy of Fengguo.

古文：王德攻金人于宿州，夜破之，降其守马秦。
现代文：王德在宿州攻击金军，夜晚攻破金军，迫使金守将马秦投降。
English: Wang De attacked the gold army in Suizhou, defeated the gold army at night, and forced the gold guard to surrender to Ma Qin.

古文：丁亥，诏释顺昌府流以下囚，再复租税二年，守御官吏进官一等。
现代文：十五日，下诏释放顺昌府流刑以下囚犯，又免除二年租税，守御官吏升官一级。
English: On the 15th, the following edict was issued to release the prisoners below Shunchang who had been exiled, and to exempt them from paying taxes for two years. The guards were promoted to the first grade.

古文：己丑，永兴军钤辖傅忠信等与金人战于华阴县，败之。
现代文：十七日，永兴军铃辖傅忠信等在华阴县与金军交战，打败金军。
English: On the 17th, Yongxing's army under the command of Fu Zhongxin fought against the Chinese army in Huayin County and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：壬辰，岳飞遣统制张宪击金将韩常于颍昌府，败之，复颍昌。
现代文：二十日，岳飞派遣统制张宪在颖昌府出击金将韩常，打败韩常，收复颖昌。
English: On the 20th, Yuefei dispatched the regent Zhang Xian to attack the gold general Han Chang in Yingchang Prefecture, defeat Han Chang, and recover Yingchang.

古文：丙申，张宪复淮宁府。
现代文：二十四日，张宪收复淮宁府。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Xian recaptured Huaining Prefecture.

古文：丁酉，赵鼎分司、兴化军居住。
现代文：二十五日，赵鼎遭受处罚，兴化军居住。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Ding was punished and forced to live with the Xinghua Army.

古文：岳飞遣统制郝晸等与金人战于郑州北，复郑州。
现代文：岳飞派遣统制郝等在郑州北与金军交战，收复郑州。
English: Yuefei dispatched his regents to fight against the Chinese army in the north of Zhengzhou and recaptured Zhengzhou.

古文：李兴复汝州，与金人战于河清县，败之，复伊阳等八县，李成遁去。
现代文：李兴收复汝州，与金军在河清县交战，打败金军，收复伊阳等八县，李成逃跑。
English: Li Xing recovered Ruzhou, fought with the Chinese army in Heqing County, defeated the Chinese army, recovered Iyang and other eight counties, and Li Cheng fled.

古文：韩世忠遣统制王胜、王权攻海州，克之，执其守王山。
现代文：韩世忠派遣统制王胜、王权攻打海州，攻取海州，俘虏守将王山。
English: Han Shizhong sent the commanding Wang Sheng and Wang Quan to attack and capture Haizhou, and captured the commander Wang Shan.

古文：戊戌，张俊率统制宋超等及王德兵会于城父县，郦琼及葛王褒遁去，遂复亳州。
现代文：二十六日，张俊率统制宋超等与王德在城父县会合，丽仔琼和葛王娜逃跑，于是收复毫州。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Jun led Song Chao and Wang De to meet in Chengchi County. Liza Qiong and Ge Wangna fled, and then recovered Wanzhou.

古文：己亥，金人救海州，王权等逆战，败之，复怀仁县。
现代文：二十七日，金军救援海州，王权等率军抵抗，打败金军，收复怀仁县。
English: On the 27th, the Chinese army came to the rescue of Haizhou, and Wang Quan led the resistance, defeated the Chinese army, and recovered Huairin County.

古文：庚子，张俊弃亳州，引军还寿春。
现代文：二十八日，张俊放弃毫州，率兵退回寿春。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Jun abandoned Wanzhou and led his troops back to Shouchun.

古文：再贬赵鼎漳州居住，又贬清远军节度副使、潮州安置。
现代文：赵鼎被又一次贬为漳州居住，又贬为清远军节度副使，潮州安置。
English: Zhao Ding was once again demoted to living in Zhangzhou, and was also demoted to deputy envoy of the Qingyuan Army, and resettled in Chaozhou.

古文：秋七月癸卯，岳飞遣将张应、韩清入西京，会李兴复永安军。
现代文：秋七月初一，岳飞派将领张应、韩清到西京，会同李兴收复永安军。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Yuefei sent generals Zhang Ying and Han Qing to Xijing to join Li Xing in recovering the Yongan Army.

古文：丙午，以御史中丞王次翁参知政事。
现代文：初四，任命御史中承王次翁为参知政事。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school career, he was appointed as a member of the council of governors.

古文：己酉，岳飞及兀战于郾城县，败之。
现代文：初七，岳飞与金兀在哪城大战，打败金军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yue Fei and Jin Qi fought a big battle in which city, defeating the Golden Army.

古文：庚戌，曲赦海州。
现代文：初八，因特殊情况赦免海州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Haishu was pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：永兴军统领辛镇及金人战于长安城下，败之。
现代文：永兴军统领辛镇与金军在长安城下交战，打败金军。
English: The Yongxing Army under the command of Xin Zhen and the Jin Army fought under the Chang'an City and defeated the Jin Army.

古文：癸丑，以杨沂中为淮北宣抚副使，刘锜为判官。
现代文：十一日，任命杨沂中为淮北宣抚副使，刘倚为判官。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yang Yuzhong was appointed as the Vice-Envoy of the Huaibei Proclamation and Liu Jie as the judge.

古文：甲寅，岳飞遣统制杨再兴、王兰等击金人于小商桥，皆战死。
现代文：十二日，岳飞派统制杨再兴、王兰等在小商桥截击金军，二将均战死。
English: On the 12th, Yuefei sent Yang Zaixing, Wang Lan and others to intercept the Jin army at Xiaoshan Bridge. Both generals were killed in the battle.

古文：乙卯，金人攻颍昌，岳飞遣将王贵、姚政合兵力战，败之。
现代文：十三日，金军攻打颖昌府，岳飞派将领王贵、姚政联合出兵努力奋战，打败金军。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese army attacked Yingchangfu, and Yuefei sent generals Wang Gui and Yao Zheng to fight hard and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：壬戌，飞以累奉诏班师，遂自郾城还，军皆溃，金人追之不及。
现代文：二十日，岳飞因为多次接到诏书要他班师，于是从哪城还师，军队士气低落，溃散不群，金军追击没有追上。
English: On the 20th, because Yuefei repeatedly received the edict to dispatch his division, so he returned the division from which city, the army's morale was low, it was scattered, and the pursuit of the Golden Army did not catch up.

古文：颍昌、蔡、郑诸州皆复为金有。
现代文：颖昌、蔡州、郑州等地又被金军占领。
English: Yingchang, Caizhou, Zhengzhou and other places were occupied by the Chinese army.

古文：甲子，以释奠文宣王为大祀。
现代文：二十二日，以祭奠文宣王为大祀。
English: On the 22nd, a memorial service was held for the king.

古文：乙丑，增收州县头子钱为激赏费。
现代文：二十三日，增收州县头子钱作为激赏费。
English: On the 23rd, more money was collected from the heads of prefectures and counties as incentive fees.

古文：金人围淮宁府，赵秉渊弃城南归。
现代文：金军围攻淮宁府，赵秉渊弃城南逃。
English: The Jin army besieged Huaining Prefecture, and Zhao Bingyuan abandoned the south of the city and fled.

古文：辛未，金人犯盭厔县，王俊逆战于东洛谷，却之。
现代文：二十九日，金军攻打绘蝙县，王俊在东洛谷率军奋力抵抗，打退金军。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army attacked Menghu County, and Wang Jun led the army in the Donglu Valley to fight back and beat back the Chinese army.

古文：八月壬申朔，以张九成、喻樗、陈刚中、凌景夏、樊光远、毛叔度、元盥等七人尝不主和议，皆降黜之。
现代文：八月初一，因张九成、喻擂、陈刚中、凌景夏、樊光远、毛叔度、元盟等七人曾经不主张和议，都被罢除。
English: On the first day of August, seven people, including Zhang Jiucheng, Yu Jun, Chen Gangzhong, Ling Jingxia, Xing Guangyuan, Mao Shudu, and Yuanmeng, were all dismissed because they had not advocated peaceful discussion.

古文：乙亥，韩世忠围淮阳军，不克。
现代文：初四，韩世忠进攻淮阳军，没能攻取。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Han Shizhong attacked the Huaiyang Army, but failed to capture it.

古文：庚辰，金人及郦琼合兵驻于千秋湖陵，韩世忠遣统制刘宝等夜袭破之。
现代文：初九，金军和哪琼兵会合驻屯在千秋湖陵，韩世忠派统制刘宝等夜晚袭击，攻破他们。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Jin army and the Qian Qiong soldiers were stationed in Qianqiu Huling, and Han Shizhong sent Liu Bao to attack at night, and defeated them.

古文：壬午，李成犯西京，李兴击却之。
现代文：十一日，李成攻打西京，李兴击退李成。
English: On the 11th day, Li Cheng attacked Xijing, and Li Xing repulsed Li Cheng.

古文：杨沂中军于宿州。
现代文：杨沂中驻军宿州。
English: Yang Huizhong stationed troops in Shuzhou.

古文：丙戌，以郭浩知夔州。
现代文：十五日，任命郭浩为夔州知。
English: On the 15th, Guo Hao was appointed as the new governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁亥，杨沂中自宿州夜袭柳子镇，军溃，遂自寿春府渡淮归，金人屠宿州。
现代文：十六日，杨沂中从宿州夜袭柳子镇，军队溃败，于是从寿春府渡过淮河回师，金军屠杀宿州城。
English: On the 16th, Yang Jizhong attacked Liuzi Town from Suzhou at night, the army was defeated, so he crossed the Huaihe River from Shuchunfu to return to the division, and the Golden Army slaughtered Suzhou City.

古文：甲午，川、陕宣抚司统领王喜等遇金人于汧阳县，败之。
现代文：二十三日，川、陕宣抚司统领王喜等在徨阳县与金军相遇，打败金军。
English: On the 23rd, Chuan and Wang Xi, the leader of Shaanxi Province, met the Chinese army in Huaiyang County and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：九月壬寅朔，遣起居舍人李易谕韩世忠罢兵。
现代文：九月初一，派起居舍人李易要韩世忠罢兵。
English: On the first day of September, Li Yi, Han Shizhong's live-in concubine, was sent to ask Han Shizhong to strike.

古文：时秦桧专主和议，诸大帅皆还镇。
现代文：当时秦桧专主议和，各军事首领都退回。
English: At that time, Qin and Yan were exclusively in charge of discussing peace, and all military leaders withdrew.

古文：丁未，杨政遣统制杨从仪夜袭金人于凤翔府，败之。
现代文：初六，杨政派统制杨从仪在凤翔夜袭金军，打败金军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Yang Zongyi, the leader of the Yang Zheng faction, attacked the Jin army at night in Fengxiang and defeated the Jin army.

古文：戊申，金人复入西京，李兴弃城去。
现代文：初七，金军又进人西京，李兴弃城逃走。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Jin army entered West Beijing again, and Li Xing abandoned the city and fled.

古文：庚戌，合祀天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：初九，在明堂合祭天地，大赦全国。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, at the Ming Hall, the heavens and the earth will join in a national amnesty.

古文：辛酉，临安火。
现代文：二十日，临安发生火灾。
English: On the 20th, a fire broke out in Lin'an.

古文：戊辰，以郭浩知金州，节制陕西、河东军马兼措置河东忠义军。
现代文：二十七日，任命郭浩为金州知州，节制陕西、河东军马兼措置河东忠义军。
English: On the 27th, Guo Hao was appointed as Jinzhou Zhizhou, restraining Shaanxi and Hedong armies and taking measures for the Hedong loyalist army.

古文：是秋，知代州王忠植举兵复石、代等十一州。
现代文：这年秋天，代州知州王忠植率兵收复石、代等十一州。
English: In the autumn of that year, Daizhou, Chizhou, and Wang Zhongzhi led troops to recapture Fuxi, Dai, and eleven other prefectures.

古文：冬十月癸酉，复张浚观文殿大学士。
现代文：冬十月初二，恢复张浚观文殿大学士职衔。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, Zhang Junguan was reinstated as a professor at Wendeng University.

古文：甲戌，以王忠植为建宁军承宣使、河东路经略安抚使。
现代文：初二，任命王忠植为建宁军承宣使、河东路经略安抚使。
English: On the second day of the first month, Wang Zhongzhi was appointed as the successor envoy of the Jianning Army and the pacification envoy of the Hedong Road.

古文：戊寅，秦桧上《重修绍兴在京通用敕令格式》。
现代文：初七，秦桧进呈重修绍兴在京通用救令格式。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Qin Yujin proposed to revise the general rescue format of Shaoxing in Beijing.

古文：庚辰，金人犯庆阳府，守臣宋万年以城降。
现代文：初九，金军攻打庆阳府，守臣宋万年据城投降。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Chinese army attacked Qingyang Prefecture, and the vassal Song Wanyan surrendered the city.

古文：辛卯，金人犯陕州，吴琦率兵迎击，败之。
现代文：二十日，金军攻打陕州，吴琦率兵迎击打败金军。
English: On the 20th, the Chinese army attacked Shaanxi, and Wu Gan led the troops to counterattack and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：庚子，金人袭洮州，攻铁城堡，统制孔文清、惠逢击败之。
现代文：二十九日，金军袭击姚州，攻打铁城堡，统制孔文清、惠逢击败金军。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army attacked Yaozhou, attacked the Iron Castle, controlled Kong Wenqing, and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：是月，刘锜入见。
现代文：这个月，刘倚朝见高宗。
English: This month, Liu Jichao met with Gao Zong.

古文：胡世将命王忠植救庆阳，叛将赵惟清执之降于金，忠植不屈而死。
现代文：胡世将命令王忠植救援庆阳，叛将赵惟清俘虏他投降金军，王忠植不屈而死。
English: Hu Shih ordered Wang Zhongzhi to rescue Qingyang, the traitor Zhao Weiqing captured him and surrendered to the Golden Army, and Wang Zhongzhi died unyielding.

古文：十一月丁未，金将合喜复犯陕州，吴琦击却之。又犯宝溪县，统制杨从仪败之。
现代文：十一月初七，金军将领合喜又来攻打陕州，吴琦击退金军；金军又攻打宝鸡县，统制杨从仪打败金军。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the general of the Jin Army, He Xi, came to attack Shaanxi again, and Wu Gan repulsed the Jin Army; the Jin Army also attacked Baoji County, and Yang Congyi defeated the Jin Army.

古文：壬子，以令为保宁军节度使。
现代文：十二日，任命令糯为保宁军节度使。
English: On the 12th, he was appointed as the envoy of the Baoding Military Festival.

古文：是月，宜章洞民骆科叛，犯桂阳、郴、道、连、贺诸州，命发大兵讨之。
现代文：这个月，宜章洞民骆科叛乱，攻打桂阳、郴州、道州、连州、贺州等地，命令派大军讨伐镇压。
English: This month, the Luo Ke Rebellion of Yizhang-dong people attacked Guiyang, Zhangzhou, Daozhou, Lianzhou, Hezhou and other places, and ordered the dispatch of a large army to fight and suppress.

古文：十二月壬午，上皇太后册宝于慈宁殿。
现代文：十二月十二日，在慈宁殿敬呈皇太后册宝。
English: On December 12th, the collection of treasures was presented to the Empress Dowager at the Jining Palace.

古文：丁亥，赠王忠植奉国军节度使，谥义节。
现代文：十七日，赠给王忠植奉国军节度使之职，溢号为义节。
English: On the 17th, Wang Zhongzhi was given the title of the Festival of the National Service Corps, and the name was changed to the Festival of Righteousness.

古文：辛卯，起诸路耆长役钱隶总制司，专给军用。
现代文：二十一日，征收各路鲁长役钱隶属总制司，专门供给军队开支。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the collection of money from all the provincial governors of Lu was subordinated to the General Administration Department, specifically to supply the army with expenses.

古文：是月，杨沂中引兵还行在。
现代文：这个月，杨沂中引兵退还行在。
English: This month, Yang Huizhong is in the process of withdrawing troops.

古文：十一年春正月癸卯，凤翔统制杨从仪败金人于渭南。
现代文：绍兴十一年春正月初二，凤翔统制杨从仪在渭南打败金军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 11th year of Shaoxing's Spring, Fengxiang's commander Yang Congyi defeated the Jin army in the south of Hunan.

古文：庚戌，张浚入见。
现代文：初十，张俊朝见高宗。
English: At the age of ten, Zhang Jun saw Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：乙卯，金人犯寿春府，守臣孙晖、统制雷仲合兵拒之。
现代文：十五日，金军攻打寿春府，守臣孙晖、统制雷仲联合出兵抵抗。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army attacked Shuchunfu, and the vassal Sun Yat-sen and the regent Lei Zhong jointly dispatched troops to resist.

古文：丁巳，寿春陷，晖、仲弃城去。
现代文：十七日，寿春被攻陷，孙晖和雷仲弃城逃走。
English: On the 17th, Shuchun was captured, and Sun Yat-sen and Lei Zhong abandoned the city and fled.

古文：己未，刘锜自太平州率兵二万援淮西。
现代文：十九日，刘倚从太平州率兵二万救援淮西。
English: On the 19th, Liu Jie led 20,000 soldiers from Taiping to rescue Huaxi.

古文：庚申，金人渡淮。
现代文：二十日，金军渡过淮河。
English: On the 20th, the Chinese army crossed the Huai River.

古文：辛酉，雨雹。
现代文：二十一日，降冰雹。
English: On the 21st, hail fell.

古文：乙丑，刘锜至庐州还。
现代文：二十五日，刘倚到庐州退还。
English: On the 25th, Liu Lian returned it to Zhangzhou.

古文：丙寅，兀陷庐州。
现代文：二十六日，兀攻陷庐州。
English: On the 26th, Min attacked and occupied Bozhou.

古文：戊辰，金人陷商州，守臣邵隆弃城去。
现代文：二十八日，金军攻陷商州，守臣邵隆弃城逃走。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Shangzhou, and the guardian Shao Long abandoned the city and fled.

古文：己巳，命杨沂中引兵赴淮西，岳飞进兵江州。
现代文：二十九日，命令杨沂中率兵前往淮西，岳飞进兵江州。
English: On the 29th, he ordered Yang Hui and his soldiers to go to Huaxi, and Yuefei to go to Jingjiang.

古文：二月癸酉，张俊遣王德渡江，屯和州，金人退屯昭关。
现代文：二月初四，张俊派王德渡江，屯驻和州，金军退屯昭关。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month, Zhang Jun sent Wang De to cross the river, stationed in Hezhou, and the Golden Army withdrew to Zhaoguan.

古文：邵隆破金人于洪门，复商州。
现代文：邵隆在洪门打败金军，收复商州。
English: Shao Long defeated the Jin army at Hongmen and recovered Shangzhou.

古文：乙亥，金人复来争和州，张俊败之。
现代文：初六，金军又来争夺和州，张俊打败金军。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army came to fight for He Prefecture again, and Zhang Jun defeated the Chinese army.

古文：命韩世忠以兵援淮西。
现代文：命令韩世忠率兵救援淮西。
English: Han Shizhong was ordered to lead soldiers to rescue Huaxi.

古文：丙子，趣岳飞会兵蕲、黄。
现代文：初七，催促岳飞会兵到薪州、黄州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, urge the Yuefei Association soldiers to go to Zhuozhou and Huangzhou.

古文：王德等败金人于含山县东。
现代文：王德等在含山县打败金军。
English: Wang De and others defeated the Chinese army in Hanshan County.

古文：己卯，统制关师古、李横击败金人于巢县，复之。
现代文：初十，统制关师古、李横在巢县击败金军，收复县城。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Guan Shigu and Li Yang, the regents, defeated the Jin army in Chaoxian and recovered the county seat.

古文：庚辰，岳飞发鄂州。
现代文：十一日，岳飞从鄂州出发。
English: On the 11th day, Yuefei set off from Ezhou.

古文：辛巳，知泰州王奂兼通、泰二州制置使。
现代文：十二日，泰州知州王廖嫌通、泰二州制置使。
English: On the 12th, Taizhou Chizhou Wang Liao Han Tong and Taizhou two-state system envoy were appointed.

古文：癸未，王德、田师中等击破金人，复含山县，夺昭关。刘锜自东关击败金人于青溪。
现代文：十四日，王德、田师中等击败金军，收复含山县，夺取昭关；刘简从东关进攻，在青溪击败金军。
English: On the 14th, Wang De and Tian Shizhong defeated the Golden Army, recovered Hanshan County, and captured Zhaoguan; Liu Jian attacked from Dongguan and defeated the Golden Army in Qingxi.

古文：甲申，金人复犯昭关，王德等又败之。
现代文：十五日，金军又攻打昭关，王德等又打败金军。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army attacked Shoguan again, and Wang De and others defeated the Chinese army.

古文：李显忠遣统领崔皋击败金人于舒城县。
现代文：李显忠派统领崔皋在舒城县击败金军。
English: The loyalists of Lee Hsien Loong, led by Choe Son, defeated the Kim army in Shucheng County.

古文：丁亥，杨沂中、刘锜等大败兀军于柘皋。
现代文：十八日，杨沂中、刘倚等在拓皋大败金兀军。
English: On the 18th, Yang Xizhong, Liu Jie and others defeated the Jinbei army in Tuobao.

古文：己丑，兀亲率兵逆战于店步，沂中等又败之，乘胜逐北，遂复庐州。
现代文：二十日，兀亲自率领军队在店步顽固抵抗，杨沂中等又打败兀，乘胜北向，于是收复庐州。
English: On the 20th, Yao personally led the army to stubbornly resist in Dianbu, and Yang Mi defeated Yao again in the middle, and took advantage of the victory to head north, thus regaining Zhangzhou.

古文：是月，虔、吉州盗贼悉平。
现代文：这个月，虔州、吉州盗贼全部平定。
English: This month, all the bandits in Kenzhou and Jizhou have been subdued.

古文：三月庚子朔，张俊进鬻田及卖度牒钱六十三万缗助军用。
现代文：三月初一，张浚献上卖田及卖度碟钱六十三万络补助军队经费开支。
English: On the first day of March, Zhang Jianxian donated 630,000 rupees to subsidize the army's expenditure.

古文：壬寅，韩世忠引兵趋寿春。
现代文：初三，韩世忠率兵前往寿春。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Han Shizhong led his soldiers to Shuchun.

古文：癸卯，复张俊特进。
现代文：初四，恢复张浚特进官职。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zhang Jun was reinstated as a special promotion official.

古文：金人围濠州。
现代文：金军围攻壕州。
English: The Chinese army besieged Trench County.

古文：岳飞发舒州。
现代文：岳飞从舒州出发。
English: Yuefei sets off from Shuzhou.

古文：甲辰，张俊、杨沂中、刘锜议班师，乙巳，沂中、锜先行，俊以轻兵留后。
现代文：初五，张俊、杨沂中、刘倚商议班师。初六，杨沂中、刘倚先回师，张俊率轻兵留在后面。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, Zhang Jun, Yang Huizhong, and Liu Jie discussed the class division. In the sixth year of junior high school, Yang Huizhong and Liu Jie were the first to return, and Zhang Jun and his light soldiers stayed behind.

古文：丙午，诏释淮西杂犯死罪以下囚。
现代文：初七，下诏释放淮西杂犯死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Huaxi issued an edict to release miscellaneous death-row prisoners.

古文：丁未，金人陷濠州，执守臣王进，夷其城，钤辖邵青死之。
现代文：初八，金军攻陷壕州，俘获守臣王进，平夷州城，铃辖邵青战死。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded and besieged Hanzhou, captured the vassal Wang Jin, the city of Pingyizhou, and the warlord Shao Qinglong died.

古文：戊申，张俊遣杨沂中、王德入濠州，遇金伏兵，败还。
现代文：初九，张俊派杨沂中、王德到壕州，遇到金军伏兵，失败退回。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhang Jun sent Yang Xizhong and Wang De to Heshou, encountered the ambush of the Golden Army, and failed to return.

古文：己酉，韩世忠至濠州，不利而退。
现代文：初十，韩世忠到壕州，不利退回。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Han Shizhong went to Hanzhou and returned unfavorably.

古文：辛亥，岳飞次定远县，闻金兵退，还屯舒州。
现代文：十二日，岳飞驻留定远县，听说金兵退回，还屯舒州。
English: On the 12th, Yuefei stationed in Dingyuan County, and heard that Jinbei had returned, and returned to Shuzhou.

古文：杨沂中归行在。
现代文：杨沂中回到行在。
English: Yang Xizhong returned to the line.

古文：壬子，金人渡淮北归。
现代文：十三日，金军渡淮北归。
English: On the 13th, Kim Jun Du returned to Huaibei.

古文：癸丑，张俊归建康府。
现代文：十四日，张俊回到建康府。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Jun returned to Jiankang.

古文：丁巳，刘锜归太平州。
现代文：十八日，刘倚回到太平州。
English: On the 18th, Liu Jie returned to Taiping.

古文：甲子，行营统制张彦及金人遇于汧阳之刘坊砦，第八将张宏战没。
现代文：二十五日，行营统制张彦在徨阳县刘坊寨与金军相遇，第八将张宏战死。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Yan, the camp commander, met the Golden Army in Liufangzhai, Huiyang County. The eighth commander, Zhang Hong, died in the battle.

古文：夏四月丙子，复收免行钱。
现代文：夏四月初八，又征收免行钱。
English: In the summer, on the eighth day of the fourth month, the toll-free money was levied again.

古文：己卯，孙近罢。
现代文：十一日，孙近被罢。
English: On the 11th day, Sun Chian was dismissed.

古文：辛巳，以王次翁兼权同知枢密院事。
现代文：十三日，任命王次翁兼代理同知枢密院事。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Wang Jiong and acting Tongzhi to the Privy Council.

古文：韩世忠、张俊、岳飞相继入觐。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊、岳飞相继到朝廷朝见高宗。
English: Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun and Yue Fei successively went to the imperial court to meet Gao Zong.

古文：壬辰，以世忠、俊并为枢密使，飞枢密副使，命三省、枢密院官复分班奏事。
现代文：二十四日，任命韩世忠、张俊为枢密使，岳飞为枢密副使，命三省、枢密院官员重新分班奏事。
English: On the 24th, Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun were appointed as Privy Envoys, Yue Fei as Deputy Privy Envoy, and the officials of the three provinces and the Privy Council were re-assigned.

古文：乙未，张俊请以所部兵隶御前。
现代文：二十七日，张俊请求把所统率的军队改隶御前。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Jun requested that the army under his command be transferred to the imperial court.

古文：罢三宣抚司，改统制官为御前统制官，各屯驻旧所。
现代文：废罢三个宣抚司，改统制官为御前统制官，分别屯驻原来的地方。
English: Abolished the three proclamation offices, and changed the regimental officers to imperial regimental officers, and stationed them in their original places.

古文：丙申，以广西经略使胡舜陟节制广东、湖南兵，趣讨骆科。
现代文：二十八日，任命广西经略使胡舜陆调遣管束广东、湖南军队，督促讨伐骆科。
English: On the 28th, he appointed the Guangxi Minister of Economic Affairs, Hu Binglu, to dispatch the troops of Guangdong and Hunan and urge them to fight against Luoke.

古文：慕容洧破新泉砦，又攻会州，将官朱勇破之。
现代文：慕容消攻破新泉寨，又攻打会州，将官朱勇攻破慕容消。
English: Murong Rui defeated Xinquanzhai, and also attacked Huizhou. General Zhu Yong defeated Murong Rui.

古文：五月辛丑，置两淮、江东西、湖广京西三道总领军马钱粮官，仍掌报发御前军马文字。
现代文：五月初四，设置两淮、江东西、湖广京西三道总领军马钱粮官，还掌管收发御前军马文字。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the year, Ma Qian, the commander-in-chief of the troops in the three provinces of Shuaihuai, East and West of the Yangtze River, and West of Huguangjing, was appointed as the official in charge of receiving and sending the imperial army's horse letters.

古文：癸卯，赙恤战没将士。
现代文：初六，抚恤战死的将士，并赐给钱物帮助家属完丧。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the dead soldiers were given a pension, and money and goods were given to help the bereaved families.

古文：丁未，遣张俊、岳飞于楚州巡视边防。
现代文：初十，派遣张俊、岳飞到楚州巡视边防。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhang Jun and Yue Fei were sent to patrol the border in Chuzhou.

古文：召刘光世赴行在。
现代文：召刘光世到行在。
English: Liu Guangxi has been summoned to appear in court.

古文：甲寅，命枢密行府置司镇江，令遍行巡历措置。
现代文：十七日，命令枢密行府在镇江置司，命令遍行巡历措置。
English: On the 17th, he ordered the Privy Council to set up an office in Zhenjiang, and ordered the implementation of inspection measures throughout the country.

古文：庚申，加杨沂中检校少保、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十三日，加给杨沂中检校少保、开府仪同三司的职衔。
English: On the 23rd, he was given the titles of Junior Security Officer, Kefu Yi and Third Division of Yangju Middle School.

古文：六月乙亥，造克敌弓。
现代文：六月初八，制造克敌弓。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, he made a bow to defeat the enemy.

古文：加秦桧特进，进尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：加给秦桧特进官职，升为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: In addition, Qin Yu was given a special promotion to an official post, and was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuchai, and to Shangshu Zhongshumen Xia Pingzhangji and Privy Councilor.

古文：癸未，张俊、岳飞至楚州。
现代文：十六日，张俊、岳飞到达楚州。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Jun and Yue Fei arrived in Chuzhou.

古文：俊以海州城不可守，毁之，迁其民，统韩世忠军还镇江，惟背嵬一军赴行在。
现代文：张俊认为海州城不可守御，毁破州城，迁徙居民，率韩世忠军回到镇江，只有亲卫一军前往行在。
English: Zhang Jun believed that the city of Haizhou could not be defended, destroyed the city of Haizhou, displaced the residents, and led the Han Shizhong army back to Zhenjiang. Only the bodyguard army went there.

古文：甲申，知河南府李兴部兵至鄂州，以兴为左军统制。
现代文：十七日，河南知府李兴率兵到鄂州，任命李兴为左军统制。
English: On the 17th, Li Xing of Henan Province led an army to Ezhou and appointed Li Xing as the leader of the Left Army.

古文：乙丑，明州僧王法恩等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：乙丑日，明州僧王法恩等谋反被处以死刑。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, the Ming state monk Wang Fahn and others were sentenced to death for plotting rebellion.

古文：壬辰，刘光世罢为万寿观使。
现代文：二十五日，刘光世罢为万寿观使。
English: On the 25th, Liu Guangzhe was appointed as the Ambassador of the Conception of Longevity.

古文：秋七月戊戌，秦桧上《徽宗实录》，进修撰以下各一官。
现代文：秋七月初二，秦桧进呈徽宗实录，修撰以下官员分别升官一级。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Qin Yujin presented the record of Huizong, and the following officials were promoted to the first level respectively.

古文：庚子，以翰林学士范同参知政事。
现代文：初四，任命翰林学士范同为参知政事。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Hanlin Scholar Fan Tong was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：以旱，减膳祈祷，遣官决滞狱，出系囚。
现代文：因早灾减少饮食，祈祷降雨，派官员处理积滞案件，放出关押的囚犯。
English: Due to the early disaster, they reduced their diet, prayed for rain, sent officials to deal with the backlog of cases, and released prisoners.

古文：丁未，加秦桧少保。
现代文：十一日，加给秦桧少保职衔。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he was given the title of Qin Xuan Shao Bao.

古文：甲寅，罢刘锜兵，命知荆南府。
现代文：十八日，罢除刘筒统兵权，命令他为荆南知府。
English: On the 18th, Liu Zui was removed from his post as commander-in-chief and ordered to be transferred to Jingnan Prefecture.

古文：乙卯，诏优奖永兴、凤翔、秦陇等州县官，到任半年减磨勘，任满迁一官。
现代文：十九日，下诏优惠奖励永兴、凤翔、秦陇等州县官，到任半年缩短迁转年限，任期满迁升一级。
English: On the 19th, Yongxing, Fengxiang, Qin Hui and other prefectural and county officials will be given preferential rewards, and their term of office will be shortened by half a year, and they will be promoted to the first level upon completion of their term.

古文：己未，加张俊太傅。
现代文：二十三日，加给张俊太保职衔。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Juntaobao was given the title.

古文：癸亥，大雨。
现代文：二十七日，降大雨。
English: On the 27th, it rained heavily.

古文：是月，命张俊复如镇江措置军务，留岳飞行在。
现代文：这个月，命令张俊又到镇江处理军务，岳飞留在行在。
English: This month, Zhang Jun was ordered to go to Zhenjiang to deal with military affairs, while Yuefei stayed in Zhouzhuang.

古文：八月戊辰，立祚德庙于临安，祀韩厥。
现代文：八月初三，在临安立柞德庙，祭祀韩厥。
English: On the third day of the eighth lunar month, Han Jue was enshrined at the Lintong Temple in Lin'an.

古文：甲戌，罢岳飞。
现代文：初九，罢免岳飞。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Yuefei was dismissed.

古文：乙亥，命诸王后各推年长一人权主祀事。
现代文：初十，命令诸王后代分别推举年长一人暂代主管祭祀事务。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered the descendants of the kings to separately nominate an older person to be the temporary head of the sacrificial affairs.

古文：癸巳，胡世将起复。
现代文：二十八日，胡世将守丧未满三年，被朝廷重新起用。
English: On the 28th, less than three years after Hu's death, he was reinstated by the imperial court.

古文：九月癸卯，命军器少监鲍琚如鄂州根括宣抚司钱谷。
现代文：九月初八，命令军器少监鲍据到鄂州清查宣抚司钱粮。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of September, he ordered the junior inspector of military equipment, Bao Zheng, to go to Ezhou to investigate and punish the department of money and grain.

古文：鄂州前军副统制王俊告副都统制张宪谋据襄阳为变，张俊收宪属吏以闻。
现代文：鄂州前军副统制王俊告发副都统制张宪谋据襄阳叛乱，张俊逮捕张宪属吏进行查问。
English: Wang Jun, deputy commander-in-chief of the former Ezhou army, accused Zhang Xian, deputy commander-in-chief, of plotting the rebellion in Xiangyang, and Zhang Jun arrested Zhang Xian's subordinates for questioning.

古文：丁未，坐监司不按赃吏罪。
现代文：十二日，监司没能查处贪赃官吏罪行的遭到处罚。
English: On the 12th, the Supervision Department failed to investigate and punish the crime of corrupt officials and was punished.

古文：辛亥，吴璘拔秦州，州将武谊降。
现代文：十六日，吴瞒攻取秦州，州守将武谊投降。
English: On the 16th, Wu Zhe captured Qinzhou, and the governor of the province surrendered to Wuyi.

古文：壬子，璘率姚仲及金人战于丁刘圈，败之。
现代文：十七日，吴瞒率姚仲与金军在丁刘圈作战，打败金军。
English: On the 17th, Wu Zheng led Yao Zhong and the Jin army to fight in the Ding Liu Circle, defeating the Jin army.

古文：杨政克陇州，破岐下诸屯。
现代文：杨政攻克陇州，攻破岐山脚下各屯。
English: Yang Zheng conquered Bozhou and broke through all the towns at the foot of Qishan Mountain.

古文：郭浩复华州，入陕州。
现代文：郭浩收复华州，进人陕州。
English: Guo Hao returns to Huazhou and enters Shaanxi.

古文：甲寅，建康大火。
现代文：十九日，建康发生大火灾。
English: On the 19th, a large fire broke out in Jiankang.

古文：丙申，遣刘光远等充金国通问使。
现代文：丙申日，派遣刘光远等人担任金国通问使。
English: On the same day, he dispatched Liu Guangyuan and others to serve as the envoy of the People's Republic of China.

古文：吴璘及金人战于剡家湾，大败之，遂围腊家城。
现代文：吴瞒与金军在刻家湾交战，大败金军，于是围攻腊家城。
English: Wu Zhen fought with the gold army in Kejia Bay, defeated the gold army, and then besieged Lajia City.

古文：癸亥，璘自腊家城受诏班师，杨政、郭浩皆引军还。
现代文：二十八日，吴瞒在腊家城奉命班师，杨政、郭浩都率军退回。
English: On the 28th, Wu Zhe was ordered to be a squad leader in Lajia City, and Yang Zheng and Guo Hao led the army back.

古文：乙丑，邵隆复虢州，郝晸讨禽骆科，斩之。
现代文：三十日，邵隆收复貌州，郝讨伐骆科，捉到后将他斩杀。
English: On the 30th day, Shao Long captured Fuzhou, fought against Luo Ke, and killed him after catching him.

古文：冬十月丙寅朔，金人陷泗州，遂陷楚州。
现代文：冬十月初一，金军攻陷泅州，于是又攻陷楚州。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the Chinese army invaded Ganzhou, and then invaded Chuzhou.

古文：丁卯，命枢密都承旨郑刚中宣谕川、陕。
现代文：初二，命令枢密院都承旨郑刚中宣谕川、陕地区。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Zheng Gang ordered the Privy Council to issue an order to the Xuanchuan and Shaanxi regions.

古文：戊辰，杨政及金人战于宝鸡县，败之，禽通检孛堇。
现代文：初三，杨政与金军在宝鸡县作战，打败金军，俘虏通检官李荃。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yang Zheng fought with the Jin Army in Baoji County, defeated the Jin Army, and captured the inspector Li Tsuen.

古文：乙亥，兀遣刘光远等还。
现代文：初十，兀派刘光远等人回国。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Yu sent Liu Guangyuan and others back to China.

古文：戊寅，诏修玉牒。
现代文：十三日，下诏修撰皇族谱碟。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered the compilation of an imperial family music CD.

古文：下岳飞、张宪大理狱，命御史中丞何铸、大理卿周三畏鞫之。
现代文：岳飞、张宪被下到大理狱中，命令御史中承何铸、大理卿周三畏审讯他们。
English: Yuefei and Zhang Xian were sent to Dali Prison, and ordered to be interrogated by Gu Shizhong, Cheng He Ji, and Dali Jing, on Wednesday.

古文：壬午，遣魏良臣、王公亮为金国禀议使。
现代文：十七日，派遣魏良臣、王公亮担任享议使出使金国。
English: On the 17th, he dispatched Wei Liangchen and Wang Gongliang to serve as envoys to negotiate with and dispatch Kim Guo.

古文：乙酉，虚恨蛮主历阶诣嘉州降。
现代文：二十日，虚恨蛮主历阶到嘉州投降。
English: On the 20th day, he went to Jiazhou to surrender.

古文：癸巳，韩世忠罢为醴泉观使，封福国公。
现代文：二十八日，韩世忠罢为醛泉观使，封为福国公。
English: On the 28th, Han Shizhong was promoted to the position of Yuanshan Envoy and named as the Prince of the Blessed Land.

古文：是月，金人陷濠州，邵隆复陕州。
现代文：这个月，金军攻陷壕州，邵隆收复陕州。
English: This month, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Hanzhou, and Shaolong recovered Shaanxi Province.

古文：十一月己亥，范同罢。
现代文：十一月初五，范同被罢职。
English: On November 5th, Fan Tong was dismissed.

古文：责降李光为建宁军节度副使、藤州安置。
现代文：李光贬降为建宁军节度副使，藤州安置。
English: Li Guang was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Jianning Army, and was resettled in Fujian.

古文：辛丑，兀遣审议使萧毅、邢具瞻与魏良臣等偕来。
现代文：初七，金兀派遣审议使萧毅、邢具瞻与魏良臣等一道来到宋朝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the consideration of dispatching Jinqi made Xiao Yi, Yao Guzhan and Wei Liangchen come to the Song Dynasty.

古文：丁未，范同分司、筠州居住。
现代文：十三日，范同遭到处罚，贬为箔州居住。
English: On the 13th, Fan Tong was punished and demoted to living in Hwazhou.

古文：罢判大宗正事士亻褭、同知宗正事士撙，申严戚里宗室谒禁。
现代文：罢除判大宗正事赵士可、同知宗正事赵士搏，再次命令严格戚里宗室渴禁制度。
English: Zhao Shike, Daizong Zhengji, and Zhao Shibo, Tongzizong Zhengji, were removed from their posts, and a strict ban on relatives moving into the family room was once again ordered.

古文：己酉，雷。
现代文：十五日，打雷。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder.

古文：壬子，萧毅等入见，始定议和盟誓。
现代文：十八日，萧毅等朝见高宗，开始确定议和盟书。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Yi and others went to see Gaozong in the morning and began to finalize the peace treaty.

古文：乙卯，以何铸签书枢密院事，充金国报谢进誓表使。
现代文：二十一日，任命何铸为签书枢密院事，担任金国报谢进誓表使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was appointed as the signer of the Privy Council, and served as the envoy of the Golden State Report and the oath.

古文：庚申，命宰执及议誓撰文官告祭天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十六日，命令宰执及议誓撰文官员祭祀祷告天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 26th, the leader and the oath-writing official were ordered to offer prayers to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：辛酉，以张浚为检校少傅、崇信军节度使、万寿观使。
现代文：二十七日，任命张浚为检校少傅、崇信军节度使、万寿观使。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Jun was appointed as the junior inspector of the school, the chief delegate of the National Day of the Chongxin Army, and the delegate of the Wan Shou Guan.

古文：是月，与金国和议成，立盟书，约以淮水中流画疆，割唐、邓二州界之，岁奉银二十五万两、绢二十五万匹，休兵息民，各守境土。
现代文：这个月，与金国议和成功，立下盟约，两国从淮水中流划定疆界，割让唐、邓二州给金国，每年供奉金国白银二十五万两、绢二十五万匹，双方休战息兵，各守自己的国土。
English: This month, after successfully negotiating and concluding a treaty with the Kim dynasty, the two countries delineated the border from the Huai Shui Current, ceded Tang and Deng two states to the Kim dynasty, and donated 250,000 silver and 250,000 horses to the Kim dynasty each year. Both sides declared a truce and disbanded their troops, and each side guarded its own territory.

古文：诏川、陕宣抚司毋出兵生事，招纳叛亡。
现代文：诏令川、陕宣抚司不要出兵惹起事端，不要招纳叛降和逃亡的兵民。
English: He ordered the Sichuan and Shaanxi procuratorates not to send troops to stir up trouble, and not to recruit soldiers and civilians who had surrendered or fled.

古文：骆科余党欧幻四等复叛桂阳蓝山，犯平阳县，遣江西兵马都监程师回讨平之。
现代文：骆科余党欧幻四等在桂阳蓝山又发动叛乱，攻打平阳县，派江西兵马都监程师回讨伐平定。
English: In Guiyang Blue Mountain, Luo Ke Yu's party, the European Fantasy Fourth Class, launched another rebellion, attacked Pingyang County, and sent Jiangxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor Cheng Division to fight back and pacify.

古文：十二月丁卯，责降徽猷阁待制刘洪道为濠州团练副使使、柳州安置。
现代文：十二月初三，徽酞阁待制刘洪道被贬降为壕州团练副使，柳州安置。
English: On the third day of December, Liu Hongdao, who had been stationed in Huiyangge, was demoted to the position of deputy envoy of Trench State Rehearsal, and was resettled in Liuzhou.

古文：癸酉，命尚书省置籍勾考诸路滞狱。
现代文：初九，命令尚书省设置簿籍检查考核各路积滞案件。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture was ordered to set up a bookkeeping inspection and assessment of all backlog cases.

古文：甲戌，罢川、陕宣抚司便宜行事。
现代文：初十，罢除川、陕宣抚司不上奏自行处决事务的规定。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the regulation that the Sichuan and Shaanxi Proclamation and Relief Departments should not report on their own execution affairs was abolished.

古文：乙亥，兀遣何铸等如会宁见金主，且趣割陕西余地。
现代文：十一日，兀派何铸等到会宁朝见金主，并且督促割让陕西余地。
English: On the 11th day, the Kuomintang faction waited until the Ho-Ning Dynasty met with the owner of the money, and urged him to cede more space to Shaanxi Province.

古文：遂命周聿、莫将、郑刚中分画京西唐邓、陕西地界。
现代文：于是命令周幸、莫将、郑刚中分别划定京西唐邓、陕西地界。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhou Xing, Mo Zheng and Zheng Gangzhong to delimit the Beijing-West Tang and Tang-Dong and Shaanxi borders respectively.

古文：壬午，命州县三岁一置产业簿，籍民赀财田宅以定赋役，禁受赇亏隐旧额。
现代文：十八日，命令州县每三年制置一次产业簿，按照民众资业财产田地多少确定赋役，禁止收受贿赂导致原有的数额减少。
English: On the 18th, it ordered the prefectures and counties to set up an estate book every three years, to determine the amount of land assigned according to the amount of property owned by the people, and to prohibit the acceptance of bribes, which led to a reduction in the original amount.

古文：丁亥，立讥察海舶条法。
现代文：二十三日，确立讥察海船条法。
English: On the 23rd, the Law on the Inspection of Seagoing Vessels was established.

古文：癸巳，赐岳飞死于大理寺，斩其子云及张宪于市，家属徙广南，官属于鹏等论罪有差。
现代文：二十九日，在大理寺赐死岳飞，他的儿子岳云同张宪被斩首示众，家属迁徙流放到广南，所属官吏、僚属于鹏等遭到不等的处罚。
English: On the 29th, Yuefei was sentenced to death in Dali Temple, his son Yueyuntong Zhangxian was beheaded in public, his family members were exiled to Guangnan, and the officials and colleagues who belonged to Peng were subjected to various punishments.

