古文：天下之士，合从相聚于赵，而欲攻秦。秦相应侯曰： 王勿忧也，请令废之。
现代文：天下的策士都聚集在赵国讨论合纵盟约，目的是联合六国抗拒强秦，这时秦相应侯范睢对秦王说： 大王不必忧心，臣可以使他们的合纵之盟约土崩瓦解。
English: The world's strategists were gathered in Zhao to discuss the alliance treaty, with the aim of uniting the six countries to resist the strong Qin. At this time, Qin's corresponding Hou Fanqi said to the Qin king: The great king need not worry, the minister can make their alliance treaty collapse.

古文：秦于天下之士非有怨也，相聚而攻秦者，以己欲富贵耳。
现代文：因为秦对于天下的策士，平日丝豪没有怨仇，他们所以要聚会谋划攻打秦国，是因为自己想借此升官发财而已。
English: Because Qin had no grudge against the world's strategists, the everyday heroes, and the reason they wanted to get together to plan an attack on Qin was because they wanted to use this opportunity to get promoted and make money.

古文：王见大王之狗，卧者卧，起者起，行者行，止者止，毋相与斗者；投之一骨，轻起相牙者，何则？
现代文：请大王看看大王的狗，现在睡着的都好好睡着，站着的都好好站着，走着的都好好走着，停着的都好好停着，彼此之间没有任何争斗。
English: Ask the king to look at the king's dogs. The dogs that are sleeping are sleeping well, the dogs that are standing are standing well, the dogs that are walking are walking well, and the dogs that are standing are standing well. There is no fighting between them.

古文：有争意也。 于是唐睢载音乐，予之五十金，居武安，高会相与饮，谓： 邯郸人谁来取者？ 
现代文：可是只要在它们之间丢下一块骨头，所有的狗都会立刻跑过来，呲牙咧嘴露出一副凶残相，互相争夺，乱咬乱叫。这是什么道理呢？
English: But as soon as you throw a bone between them, all the dogs come running at once, snarling and gnashing their teeth with a ferocious grin, competing with each other and biting and barking.

古文：于是其谋者固未可得予也，其可得与者，与之昆弟矣。
现代文：因为所有的狗都起了争夺的意念。 于是范雎就派秦臣唐雎用车载着乐工乐器，又让他带了五千两黄金，在赵国的武安大摆宴席，并且对外宣布说： 邯郸人谁愿意来拿黄金呢？ 
English: Because all the dogs were eager to compete, Fan Kuang sent Qin's minister, Tang Jun, with a car loaded with musical instruments and five thousand taels of gold, to hold a grand banquet in Wu'an, Zhao Province, and announced to the outside world: "Who would like to take the gold?

古文：公与秦计功者，不问金之所之，金尽者功多矣。今令人复载五十金随公。 
现代文：就这样，那些人当中为首的固然没有来拿黄金，但那些已得到黄金的人，已经和秦国人就像亲兄弟一样亲密了。应侯又告诉唐雎说： 你为秦国立下功劳，不用管黄金究竟给了哪些人，只要你把黄金都送给人就完成任务了，现在再派人载五千金给你。 
English: In this way, although the leaders of those people did not come to take the gold, those who had already received the gold were already as close to the Qin people as brothers and sisters. Ying Hou also told Tang Jun that: You have made a great contribution to the Qin State, no matter who the gold was given to, as long as you give the gold to people, the task will be completed. Now send someone to carry five thousand gold to you.

古文：唐睢行，行至武安，散不能三千金，天下之士，大相与斗矣。
现代文：于是唐雎又用车拉着大量的黄金出发，又来到武安，结果还没分完三千金，那些商讨合纵的天下谋士就互相争夺打斗起来了。
English: Therefore, Tang Xuan set off again with a car pulling a large amount of gold, and came to Wu'an. As a result, before the three thousand gold coins were divided, the world's strategists who were discussing and conspiring began to fight each other.

