古文：《齐民要术》：椹熟时，多收，曝干之，凶年粟少，可以当食。
现代文：《齐民要术》：桑葚成熟的时候，多多采收，晒干；遇上荒年粮食不够吃，可以充饥。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": When the mulberry is ripe, harvest more and dry it in the sun; if there is not enough grain to eat in a bad year, it can satisfy hunger.

古文：《魏略》曰：杨沛为新郑长。
现代文：《魏略》说：杨沛任新郑县县官。
English: "Weiliu" said: Yang Pei is the county official of Xinzheng County.

古文：兴平末，人多饥穷。
现代文：汉献帝兴平二年末，百姓多挨饥受饿，生活穷苦。
English: By the end of the second year of Emperor Han Xingping's reign, most of the people were starving and living in poverty.

古文：沛课民益畜干椹，收萱豆：阅其有余，以补不足，积聚千余斛。
现代文：杨沛叫百姓多收藏干桑葚，采集野萱豆，并进行检查，凡蓄积有多余的，一律收集，准备补助不足，总计收集起来千多斛。
English: Yang Pei called on the people to collect more dried mulberry stalks, collect wild peas, and conduct inspections. If there is excess accumulation, it will be collected without exception. If there is insufficient preparation for subsidies, a total of more than a thousand stalks will be collected.

古文：会太祖西迎天子，所将千人皆无粮；沛谒见，乃进干椹，太祖甚善。
现代文：这时适逢魏太祖出兵千余人，西去迎接皇帝，没带军粮。杨沛迎接拜见太祖时，遂将干桑葚献上。魏太祖对杨沛的做法甚为称道。
English: At this time, Wei Taizu sent more than a thousand soldiers to the west to meet the emperor, but they did not bring any military food. When Yang Pei met the emperor, he presented dried mulberry to him. Wei Taizu highly praised Yang Pei's actions.

古文：及太祖辅政，超为邺令，赐生口十人，绢百匹，既欲励之，且以报干椹也。
现代文：后来太祖作了丞相，破格提拔杨沛任邺县令，赏给奴仆十人，绢一百匹。一方面是为了奖励他，同时也是为了报答他的干桑葚。
English: Later, the great-great-grandfather became the prime minister, promoted Yang Pei to the position of county magistrate, and rewarded him with ten servants and one hundred donkeys. On the one hand, it was to reward him, and at the same time, it was to reward his dried mulberry.

古文：今自河以北，大家收百石，少者尚数十斛，故杜、葛乱后，饥馑荐臻，惟仰以全躯命，数州之内，民死而生者，干椹之力也。
现代文：今黄河以北，人多的家庭，收藏多至上百石，少的也有数十斛。故杜、葛兵乱以后连年饥荒，百姓全靠干桑葚维持活命。几州地方的百姓能够死里逃生，皆为干桑葚的功劳。
English: Now, north of the Yellow River, many families have collections of up to hundreds of stones, and a few have dozens of mulberries. Therefore, after the Du and Ge Rebellion, the famine lasted for years, and the people were kept alive by dried mulberries. The people in several states were able to escape death, all thanks to dried mulberries.

古文：《务本新书》：桑椹：平时以枣、椹拌馅，煿饼食之，甜而有益。
现代文：《务本新书》：桑葚：平时用枣和桑葚拌成馅作烤饼，吃着又甜又有益处。
English: "Ryuhon Shinsho": Mulberry: Usually, jujube and mulberry are mixed into a filling to make scones, which are sweet and beneficial to eat.

古文：椹子煎：采熟椹，盆内微研；以布纽汁，瓷器盛顿。昼夜露地放之，四十九日。
现代文：葚子煎：采收成熟的桑葚，放在盆中研破，用布绞取桑葚汁液，用瓷器盛放；白天和夜晚，放在露地，四十九天以后，用滚开水冲服。
English: Pan-fried hazelnuts: harvest ripe mulberries, grind them in a basin, wring out the juice with a cloth and serve with porcelain; day and night, place in the open air, after 49 days, wash with boiled water.

古文：以汤点服，明耳目，益水藏，和血气。
现代文：明耳目、益水藏、和血气。
English: Bright ears and eyes, beneficial water reservoirs, and healthy blood.

古文：或加蜜少许，石器同煎亦可。
现代文：或加上少量蜂蜜，放在石器中煎熬也可以。
English: or with a small amount of honey, it can also be simmered in a stone vessel.

古文：病诸疮疾，作膏药贴，神效。
现代文：患各种疮病时，用作成膏药贴患处，有奇效。
English: When suffering from various sores, it is used to make a plaster to stick to the affected area, which has a miraculous effect.

古文：桑螵蛸，桑根白皮，皆入药用。
现代文：桑螵蛸、桑根白皮，皆可作药用。
English: Mulberry and mulberry root bark can both be used medicinally.

古文：桑皮抄纸：春初刳斫繁枝，剥芽皮为上；余月次之。
现代文：桑皮抄纸：春初科伐桑树上过多的枝条，剥取桑皮连同芽眼用来造纸为最好，其余月份较次。
English: Peeling mulberry bark for paper: In early spring, the excessive branches on the mulberry trees are cut off. It is best to peel the mulberry bark together with the buds to make paper. The rest of the months are less important.

古文：桑木为弓弩胎，则耐挽拽。
现代文：桑木做成的弓弩内胎，非常耐得住挽拉。
English: The inner tube of the bowstring, made of mulberry wood, is very resistant to pinching.

古文：桑莪，素食中妙物。
现代文：桑莪，是素食中的佳品。
English: Mulberry, is the best product in vegetarian food.

古文：又 五木耳 ：桑、槐、榆、柳、楮是也。桑、槐者为良。
现代文：桑、槐、榆、柳、楮等树上长出的五种木耳当中，只有桑树和槐树上生长出来的为上等。
English: Among the five types of fungi that grow on trees such as mulberry, alder, oak, willow, and poplar, only those that grow on mulberry and eucalyptus are superior.

古文：野田中者，恐有毒，不可食。
现代文：田野中生长出来的，恐怕有毒，不可食用。
English: Cows grown in the fields are probably poisonous and inedible.

