古文：○高宗五五年春正月乙巳朔，日有食之。帝在平江府。
现代文：绍兴五年春正月初一，日食。高宗在平江府。金军退离壕州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Shaoxing Spring, the sun was eclipsed. Gao Zong was in Pingjiang Prefecture. The Golden Army retreated from Hezhou.

古文：金人去濠州。丁未，戒诸军战陈毋杀中原民籍充金兵者。
现代文：初三，命令各军在与金军交战中，不要杀死中原百姓被征发为金兵的人。
English: On the third day of the first month, he ordered the armies not to kill the Central Plains people who were conscripted as gold soldiers in the war with the gold army.

古文：命鬻官田宅输钱专充军费。
现代文：命令誓卖官田宅得到的钱专门充作军费开支。
English: He ordered that the money from the sale of the official's residence be used exclusively for military expenses.

古文：戊申，进庐、泰二州守御官属各一官。
现代文：初四，庐、泰二州守御官及僚属分别升官一级。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zou and Tai, two provincial governors and their subordinates were promoted to the first grade respectively.

古文：己酉，诏前宰执吕颐浩等十九人及行在职事官各条上攻战备御措置绥怀之策。
现代文：初五，下诏前任宰执吕颐浩等十九人，以及行在职事官分别向朝廷陈述攻战备御、措置绥怀的方略。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, nineteen people, including the former leader Lyu Binhao, as well as the current officials, separately presented to the imperial court the strategy of preparing for war and taking measures.

古文：免淮南官吏去职之罪，仍令还任。
现代文：免除淮南官吏离职之罪，仍然命令他们各自归职。
English: exempted Huainan officials from the crime of leaving their posts, but still ordered them to return to their posts.

古文：承州水砦统领仲谅复入楚州。
现代文：承州水寨统领仲谅又进人楚州。
English: The Chenzhou Water Township leader, Zhongren, has entered Chuzhou again.

古文：庚戌，张俊遣统领杨忠闵、王进夹击金人于淮南岸，败之，降其将程师回、张延寿。
现代文：初六，张俊派统领杨忠阂、王进在淮河南岸夹击金军，打败他们，迫使金军将领程师回、张延寿投降。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Yang Zhongyao and Wang Jin, the leaders of the Zhang Jun faction, clamped down on the gold army on the south bank of the Huai River, defeated them, and forced the gold army general to lead the division back and Zhang Yanshou to surrender.

古文：辛亥，淮东统制崔德明袭败金兵于盱眙。召张浚赴行在。
现代文：初七，淮东统制崔德明在盯胎袭击打败金军。召张浚前往行在。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Cui Deming, the commanding officer of Huaidong, defeated the Jin army in the tire-tracking attack. Zhang Jun was summoned to the scene.

古文：乙卯，浚入见。
现代文：十一日，张浚来朝见。
English: On the 11th day, Zhang Jun came to see me in the morning.

古文：赏沿江监司、帅臣供亿之劳，各进官一等。
现代文：奖赏沿江监司、帅臣供应军需的功劳，分别升官一级。
English: Rewarding the merits of the supervisors along the river and the courtiers supplying military supplies, they were promoted to the first level.

古文：戊午，趣修建康行宫。
现代文：十四日，催促修筑建康行宫。
English: On the 14th, the construction of the Kangxing Palace was urged.

古文：己未，诏减淮南诸州杂犯死罪，释流以下囚。
现代文：十五日，下诏减轻淮南各州杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放流刑以下的罪犯。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following decree was issued to commute the sentences of death penalty prisoners in various states of Huainan, and to release criminals who were sentenced to less than exile.

古文：庚申，置诸州军教场，选兵专习弓弩，立格按试。
现代文：十六日，设置各州军教场，挑选士兵专门练习弓弩，确立标准检查考试。
English: On the 16th, set up military training grounds in each state, select soldiers to specifically practice bow and arrow, and establish standard inspection examinations.

古文：辛酉，赠殿中侍御史马伸左谏议大夫。
现代文：十七日，赠给殿中侍御史马伸左谏议大夫。
English: On the seventeenth day, it was presented to the palace chamberlain, Shima Shinsha Zuo.

古文：韩世忠、刘光世、张俊入见。
现代文：韩世忠、刘光世、张俊来朝见。
English: Han Shizhong, Liu Guangzhe and Zhang Jun came to see the emperor.

古文：壬戌，以世忠为少保、淮东宣抚使，驻镇江；光世少保、淮西宣抚使，驻太平；俊开府仪同三司、江东宣抚使，驻建康。
现代文：十八日，任命韩世忠为少保、淮东宣抚使，驻屯镇江；刘光世为少保、淮西宣抚使，驻屯太平；张俊为开府仪同三司、江东宣抚使，驻屯建康。
English: On the 18th, Han Shizhong was appointed as the Junior Vice-Minister of Public Security and the Special Envoy to the East Huaihai Province, stationed in Zhenjiang; Liu Guangshi was appointed as the Junior Vice-Minister of Public Security and the Special Envoy to the West Huaihai Province, stationed in Taiping; Zhang Jun was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Public Security and the Special Envoy to the East Huaihai Province, stationed in Jiankang.

古文：甲子，郦琼复光州，降其守许约。
现代文：二十日，丽仔琼收复光州，迫使其守将许约投降。
English: On the 20th, Liza Qiong recaptured Gwangju and forced it to surrender.

古文：乙丑，罢淮南茶盐提刑司，置提点两路公事官一员，兼领刑狱、茶盐、漕运、市易事。
现代文：二十一日，废罢淮南茶盐提刑司，设置提点两路公事官一名，兼领刑狱、茶盐、槽运、市易事务。
English: On the 21st, Huainan Tea and Salt Criminal Investigation Division was abolished, and a two-way public affairs officer was set up, concurrently in charge of prison, tea and salt, warehouse transportation, and market and exchange affairs.

古文：淮西要会州军并置市易务。
现代文：淮西重要交会州军都设置市易务。
English: Huaxi's important state-level military exchanges have all set up municipal exchange services.

古文：戊辰，诏川、陕宣抚司招谕陷贼官民。
现代文：二十四日，下诏川、陕宣抚司招谕沦陷伪齐的官吏和百姓。
English: On the 24th, officials and people who fell into pseudo-Qi were invited by the lower Zhaochuan and Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Bureau.

古文：庚午，命王进合江西、广东诸将兵讨周十隆。
现代文：二十六日，命令王进联合江西、广东各将领统率的军队讨伐周十隆。
English: On the 26th, Wang Jin ordered the army led by the generals of Jiangxi and Guangdong to fight against Zhou Shulong.

古文：海贼朱聪犯广州，又犯泉州。
现代文：海贼朱聪攻打广州，又攻打泉州。
English: The pirate Zhu Cong attacked Guangzhou and Quanzhou.

古文：壬申，刘光世、韩世忠、张俊入辞，命升殿，以光世、世忠有隙，赐酒谕释之，皆感激奉诏。
现代文：二十八日，刘光世、韩世忠、张俊人朝辞谢，命令上殿，因刘光世、韩世忠之间有不愉快的事情，高宗赐酒从中调解，二人都感激不尽，表示奉命。
English: On the 28th, Liu Guangzhe, Han Shizhong, and Zhang Junren resigned from the imperial court and ordered to go to the palace. Because there were unpleasant things between Liu Guangzhe and Han Shizhong, Gao Zong gave wine to mediate between them. Both of them were grateful and said that they had been ordered.

古文：癸酉，伪齐知亳州马秦犯光州，权州事王萃率兵拒之。
现代文：二十九日，伪齐毫州知州马秦攻打光州，代理州事王萃率兵抵抗。
English: On the 29th, the pseudo-Qizhou Zhizhou Maqin attacked Gwangju, and the acting provincial governor Wang Qi led the resistance.

古文：是月，金主晟殂，旻之孙亶立。
现代文：这个月，金主晨去世，的孙子即皇帝位。
English: This month, Emperor Jin died, and his grandson became emperor.

古文：岳飞自池州入朝。
现代文：岳飞从池州前往行在朝见高宗。
English: Yuefei travels from Chizhou to see Gaozong in the morning.

古文：二月丙子，以飞为镇宁、崇信军节度使。
现代文：二月初二，任命岳飞为镇宁、崇信军节度使。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Yuefei was appointed as the festival envoy of Zhening and Chongxin Army.

古文：命常州布衣陈得一造新历。
现代文：命令常州百姓陈得一制作新历。
English: ordered the people of Changzhou to make a new calendar.

古文：丁丑，帝发平江。
现代文：初三，高宗从平江出发。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Gao Zong set out from Pingjiang.

古文：戊寅，遣权太常少卿张铢奉迎太庙神主于温州。
现代文：初四，派遣代理太常少卿张铣到温州奉迎太庙神主。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zhang Ye, the agent of Taizang Shaoqing, was dispatched to Wenzhou to welcome the god of the temple.

古文：壬午，帝至临安，进扈从官吏秩一等。
现代文：初八，高宗到达临安，护从官吏增加棒禄一级。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Gaozong arrived in Lin'an, and the protection from officials increased by one level.

古文：丙戌，以赵鼎为左仆射，张浚右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事、都督诸路军马。
现代文：十二日，任命赵鼎为左仆射，张浚为右仆射，都为同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事，都督各路军马。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Zhao Ding as his left-hand man and Zhang Jun as his right-hand man, both of whom were in charge of the Privy Council and the government.

古文：岳飞为荆湖南北、襄阳府路制置使，将兵平湖贼杨太。
现代文：任命岳飞为荆湖南北、襄阳府路制置使，率兵平定洞庭湖贼杨太。
English: Yue Fei was appointed as the road construction envoy for the north and south of Jinghu and Yangyang Prefecture, and led the troops to subdue Yang Tai, the thief of Dongting Lake.

古文：丁亥，吴璘、杨政攻拔秦州，执伪齐守胡宣，金帅撒离曷来援，政复击败之。
现代文：十三日，吴瞒、杨政攻取秦州，俘获伪齐太守胡宣，金军统帅撒离易前来救援，杨政又打败金军。
English: On the 13th, Wu Zhen and Yang Zheng captured Qinzhou, captured the pseudo-Qi Taishou Hu Xuan, the commander of the Jin Army, Sa Yiyi, came to the rescue, and Yang Zheng defeated the Jin Army.

古文：己丑，诏建太庙。
现代文：十五日，下诏建造太庙。
English: On the 15th, the imperial edict was issued to build a grand temple.

古文：壬辰，命张浚诣江上措置边防，诏谕诸路宣抚制置司，示以专任之旨。
现代文：十八日，下命张浚到长江上措置边境防务，下诏告谕各路宣抚制置司，示以单独承担此任的意旨。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun was ordered to go to the Yangtze River to take measures of border defense, and the next edict was to announce the establishment of a division in each province, indicating the intention to assume this position alone.

古文：以右司谏赵霈论奏得体，赐三品服。
现代文：因右司谏赵需上奏论事合乎治体，恰如其分，赐给三品官服。
English: Due to the fact that the right secretary, Zhao Zhao, needed to report the matter, it was in accordance with the ruling body and appropriate, and he was given three official uniforms.

古文：丁酉，进执政官秩一等，以赏防秋之功。
现代文：二十三日，执政官增加棒禄一级，用来奖赏他们抵抗金、伪齐联军秋季侵略的功劳。
English: On the 23rd, the consul increased the bonus by one level, which was used to reward their efforts in resisting the autumn invasion by the Jin and Qin allied forces.

古文：戊戌，诏淮南宣抚司抚司淮北来归官吏军民。
现代文：二十四日，下诏淮南宣抚司抚恤慰问从淮北来归顺的官吏和军民。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the Huainan Propaganda and Guidance Bureau sent condolences to the officials, soldiers and civilians who came from Huaibei to surrender.

古文：己亥，直史馆范冲上《神宗实录考异》。
现代文：二十五日，直史馆范冲呈上件申宗实录考异。
English: On the 25th, Fan Chong of the Direct History Museum submitted the above-mentioned petition for the examination of the record.

古文：庚子，诏翰林学士孙近、胡交修类编臣僚条具利害章疏以闻。
现代文：二十六日，下诏翰林学士孙近、胡交修分类编撰臣僚陈述时政利害的奏疏报告朝廷。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Hanlin Scholar Sun Chian and Hu Jiaxiu classified and compiled the ministerial statement of current political interests and sent the report to the imperial court.

古文：甲辰，蠲湖南路上供三年。
现代文：三十日，免除湖南路上供三年。
English: On the 30th, exempt Hunan Road for three years.

古文：是月，伪齐商元寇信阳军，守臣舒继明被禽，死之。
现代文：这个月，伪齐商元攻打信阳军，守臣舒继明被俘而死。
English: This month, the pseudo Qi merchants attacked the Xinyang army, and the vassal Shu Jiming was captured and died.

古文：闰月乙巳朔，雨雹。
现代文：闰二月初一，降冰雹。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, hail fell.

古文：丁未，胡松年罢。
现代文：初三，胡松年罢职。
English: In his junior year, he resigned from his post.

古文：戊申，雪。
现代文：初四，降雪。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, it snowed.

古文：己酉，留四川上供银帛就充军费。
现代文：初五，留下四川上供银帛就地充作军费。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he left the upper supply of silver ingots from Sichuan to be used for military expenses.

古文：乙卯，以孟庾、沈与求并兼权枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命孟庚、沈与求兼代理枢密院事。
English: On the 11th, Meng Geng and Shen Youcui were appointed acting Privy Councillors.

古文：丙辰，并诸路提举常平入茶盐司。
现代文：十二日，合并各路提举常平到茶盐司。
English: On the 12th, all roads were merged to raise Changping to the tea salt department.

古文：罢福建铸钱，令转运、坑冶司办集。
现代文：废罢福建铸钱，命令转运坑冶司办理。
English: The Fujian Foundry was abolished, and the transfer pit metallurgy department was ordered to handle it.

古文：丁巳，撒离曷欲犯秦州，吴玠遣部将牛皓伺之，遇于瓦五谷，战死。
现代文：十三日，撒离易想攻打秦州，吴派遣部将牛皓侦察这一情况，在瓦吾谷与金军相遇，牛皓战死。
English: On the thirteenth day, Sari Yiyi wanted to attack Qinzhou, Wu dispatched General Niu Yao to investigate the situation, and met with the Golden Army in Wagu Valley. Niu Yao was killed in the battle.

古文：癸亥，海贼陈感犯雷州，官军屡败。
现代文：十九日，海贼陈感攻打雷州，官军多次失败。
English: On the 19th, the pirates attacked Leizhou, and the government army failed many times.

古文：丁卯，王燮罢。
现代文：二十三日，王镬罢职。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Qi resigned.

古文：命户部尚书章谊措置财用，孟庾提领，号总制司。
现代文：命令户部尚书章谊措置财政收支，由孟庚提领，号称总制司。
English: He ordered Meng Geng to take charge of the financial revenue and expenditure of the household department, known as the General Accounting Office.

古文：命川、陕宣抚司幕僚摄司事，仍权节制军马。
现代文：命令川、陕宣抚司幕僚代理管理宣抚司事务，并且代理节制军马。
English: He ordered the staff members of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Departments to act as agents to manage the affairs of the Propaganda and Guidance Departments, and to act as agents to restrain the war horses.

古文：戊辰，置路分总管，以处闲退武臣。
现代文：二十四日，设置路分总管，用来安置闲退武臣。
English: On the 24th, the General Administration of Road Division was set up to resettle idle retiring samurai.

古文：辛未，复置宗正丞，掌修属籍。
现代文：二十七日，重新设置宗正承，掌管修撰属籍。
English: On the 27th, Zong Zheng Rong was re-installed, in charge of revising the family register.

古文：再蠲荆南府、归、峡二州、荆门、公安二军岁贡上供二年。
现代文：再次免除荆南府、归峡二州、荆门公安二军岁供、上供二年。
English: Once again exempted Jingnanfu, Guixia two states, Jingmen public security two years, and the upper two years.

古文：三月甲戌朔，以王燮贪纵不武，败师误国，责授濠州团练使。
现代文：三月初一，王镬因贪婪悠肆，缺少将才，败师误国，贬降为壕州团练使。
English: On the first day of March, due to his greed and lack of military talent, Wang Xizhong lost his position and was demoted to the position of Jiaozhou regimental training envoy.

古文：丙子，遣枢密计议官吕用中等分使两浙、江东、西路检察经、总制司财用。
现代文：初三，派遣枢密计议官吕用中等分别出使两浙、江东西路，检察经、总制司财政收支情况。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Privy Counsellor Lü Yimin separately dispatched envoys to Zhejiang and Jiangxi provinces to inspect the financial revenue and expenditure of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and the General Administration of Customs.

古文：丁丑，诏侍从至监察御史、馆职已上，在内馆职、在外侍从官、监司、帅守，各举所知充监司、守令，寻命馆职专举县令。
现代文：初四，下诏侍从至监察御史、馆职以上，在内馆职、在外侍从官、监司、帅守，各自推举所熟知的可以担任监司、守令的人才。不久命令馆职专门推举可以担任县令的人才。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the lower echelon of attendants were selected to be supervisors of history, above the rank of librarian, in-house librarians, outside attendants, supervisors, and superintendents, each of whom was familiar with the talents that could serve as supervisors and guards. Soon, the librarian was ordered to specifically select talents that could serve as county magistrates.

古文：己卯，以韩世忠兼镇江府宣抚使，刘光世兼太平州宣抚使。
现代文：初六，任命韩世忠兼镇江府宣抚使，刘光世兼太平州宣抚使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Han Shizhong was also appointed as the Zhenjiang prefectural envoy, and Liu Guangze was also appointed as the Taiping prefectural envoy.

古文：壬午，以都督府参议军事邵溥兼权川、陕宣抚副使。
现代文：初九，任命都督府参议军事邵溥兼代理川、陕宣抚副使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he appointed the military counselor of the governor's office, Shao Jun, as well as the deputy envoy of the Sichuan and Shaanxi proclamation.

古文：罢御前军器所提举官，并隶工部。
现代文：废罢御前军器所提举官，隶属工部。
English: An official nominated by the former Ordnance Department was abolished and transferred to the Engineering Department.

古文：壬辰，命广东、福建路招捕朱聪。
现代文：十九日，命令广东、福建路招捕朱聪。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the Guangdong and Fujian provinces to recruit and arrest Zhu Cong.

古文：乙未，初榷铅、锡。
现代文：二十二日，初次禁铅、锡。
English: On the 22nd, lead and tin were banned for the first time.

古文：张浚亲讨湖贼。
现代文：张浚亲自讨伐洞庭湖贼。
English: Zhang Jun personally fought against the Dongting Lake bandits.

古文：丁酉，复移浙西安抚司于临安府。
现代文：二十四日，又把浙西安抚司迁移到临安府。
English: On the 24th, the Zhejiang and West China Pacification Division was relocated to Lin'an.

古文：庚子，罢饶州牧马监。
现代文：二十七日，废罢饶州牧马监。
English: On the 27th, the removal of the state horse-breeding inspector was abolished.

古文：夏四月丙午，贵池县丞黄大本坐枉法赃，杖脊、刺配南雄州。
现代文：四月初三，贵池县承黄大本因贪赃枉法，被杖脊刺配南雄州。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Chenghuang Daben of Guiqi County was punished for corruption by being impaled with a cane and impaled with a spike and sent to Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：丁未，遣司农丞盖谅持诏抚谕川、陕。
现代文：初四，派遣司农承盖谅带着诏书抚谕川、陕。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he dispatched the chief farmer, Chengge Yue, with an imperial edict to the Sichuan and Shaanxi Provinces.

古文：召解潜赴行在，王彦知荆南府，诸镇抚使至是尽罢。
现代文：召解潜前往行在，王彦知荆南府，各镇抚使至此全部废罢。
English: Wang Yan Zhi Jing Nanfu, all the township commissioners should be scrapped.

古文：戊申，太庙神主至自温州。
现代文：初五，太庙神主从温州迁到临安。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the chief priest of the temple moved from Wenzhou to Lin'an.

古文：己酉，以审量滥赏，追左银青光禄大夫王序八官及职名，仍改正出身。
现代文：初六，因审核检察滥赏，追赠左银青光禄大夫王序八官及职名，并且改正出身。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, due to the examination and inspection of excessive rewards, the left silver Qingguanglu doctor was awarded eight positions and titles, and his birth was corrected.

古文：庚戌，诏内侍遇特恩转宫，止武功郎。
现代文：初七，下诏：内侍遇到特别恩惠调迁官职，至武功郎为止。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the following edict was issued: If a chambermaid received a special favor, she would be transferred to an official post, until she became a warrior.

古文：壬子，访得周后柴叔夏袭封崇义公。
现代文：初九，寻访得到后周后代柴叔夏，命令他袭封崇义公。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Chai Shuxia, a descendant of Hou Zhou, visited him and ordered him to seize the throne of Chongyi.

古文：戊午，奉安太庙神主。
现代文：十五日，奉安太庙神主。
English: On the fifteenth day, the deity of An Taimiao Temple was honored.

古文：己未，更免役保正长法。
现代文：十六日，更改免役保正长法。
English: On the 16th, the law on exempting senior officials from military service was amended.

古文：甲子，太上皇帝崩于五国城。
现代文：二十一日，太上皇帝徽宗在五国城逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Huizong died in the Five Kingdoms City.

古文：丙寅，帝即射殿行朝献景灵宫之礼，始以惠恭皇后祔祭。
现代文：二十三日，高宗到射殿，行祭祀景灵宫之礼，开始用惠恭皇后附祭。
English: On the 23rd, Gao Zong went to the Hall of Fire to perform the ritual of the Jingling Palace, and began to use the Queen Huigong Festival.

古文：募民耕营田，官给牛、种。
现代文：招募百姓耕种营田，官府供给耕牛和种子。
English: People were recruited to cultivate the yakitori fields, and the government supplied oxen and seeds.

古文：庚午，省四川添差官。
现代文：二十七日，省减四川添差官。
English: On the 27th, Sichuan Province reduced the number of additional officials.

古文：辛未，以诸路税赋畸零增收钱专充上供。
现代文：二十八日，用各路赋税整数外的余数和多征收的钱专门充作上供。
English: On the 28th, the remaining amount in excess of the tax amount for each road and the money collected were used to make special contributions.

古文：是月，龙图阁直学士致仕杨时卒。
现代文：这个月，以龙图阁直学士身份退休的杨时逝世。
English: This month, Yang Shi, who retired as a graduate of Longtu Ge, passed away.

古文：五月乙亥，初谒太庙。
现代文：五月初二，初次朝拜太庙。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, he made his first visit to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚辰，命邵溥、吴玠裁省四川冗官浮费。
现代文：初七，命令邵溥、吴裁减四川冗官浮费。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered Shao Jun and Wu to reduce the floating expenses of redundant officials in Sichuan.

古文：辛巳，名行宫新作书院为资善堂。
现代文：初八，称行宫新作书院为资善堂。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the newly built school in the palace was called Shizen-do.

古文：遣何藓等奉使金国，通问二帝。
现代文：派遣何蓟等人奉命出使金国，与金朝接触并问候徽、钦二帝。
English: He Jun and others were ordered to send envoys to the Kim kingdom to make contact with the Kim dynasty and greet Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin.

古文：中书舍人胡寅言，国家与金世仇，无通使之义。
现代文：中书舍人胡寅上书说，国家与金朝世代为仇，没有通使接触的道理。
English: Hu Ying, China's delegate to the congress, said in his letter that the country had been enemies with the Kim dynasty for generations, and there was no reason for the envoy to make contact.

古文：张浚奏： 使事兵家机权，后将辟地复土，终归于和，未可遽绝。 
现代文：张浚上奏说： 出使敌国是兵家的权宜之计，日后将开辟国境，恢复故土，最终会归于和好，不可立即断绝交往。 
English: Zhang Jun said in his report: The dispatch of the enemy country is a stopgap measure of the soldiers. In the future, the border will be opened and the homeland will be restored. Eventually, they will be reconciled. It is impossible to cut off exchanges immediately.

古文：乃遣行。
现代文：于是派他们出发。
English: And he sent them out.

古文：丁亥，立残破州县守令劝民垦田及抛荒殿最格。
现代文：十四日，确定遭受兵火残破州县守令劝民垦田及抛荒多少的标准。
English: On the 14th, the standard for determining how much of the state and county defense orders to persuade people to plow the fields and abandon the wasteland were broken by the remnants of the war.

古文：己丑，以孟庾知枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命孟庚为知枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, Meng Geng was appointed as the new Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：壬辰，召张浚还行在。
现代文：十九日，召张浚回到行在。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Jun was summoned back to Gangwon.

古文：丁酉，诏浚提举详定一司敕令。
现代文：二十四日，下诏张浚提举详定一司救令。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jun proposed to issue a detailed rescue order.

古文：戊戌，以贵州防御使瑗为保庆军节度使，封建国公。
现代文：二十五日，任命贵州防御史赵缓为保庆军节度使，封为建国公。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Jian, Guizhou's defense historian, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guoqing Army and named the founding father of the country.

古文：徽猷阁待制范冲兼资善堂翊善，起居郎朱震兼赞读。
现代文：徽酞阁待制范冲兼资善堂诩善，起居郎朱震兼赞读。
English: Hu Yingge is waiting for the production of Fan Chong and Shizendang Ying Zhen, and Zhu Zhen and Zhan reading.

古文：以盛暑，命监司行部虑囚。
现代文：因酷暑命令监司到辖区内讯察囚犯罪状。
English: Due to the extreme heat, the superintendent was ordered to go to the jurisdiction to inquire about the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：己亥，岳飞军次鼎州。
现代文：二十六日，岳飞军驻扎鼎州。
English: On the 26th, Yuefei's army was stationed in Dingzhou.

古文：庚子，周十隆降。
现代文：二十七日，周十隆出降。
English: On the 27th, Zhou Shulong resigned.

古文：辛丑，命川、陕访求元祐党人子孙。
现代文：二十八日，命令川、陕官吏寻访元党人子孙。
English: On the 28th, Sichuan and Shaanxi officials were ordered to search for the descendants of the former party members.

古文：六月甲辰，封武经大夫令矼为安定郡王。
现代文：六月初二，封武经大夫赵邻正为安定郡王。
English: On the second day of June, Fengwujing doctor Zhao Niangzheng was crowned the king of Ding'an County.

古文：湖贼杨钦、全琮、刘诜相继率众诣岳飞降。
现代文：洞庭湖贼杨钦、全琼、刘洗相继率众到岳飞军中投降。
English: Dongting Lake bandits Yang Qin, Quan Qiong, and Liu Qian successively led the crowd to surrender to Yuefei's army.

古文：乙巳，名新历曰《统元》。
现代文：初三，称新历为统元。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he said that the new calendar was the unifying principle.

古文：丁未，并饶州铸钱司于虔州。
现代文：初五，合并饶州铸钱司到虔州铸钱司。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Raozhou mint was merged into the Qianzhou mint.

古文：己酉，命建国公瑗出就资善堂听读，拜范冲、朱震。
现代文：初七，命令建国公赵缓到资善堂听读，拜见范冲、朱震。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered Jianguo Gong Zhao to go to Shisen Hall to listen to the lecture and meet Fan Chong and Zhu Zhen.

古文：出内帑钱赐宗室贫者。
现代文：拿出内格钱赐给宗室贫寒的人。
English: Take out Neger money and give it to the poor in the family.

古文：壬子，复省淮南州县冗官。
现代文：初十，又减省淮南州县冗官。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the number of redundant officials in Huainan County was also reduced.

古文：癸丑，以久旱，减膳、祈祷。禁诸路科率，自租税、和市、军须外皆罢。
现代文：十一日，因长期干早减少饮食，举行祈祷；禁止各路苛征，除租税、和买军须外，其他苛征都废罢。
English: On the 11th day of the month, due to the prolonged dry weather, the diet was reduced and prayers were held. Harsh levies on all roads were prohibited. Except for taxes and the need to buy troops, all other harsh levies should be abolished.

古文：岳飞急攻湖贼水砦，贼将陈瑫降，杨太赴水死，余党刘衡等皆降。
现代文：岳飞猛攻洞庭湖贼水寨，贼将领陈舀投降，杨太跳水而死，余党刘衡等人都投降。
English: Yue Fei stormed the Dongting Lake Thief's Village, the thief's general Chen Yao surrendered, Yang Tai died from diving, and the rest of the party, including Liu Heng, all surrendered.

古文：飞急击夏诚，斩之。
现代文：岳飞猛攻夏诚，斩杀他。
English: Yue Fei attacked Xia Cheng fiercely and killed him.

古文：丁巳，湖贼黄诚斩杨太首，挟钟子仪、周伦诣都督府降，湖湘悉平，得户二万七千，悉遣归业。
现代文：十五日，洞庭湖贼黄诚割下杨太的头，挟持钟子义、周伦到都督府投降，湖湘全部平定，得到二万七千户百姓，全部让他们回到家园从事农业生产。
English: On the 15th, Huang Cheng, the thief of Dongting Lake, cut off the head of Yang Tai Rong, and took Zhong Ziyi and Zhou Lun to the governor's office to surrender. Hunan was completely pacified, and 27,000 households were obtained. All of them were allowed to return to their homes to engage in agricultural production.

古文：戊午，减福建贡茶岁额之半。
现代文：十六日，减少福建贡茶岁额的一半。
English: On the 16th, the amount of Fujian tea tax was reduced by half.

古文：庚申，以旱罢诸路检察财用官。
现代文：十八日，因干早废罢各路检察财政收支官员。
English: On the 18th, procuratorial financial revenue and expenditure officials from all walks of life went on strike due to early retirement.

古文：丁卯，以贼平，免沿湖民前二年逋租。
现代文：二十五日，沿洞庭湖贼平定，免除沿湖百姓前二年积欠官府租税。
English: On the 25th, the bandits along Dongting Lake were subdued, and the people along the lake were exempted from the tax arrears of the previous two years.

古文：己巳，罢福建诸州枪杖手。
现代文：二十七日，废罢福建各州枪杖手。
English: On the 27th, the ban on gunpowder in Fujian Province was lifted.

古文：秋七月壬申朔，以仇悆为沿海制置使。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命仇昵为沿海制置使。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, he was appointed as the coastal system envoy.

古文：甲戌，免蕲州上供及租税三年。
现代文：初三，免除薪州上供和租税三年。
English: Junior high school students in their third year of junior high school will be exempted from the state subsidy and tax for three years.

古文：戊寅，奖谕岳飞，抚劳将士，趣张浚还朝。
现代文：初七，奖谕岳飞，抚劳将士，催促张浚回到朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yuefei, a laborer, urged Zhang Jun to return to the imperial court.

古文：己卯，孟庾罢，以沈与求兼权枢密院事及措置财用。
现代文：初八，孟庚罢职，任命沈与求兼代理枢密院事及措置财政收支。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Meng Geng stepped down from his post and appointed Shen Youcui as acting Privy Councillor and in charge of financial revenue and expenditure.

古文：壬午，以金、均、房州隶襄阳府路。
现代文：十一日，把金、均、房州划归襄阳府路。
English: On the 11th, Jin, Jun and Fangzhou were assigned to Xiangyangfu Road.

古文：伪齐兵寇湖阳县，执唐州守臣高青，复释之。
现代文：伪齐军攻打湖阳县，俘获唐州守臣高青，又放了他。
English: The pseudo-Qi army attacked Hoyang County and captured Gao Qing, the governor of Tang Prefecture, but then released him.

古文：丁亥，赐宇文虚中家福建田十顷。
现代文：十六日，赐给宁文虚中家庭福建田十顷。
English: On the 16th, 10 hectares of Fujian fields were given to the Ning Wenxu Middle School family.

古文：甲午，诏残破州县亲民官，计到、罢之日户口考殿最。
现代文：二十三日，下诏遭受兵火残破州县守令官员，计算到任、离任之间户口数多少，作为考核好坏的依据。
English: On the 23rd, the officials of the following prefectures and counties, who were affected by the war, calculated the number of hukou between taking office and leaving office, as a basis for assessing good and bad.

古文：韩世忠复镇淮军，禽伪齐守王拱。
现代文：韩世忠收复镇淮军，俘获伪齐守官王拱。
English: Han Shizhong recovered the Zhenhuai army and captured the pseudo Qi governor Wang Gong.

古文：丙申，蠲湖南路上供米三年及秋租之半。
现代文：二十五日，免除湖南路上供米三年及秋租的一半。
English: On the 25th, the three-year supply of rice and half of the autumn rent on Hunan Road were exempted.

古文：丁酉，置高峰、王口二砦都巡检使，益兵戍之。
现代文：二十六日，设置高峰、王口二寨都巡检使，增加军队戍守二寨。
English: On the 26th, patrols were set up in Gao Feng, Wangkou and Erzhai, and the number of troops guarding Erzhai was increased.

古文：八月壬寅朔，罢荆南营田司，令安抚司措置官兵耕种。
现代文：八月初一，废罢荆南营田司，命令安抚司指挥官兵耕种。
English: On the first day of August, he abolished the Jing Nanying Field Division and ordered the commander of the Pacification Division to cultivate the soldiers.

古文：甲辰，定馆职额为十八员。
现代文：初三，确定馆职名额为十八人。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the number of positions in the library was determined to be eighteen.

古文：壬子，诏淮南山水砦都巡检各听守令节制。
现代文：十一日，下诏淮南山水寨都巡检分别接受守令调度管束。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, the inspection of Huainan Mountain Water Village was separately subject to the order of dispatching control.

古文：癸丑，蠲福建州军供拨常平钱米。
现代文：十二日，免除福建州军借拨常平钱米。
English: On the 12th, the Fujian Provincial Army was exempted from borrowing ordinary flat rice.

古文：己未，下诏示章惇、蔡卞诋诬宣仁圣烈皇后之罪，追贬惇昭化军节度副使，卞单州团练副使，子孙不许在朝。
现代文：十八日，下诏宣布章、蔡卞低毁诬陷宣仁圣烈皇后的罪行，追贬章为昭化军节度副使，蔡卞为单州团练副使，子孙不许在朝廷任官。
English: On the 18th, the emperor issued an edict declaring that Zhang and Cai Jun were guilty of slandering and framing Empress Xuanren Shengli, that Cai Jun was the vice-envoy of the Shaohua Army, and that Cai Jun was the vice-envoy of the Single-State Reunification Army, and that their children and grandchildren were not allowed to hold official positions in the imperial court.

古文：命广宫学，教内外宗子。
现代文：命扩大宫学，教育内外宗室子弟。
English: He ordered the expansion of palace studies and the education of the younger members of the imperial family both at home and abroad.

古文：辛酉，诏淮南、襄阳府等路团结民社。
现代文：二十日，下诏淮南、襄阳府等路团结民社。
English: On the 20th, Huainan, Xiangyang and other provinces issued a decree to unite the people's organizations.

古文：丙寅，以诸盗平，减湖、广、江西二十二州杂犯死罪，释徒、杖以下囚。
现代文：二十五日，因各盗平定，减轻湖、广、江西二十二州杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放徒刑、杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 25th, as a result of the suppression of various robberies, the death sentences of 22 states in Hubei, Guangxi and Jiangxi were reduced, and prisoners sentenced to imprisonment or caning were released.

古文：海贼朱聪降，命补水军统领。
现代文：海贼朱聪投降，命令他补官为水军统领。
English: The sea robber Zhu Cong surrendered and was ordered to be promoted to be the commander of the navy.

古文：是月，伪齐陷光州。
现代文：这个月，伪齐攻陷光州。
English: This month, the pseudo Qi invaded Gwangju.

古文：九月辛未朔，罢总制司所增收头子等诸色钱。
现代文：九月初一，废罢总制司所增加征收的头子钱等各种名目的钱。
English: On the first day of September, the money for various purposes, such as the leader's money, was increased by the abolition of the general strike system.

古文：乙亥，赐礼部进士汪洋以下二百二十人及第、出身。
现代文：初五，赐给礼部进士汪洋以下二百二十人及第、出身。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, it was given to 220 people who were born in and after Wang Yang, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：唱名始遵故典，令馆职侍立殿上。
现代文：唱名赐第开始遵循原来的制度，命令馆职侍立殿上。
English: At the beginning of the name-calling ceremony, the original system was followed, and the officials of the museum were ordered to stand in the hall.

古文：壬午，加岳飞检校少保。
现代文：十二日，加官岳飞为检校少保。
English: On the 12th, Yuefei, an additional official, was appointed as a junior security guard.

古文：伪齐兵寇固始县，统领华旺拒战，却之，寻复光州。
现代文：伪齐军攻打固始县，统领华旺率兵抵抗，打退伪齐军，不久收复光州。
English: The pseudo-Qi army attacked Gushi County, Huawang led the resistance, defeated the pseudo-Qi army, and soon recovered Gwangju.

古文：甲申，命沿海州军籍海舶，分守要害。
现代文：十四日，命令沿海州军籍没海船，分别守卫要害之地。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the military of the coastal states not to have seagoing ships and to guard the key areas separately.

古文：乙酉，赵鼎上《重修神宗实录》。
现代文：十五日，赵鼎呈上重修神宗实录。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao Ding presented a real record of the reinstatement of the Shenzong.

古文：壬辰，诏元符上书邪等范柔中等二十七人各官一子。
现代文：二十二日，下诏元符上书被贬为邪等的范柔中等二十七人分别授给他们儿子一人官职。
English: On the 22nd day of the year, 27 middle-aged Fan Rong and middle-aged Fan Rong, who were relegated to the lower echelon of the imperial edict, were awarded an official post to one of their sons.

古文：以解潜部兵三千隶马军司。
现代文：下命解潜率领的三千军队隶属马军司。
English: The three thousand troops under the command of the commander-in-chief were subordinated to Ma Junshi.

古文：甲午，周十隆复叛，犯汀州。
现代文：二十四日，周十隆又叛乱，攻打汀州。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Shilong rebelled again and attacked Tingzhou.

古文：戊戌，遣统领王进、李贵讨之。
现代文：二十八日，派遣统领王进、李贵讨伐周十隆。
English: On the 28th, commanders Wang Jin and Li Gui were dispatched to fight against Zhou Shilong.

古文：冬十月庚戌，张浚入见。
现代文：冬十月十一日，张浚朝见高宗。
English: On October 11, winter, Zhang Jun met Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：乙卯，以席益为四川制置大使，位宣抚副使上，州军兵马并隶大使司，边防重事仍令宣抚司处置。
现代文：十六日，任命席益为四川制置大使，位次在宣抚副使之上，州军兵马一律隶属大使司，边防重大事情仍然命令宣抚司处理管辖。
English: On the 16th, Xi Yixin was appointed as the ambassador of Sichuan Province, and his rank was higher than that of the deputy minister of propaganda. All the soldiers and horses of the state army were subordinated to the ambassador's department. Major border defense matters were still ordered to be handled and governed by the propaganda department.

古文：李纲为江西制置大使，吕颐浩为湖南制置大使。
现代文：李纲为江西制置大使，吕颐浩为湖南制置大使。
English: Li Gang is the ambassador of Jiangxi Province, and Lv Yinghao is the ambassador of Hunan Province.

古文：戊午，诏川、陕类试合格第一人依殿试第三人例推恩，余并同赐进士出身，特奏名进士命宣抚选官试时务策。
现代文：十九日，下诏川、陕类试合格第一名按照殿试第三名施加恩惠，其余一律同赐进士出身；特奏名进士命令宣抚使选择考官加试时务策。
English: On the 19th day of the following month, the first person to pass the Zhaochuan and Shaanxi examinations was granted the same favor as the third person in the palace examination, and the rest were all awarded the title of scholar.

古文：澧州贼雷德进降。
现代文：遭州贼雷德进投降。
English: Surrendered to the state thieves.

古文：乙丑，伪齐兵寇涟水军，韩世忠遣统制呼延通等逆击，败之。
现代文：二十六日，伪齐军攻打涟水军，韩世忠派遣统制呼延通等抵抗出击，打败伪齐军。
English: On the 26th, the pseudo-Qi army attacked the Surabaya army, and Han Shizhong dispatched the commanding officer Huyan Tong and other resistance to attack and defeat the pseudo-Qi army.

古文：十一月庚午朔，初置节度使以下金字牙符，命都督府掌之，给将帅立战功者。
现代文：十一月初一，初次设置节度使以下金字奖牌，命令都督府掌管，奖给将帅立有战功的人。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the following gold medals were set up for the first time, and the governor's office was ordered to take control of them, and the awards were given to those who had distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：命州县卖户帖以助军费。
现代文：命令州县出卖户帖用来补助军费。
English: Ordered the state and county to use the money to subsidize military spending.

古文：癸酉，诏守臣死节昭著者，毋限品秩，并赐谥。
现代文：初四，下诏：守臣为国捐躯，功绩昭著的，不受等级、棒禄高低多少的限制，一律赐给溢号。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: If a retainer has sacrificed his or her life for the country and his or her achievements are well-known, regardless of rank or how high or low the award is, they will all be given a posthumous award.

古文：乙亥，征和靖处士尹焞于涪州，命为崇政殿说书。
现代文：初六，到涪州征召和靖处士尹淳，任命他为崇政殿说书。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Yin Jun, a peace officer, was called to Bozhou and appointed as the narrator of the Su Zheng palace.

古文：戊寅，郊。
现代文：初九，祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the heavens and the earth are sacrificed.

古文：辛巳，复置淮南提举盐事官。
现代文：十二日，重新设置淮南提举盐事官。
English: On the 12th, Huainan was re-established as the salt-raising official.

古文：壬午，出宫女三十人。
现代文：十三日，放出宫女三十人。
English: On the thirteenth day, thirty maids of honour were released.

古文：甲申，权减宰执及行在官吏奉。
现代文：十五日，暂减宰执及行在官吏棒禄。
English: On the 15th, the salary of the vice-governor and other officials was temporarily reduced.

古文：乙酉，以赵开为四川都转运使。
现代文：十六日，任命赵开为四川都转运使。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Kai was appointed as the Sichuan Metropolitan Transfer Envoy.

古文：丙戌，命张浚视师荆、襄、川、陕。
现代文：十七日，命令张浚到荆、襄、川、陕视察军队。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Jun was ordered to go to Jing, Xiang, Sichuan and Shaanxi to inspect the troops.

古文：戊子，知衡州裴廪坐调夫筑城冻死二千余人，除名、岭南高州编管。
现代文：十九日，衡州知州裴凛因征调民夫筑城冻死二千多人，被除掉名籍，岭南高州编管。
English: On the 19th, more than 2,000 people froze to death in Chizhou, Hengzhou, and Feiring due to the conscription and transfer of people to the city of Chicheng. They were stripped of their names and surnames, and were placed under the administration of Lingnan Gaozhou.

古文：乙未，出内帑绵绢赐宗室。
现代文：二十六日，拿出内格绵绢赐给宗室。
English: On the 26th, he took out the Negeri Mianzhu and gave it to his family.

古文：丁酉，罢催税户长。
现代文：二十八日，废罢催税户长。
English: On the 28th, the strike of tax accountants was abolished.

古文：十二月己亥朔，以岳飞为荆湖南北、襄阳府路、蕲黄州招讨使。
现代文：十二月初一，任命岳飞为荆湖南北路、襄阳府路、薪黄州招讨使。
English: On the first day of December, Yue Fei was appointed as the recruiting envoy for Jinghu South-North Road, Yangyangfu Road, and Zhanhuangzhou.

古文：杨沂中权主管殿前司，并统神武中军。
现代文：杨沂中代理主管殿前司，并且统领神武中军。
English: Yang Zhenzhong was the acting head of the palace front office, and he led the Shenwu Middle Army.

古文：庚子，改神武四军及巡卫军号行营五护军。
现代文：初二，改神武四军及巡卫军为行营五护军。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the Fourth Army of Shenwu and the Patrol Army were changed to the Fifth Escort Army.

古文：辛丑，以都督府兵隶三衙。
现代文：初三，下命都督府兵隶属三衙。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was ordered to be a prefectural governor.

古文：命左右司、枢密院检详官参考中兴已行条例，修为定法。
现代文：命令左右司、枢密院检详官参考朝廷南渡以来已经实行条例制度，修撰成为固定的法律制度。
English: The Ordinance system has been implemented since the imperial court moved to the south, and it has become a fixed legal system.

古文：乙巳，禁服用翠羽。
现代文：初七，禁止服用翠羽。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, it is forbidden to take cedar leaves.

古文：己酉，免侍从官轮对。
现代文：十一日，废除侍从官五日上殿面奏时政并提出建议。
English: On the 11th day, the attendants were abolished, and on the 5th day, they went to the palace to present the current government and make suggestions.

古文：庚戌，汰横江水军三之一。
现代文：十二日，裁减横江水军的三分之一。
English: On the 12th, one-third of the Yokogawa navy was reduced.

古文：癸丑，命两淮、川陕、荆襄、荆南诸帅府参谋官各一员提点屯田。
现代文：十五日，命令两淮、川陕、荆襄、荆南各帅府一名参谋官提点屯田。
English: On the 15th, he ordered a staff officer from each of the two provinces of Huai, Chuanshan, Jingxiang and Jingnan to nominate a military garrison.

古文：癸亥，禁川陕州县官悉用川陕人。
现代文：二十五日，禁止川陕州县官全部任用川陕籍的人。
English: On the 25th, all county officials in Sichuan and Shaanxi were prohibited from appointing people from Sichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：丙寅，都督府遣参议军事刘子羽、主管机宜文字熊彦诗抚谕川陕，且察边备虚实。
现代文：二十八日，都督府派遣参议军事刘子羽、主管机宜文字熊彦诗抚谕川陕，并且视察边防战备虚实情况。
English: On the 28th, the prefectural government dispatched Liu Zi Yu, a military counselor, and Guan Ji Ji Ji, a military commander, to Sichuan and Shaanxi, and inspected the preparation for the border defense war.

古文：戊辰，夜雨雹。
现代文：三十日，夜晚降冰雹。
English: On the 30th, hail fell in the evening.

古文：六年春正月辛未，蠲贫民户帖钱之半，无物产者悉除之。
现代文：绍兴六年春正月初三，免除贫民帖钱的一半，没有物业资产的人户全部免除帖钱。
English: On the third day of the first month of the sixth year of Shaoxing Spring, half of the poor people's post money was exempted, and all households without property assets were exempted from post money.

古文：癸酉，命给事中、中书舍人甄别元祐党籍。
现代文：初五，命令给事中、中书舍人审查鉴别元党籍。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the order was given to review and identify the former party membership of the petitioner and the petitioner.

古文：乙亥，以内重外轻，命省台、寺监及监司、守令居职及二年者，许更迭出入除擢。
现代文：初七，因内重外轻，命令省台、寺监及监司、守令任职满二年的，允许互换授官调迁。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, due to the fact that the internal importance is less than the external importance, it is ordered that the provincial governors, temple supervisors and supervisors, and guards who have served for two years are allowed to exchange the transfer of officials.

古文：丁丑，诏凡入粟补官者，毋授亲民、刑法之职。
现代文：初九，下诏：凡是人粟得到官职的人，不许授给县令一类的地方官和刑法官。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Any person who has been promoted to an official post is not allowed to be assigned to a local official or criminal judge of the county magistrate category.

古文：壬午，赐宗子伯玖名琚，为和州防御使。
现代文：十四日，赐给宗子赵伯玖名为赵朦，任为和州防御使。
English: On the 14th, the name Zhao Mei was given to Zhao Boqin, the eldest son of Zhao Boqin, and he was appointed as the Wazhou Defense Envoy.

古文：罢绵州宣抚副使，命吴玠专治兵事。
现代文：废罢绵州宣抚副使，命令吴专门管理军事。
English: He abolished the vice-envoy of Mianzhou and ordered Wu to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：罢御史平反刑狱赏。
现代文：废罢御史平反刑法案件的奖赏。
English: Reward for abolishing the criminal law cases against Shi Ping.

古文：丙戌，张浚视师荆襄，入辞。
现代文：十八日，张浚到荆襄视察军队，上殿向高宗辞行。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun went to Jingxiang to inspect the army, and went to the palace to resign from Gao Zong.

古文：己丑，安定郡王令矼薨。
现代文：二十一日，安定郡王赵令在逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Zhaoling, the Prince of Ding'an County, passed away.

古文：庚寅，还预借坊场钱。
现代文：二十二日，归还预借坊场钱。
English: On the 22nd, the advance rental fee will be refunded.

古文：辛卯，诏监司、帅臣慢令失职者，令张浚黜陟以闻。
现代文：二十三日，下诏：监司、帅臣怠慢朝命、管理失职的人，命令张浚决定升降，报告朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: Supervisors and court officials who neglected the imperial order and those who failed in their duties were to be managed, and Zhang Jun was ordered to decide on promotion and demotion and report to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，振江、湖、福建、浙东饥民，命监司、帅臣分选僚属及提举常平官躬行检察。
现代文：二十六日，贩济江、湖、福建、浙东饥民，命令监司、帅臣分别挑选僚属及提举常平官亲自检察贩济情况。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the supervisors and marshals to select their subordinates and promote the officials to personally inspect the situation of the traffickers in Jijiang, Hubei, Fujian and East Zhejiang.

古文：戊戌，命鬻通直郎、阁门宣赞舍人以下官。
现代文：三十日，命令警卖通直郎、阎门宣赞舍人以下官员。
English: On the 30th, the police were ordered to sell officials such as Tsunenauro, Yanmen Xuanzan and others.

古文：二月庚子，以诸路宣抚制置大使并兼营田大使，宣抚副使、招讨安抚使并兼营田使。
现代文：二月初二，命令各路宣抚制置大使一律兼营田大使，宣抚副使、招讨安抚使一律兼营田使。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, it was ordered that all the ambassadors appointed by the various channels should be concurrently appointed as Yingtian Ambassadors, and all the vice-ambassadors and envoys should be concurrently appointed as Yingtian Envoys.

古文：壬寅，雨雪。
现代文：初四，降雪。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, it snowed.

古文：改江、淮屯田为营田。
现代文：江淮屯田改为营田。
English: Jianghuai Tun Tian was changed to Ying Tian.

古文：甲辰，置行在交子务，印交子钱引给诸路，令公私同见钱行用。
现代文：初六，设置行在交子务，印制交子钱引发给各路，下令百姓、官府与现钱等同流通使用。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the bank was set up for the business of exchange, the printing of exchange money was initiated to all roads, and the people, government and cash were ordered to circulate and use equally.

古文：戊申，岳飞入见。
现代文：初十，岳飞朝见高宗。
English: At the age of ten, Yue Fei saw Gao Zong.

古文：复以襄阳府路为京西南路。
现代文：又改襄阳府路为京西南路。
English: It also changed Xiangyangfu Road to Beijing South West Road.

古文：辛亥，诏张浚暂赴行在奏事。
现代文：十三日，下诏张浚立即前往行在奏事。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Jun immediately went to the line to report.

古文：甲寅，以兵部尚书、都督府参谋折彦质签书枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命兵部尚书、都督府参谋折彦质为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, he appointed Sho Sho from the Ministry of Military Affairs and Orihikosho, the staff officer of the prefectural government, as the privy councilors to sign the document.

古文：乙卯，韩世忠引兵攻宿迁县，统制呼延通与金兵战，败之，禽其将孛堇牙合。
现代文：十七日，韩世忠带领军队攻打宿迁县，统制呼延通与金兵交战，打败金军，俘获金军将领李荃牙合。
English: On the 17th, Han Shizhong led the army to attack Suqian County, and the governor of Huyan County fought with the gold soldiers, defeated the gold army, and captured the gold army general Li Tsuen Yahua.

古文：澧州贼徒伍俊杀雷德进，持其首诣鼎州降。
现代文：遭州贼徒伍俊杀死雷德进，带上他的首级到鼎州投降。
English: Lei Dejin was killed by Wu Jun, a state thief, and took his head to Dingzhou to surrender.

古文：丙辰，韩世忠围淮阳军。
现代文：十八日，韩世忠围攻淮阳军。
English: On the 18th, Han Shizhong besieged the Huaiyang army.

古文：复置诸路市易务。
现代文：重新设置各路市易务。
English: Re-establish the city's e-commerce.

古文：戊午，命杨沂中以兵万人听都督行府调遣。
现代文：二十日，命令杨沂中率领一万军队听从都督行府调遣。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Yang Xizhong to lead ten thousand troops to obey the dispatch of the governor.

古文：己未，遣户部侍郎刘宁止如镇江府，总领三宣抚司钱粮。
现代文：二十一日，派遣户部侍郎刘宁止到镇江府，统一管理三宣抚司钱粮。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Ningzhe, the head of the household department, was sent to Zhenjiang to unify the management of the money and grain of the three proclamation departments.

古文：辛酉，兀救淮阳，韩世忠引兵归楚州。
现代文：二十三日，兀出兵援救淮阳，韩世忠带兵退归楚州。
English: On the 23rd, Yu sent troops to rescue Huaiyang, and Han Shizhong led the troops back to Chuzhou.

古文：壬戌，以折彦质兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十四日，任命折彦质兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 24th, Orihikosho was appointed to the post of Acting Vice-Governor.

古文：癸亥，沈与求罢。
现代文：二十五日，沈与求罢职。
English: On the 25th, Shen Ye resigned.

古文：李纲入见。
现代文：李纲朝见高宗。
English: Li Gang sees Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：是月，张浚至江上会诸将议事，命张俊进屯盱眙。
现代文：这个月，张浚到长江召集各将领商议军事，命令张俊进屯盯胎。
English: This month, Zhang Jun went to the Yangtze River to convene the generals to discuss military affairs, and ordered Zhang Jun to enter the town to check on the baby.

古文：三月戊辰朔，初收官告绫纸钱。
现代文：三月初一，初次征收官告绩纸钱。
English: On the first day of March, the first collection of official report paper money.

古文：名金、均、房州民兵曰保胜，又命招刺三千人，赐名必胜军。
现代文：称金、均、房州民兵为保胜，又命令招刺三千人赐名必胜军。
English: He called the Jin, Jun, and Fangzhou militias as guarantors of victory, and also ordered the recruitment of three thousand people to give their names to the victorious army.

古文：己巳，以韩世忠为京东、淮东路宣抚处置使，岳飞为京西、湖北路宣抚副使。
现代文：初二，任命韩世忠为京东、淮东路宣抚处置使，岳飞为京西、湖北路宣抚副使。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Han Shizhong was appointed as the Beijing-East and Huaiyang-East Propaganda and Disposition Envoy, and Yuefei was appointed as the Beijing-West and Hubei-Road Propaganda and Disposition Deputy Envoy.

古文：辛未，蠲旱伤州县民积欠钱帛租税。
现代文：初四，免除遭受早灾州县百姓拖欠的钱帛租税。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the people of Zhoushu County who suffered from the early disaster were exempted from the arrears of money and tax.

古文：己卯，趣岳飞如鄂州措置军事。
现代文：十二日，催促岳飞到鄂州措置军事。
English: On the 12th, he urged Yuefei to fly to Ezhou to take military measures.

古文：辛巳，以枢密副都承旨马扩为沿海制置副使。
现代文：十四日，任命枢密副都承旨马扩为沿海制置副使。
English: On the 14th, Deputy Privy Councillor Zongzhi Ma Zhan was appointed as Deputy Envoy for Coastal Affairs.

古文：壬午，金、齐兵犯涟水军，韩世忠击败之。
现代文：十五日，金军、伪齐军攻打涟水军，韩世忠军打败他们。
English: On the 15th, the Jin army and the pseudo-Qi army attacked the Surabaya army, and the Han Shizhong army defeated them.

古文：壬辰，宽四川灾伤州县户帖钱之半。
现代文：二十五日，减少四川遭灾州县户帖钱的一半。
English: On the 25th, the amount of money received by households in the affected prefectures in Sichuan was reduced by half.

古文：夏四月戊戌朔，湖南贼黄旺犯桂阳监。
现代文：夏四月初一，湖南贼黄旺攻打桂阳监。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the Hunan thief Huang Wang attacked the Guiyang supervisor.

古文：甲辰，伪齐兵陷唐州，团练判官扈举臣、推官张从之等皆死。
现代文：初七，伪齐兵攻陷唐州，团练判官启举臣、推官张从之等都战死。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the pseudo Qi soldiers invaded Tangzhou, and the group training judge Qi Zhuoxin, the judge Zhang Congzhi, and so on all died in battle.

古文：岳飞以母丧去官。
现代文：岳飞因母亲逝世离职。
English: Yuefei resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：丙午，诏飞起复。
现代文：初九，下诏岳飞赴任。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Yuefei Zhaozhao took office.

古文：己酉，诏文武臣僚能决胜强敌恢复境土者，赐功臣号。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 文武百官能战胜金军、恢复故疆的，赐给功臣称号。 
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Those who are able to defeat the Golden Army and restore the motherland will be given the title of meritorious subject.

古文：庚戌，始训诸宗子名。
现代文：十三日，开始给各宗子命名。
English: On the 13th, the naming of the sons began.

古文：甲寅，赏淮阳功，呼延通等进官有差，余受赏者凡万七千人。
现代文：十七日，赏赐淮阳战功，呼延通等人升官不等，其余有一万七千人受到奖赏。
English: On the 17th, Huaiyang was awarded for its war exploits, Huyan Tong and others were promoted, and the remaining 17,000 people were rewarded.

古文：刘光世遣副统制王师晟、郦琼袭伪齐兵于刘龙城，破之，禽其统制华知刚。
现代文：刘光世派遣副统制王师晨、哪琼在刘龙城袭击打败伪齐军，俘虏伪齐军统制华知刚。
English: Liu Guangxi dispatched the deputy commander Wang Shichen and Ne Qiong to attack and defeat the pseudo-Qi army in Liu Longcheng, and captured the pseudo-Qi army commander Hua Zhigang.

古文：己未，命福建安抚司发水军讨海贼郑庆。
现代文：二十二日，命令福建安抚司派出水军攻讨海贼郑庆。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the Fujian Reassurance Division to send naval forces to attack the sea thief Zheng Qing.

古文：辛酉，禁四川伐并边山林。
现代文：二十四日，禁止四川砍伐沿边山林。
English: On the 24th, Sichuan banned the cutting of forests along the border.

古文：甲子，以韩世忠为横海、武宁、安化军节度使，号扬武翊运功臣。
现代文：二十七日，任命韩世忠为横海、武宁、安化军节度使，赐给扬武诩运功臣称号。
English: On the 27th, Han Shizhong was appointed as the envoy to the festivals of Henghai, Wu Ning and Anhua Army, and Yang Wu was awarded the title of Hero of the War of Resistance.

古文：除商旅缗钱税。
现代文：废除商人络钱税。
English: Abolish the merchant network money tax.

古文：丙寅，复行在官吏奉。
现代文：二十九日，恢复行在官吏棒禄。
English: On the 29th, the practice of awarding bonuses to officials was resumed.

古文：蠲东京民渡淮南商贩之税。
现代文：免除东京百姓渡过淮河从事商业贸易的税。
English: The people of Tokyo were exempted from taxes for crossing the Huai River to engage in commercial trade.

古文：五月戊辰朔，禁以鹿胎为冠。
现代文：五月初一，禁止用鹿皮做帽子。
English: On the first day of May, it is forbidden to use deerskin to make hats.

古文：癸酉，诏未经上殿臣僚，先令三省审察，然后引对。
现代文：初六，下诏： 没有上殿经历的臣僚，先命令三省审察，然后接受皇帝召见，回答询问。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Ministers who have not been to the Imperial Palace should first order the three provinces to investigate, and then accept the emperor's summons to meet and answer questions.

古文：戊寅，以四川监司地远玩法，应有违戾，令制置大使按劾。
现代文：十一日，因为四川监司地处僻远，玩忽法令，当有违背圣意的地方，命令制置大使纠察核准。
English: On the 11th, because of the remote location of the Sichuan Supervision Division and the negligence of the law, if there is a violation of the sacred will, it is ordered to set up an ambassador to picket and approve.

古文：壬午，诏大理寺议狱不合，即诣刑部关决，刑部不能定，同赴都堂禀议。
现代文：十五日，下诏大理寺议定处理的案件有情法不符合的，就到刑部要求审议，刑部不能定案的，一起到尚书省商议处理。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, if the case agreed to be handled by Dali Temple did not comply with the law, it was requested to be reviewed by the criminal department. If the criminal department could not finalize the case, it was discussed and handled together in Shangshu Province.

古文：赐吴玠四川户帖钱十万缗犒军。
现代文：赐给吴四川户帖钱十万络作为搞军费。
English: He gave 100 thousand rupees to Wu Sichuan households as military expenses.

古文：癸未，禁淮南州县收额外杂色租。
现代文：十六日，禁止淮南州县征收额外各种名目的租税。
English: On the 16th, Huainan County was prohibited from levying additional taxes for various purposes.

古文：乙酉，改交子为关子，罢交子务。
现代文：十八日，改称交子为关子，废罢交子务。
English: On the 18th, the name of the trading post was changed to the gate post, and the trading post duties were abolished.

古文：庚寅，以刘光世为保静、宁武、宁国军节度使。
现代文：二十三日，任命刘光世为保静、宁武、宁国军节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the ceremonial envoy of the Baoding, Ningwu and Ningguo armies.

古文：壬辰，以张俊进屯盱眙，改崇信、奉宁军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，因张俊进屯盯胎，改任张俊为崇信、奉宁军节度使。
English: On the 25th, due to Zhang Jun's pregnancy, he was reassigned as the festival envoy of the Chongxin and Bongning armies.

古文：甲午，禁销钱及私铸铜器。
现代文：二十七日，禁止销钱及私铸铜器。
English: On the 27th, the sale of money and privately minted copperware was banned.

古文：丙申，诏监司虑囚不能遍及者，听遣官，著为令。
现代文：二十九日，下诏监司讯察囚犯罪状不能全部审查到的，允许派有关官员审查，规定成为法令。
English: On the 29th, the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television of the People's Republic of China announced that if the criminal status of the prisoners could not be fully reviewed, it was allowed to send relevant officials to review it, and the regulations became a decree.

古文：六月乙巳夜，地震。
现代文：六月初九，夜晚，发生地震。
English: On the night of June 9th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：乙酉，求直言。
现代文：十三日，访求直言。
English: On the 13th, a visit to ask for a straight answer.

古文：甲寅，张浚渡江，抚淮上诸屯。
现代文：十八日，张浚渡过长江抚慰淮河地区屯驻的军队。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun crossed the Yangtze River to comfort the troops stationed in the Huaihe area.

古文：命刘光世自当涂进屯庐州，岳飞自九江进屯襄阳，杨沂中屯泗州。
现代文：命令刘光世从当涂进屯庐州，岳飞自九江进屯襄阳，杨沂中屯驻泅州。
English: Liu Guangzhe was ordered to move from Dangtu to Danzhou, Yuefei from Jiujiang to Xiangyang, and Yang Rongzhong from Danzhou.

古文：戊午，诏两淮沿江守臣并以三年为任。
现代文：二十二日，下诏两淮沿江守臣一律以三年为一个任期。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that the governors of the two provinces along the Yangtze River would each serve a three-year term.

古文：辛酉，封集英殿修撰令懬为安定郡王。
现代文：二十五日，封集贤殿修撰令溉为安定郡王。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, Fuxi Xianden Shuxin issued an order to make him the king of Ding'an County.

古文：秋七月壬申，以司农少卿樊宾提领营田公事。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命司农少卿樊宾提领营田公事。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he appointed Sino-Minor Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Zou Binti to lead the yakitori field work.

古文：癸未，诏张浚暂赴行在。
现代文：十七日，下诏张浚立即前往行在。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Jun immediately went there.

古文：癸巳，罢川陕便宜差遣监司、守贰。
现代文：二十七日，废罢川陕没经朝廷批准差遣的监司、守官。
English: On the 27th, the supervisors and officers sent to Sichuan and Shaanxi without the approval of the imperial court were abolished.

古文：以金州隶川陕路，均、房二州隶京西南路。
现代文：把金州划归川陕路，均、房二州隶属京西南路。
English: Jinzhou was assigned to Chuan-Shan Road, and both Jinzhou and Fangyi County were assigned to Southwest Beijing Road.

古文：郭浩为永兴军路经略安抚使兼知金州，阁门宣赞舍人邵隆知商州，听浩节制，经理商、虢。
现代文：任命郭浩为永兴军路经略安抚使兼金州知州，阁门宣赞舍人邵隆为商州知州，听从郭浩调遣管束，全面处理商、貌二州事务。
English: He appointed Guo Hao as the Yongxing Army's envoy to pacify and pacify Jinzhou and Zhizhou, and proclaimed Shao Long as the Shangzhou and Zhizhou, and listened to Guo Hao's dispatching and management, and comprehensively handled the affairs of merchants and the two states.

古文：是月，刘光世复寿春府。
现代文：这个月，刘光世收复寿春府。
English: This month, Liu Guangxing returned to Shoushunfu.

古文：八月己亥，范宗尹薨。
现代文：八月初四，范宗尹逝世。
English: Fan Zongyin passed away on August 4.

古文：庚子，赐左司谏陈公辅三品服。
现代文：初五，赐给左司谏陈公辅三品礼服。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the left priest, Chen Gongyu, was given a three-piece ceremonial robe.

古文：癸卯，以徽猷阁直学士李迨为四川都转运使。
现代文：初八，任命徽酞阁直学士李追为四川都转运使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Dui, a direct graduate of Huizhong Academy, was appointed as the envoy to Sichuan.

古文：甲辰，诏谕将士将亲征。
现代文：初九，下诏告谕将士皇上将亲征。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript the general himself.

古文：岳飞遣统制牛皋破伪齐镇汝军，禽其守薛亨。
现代文：岳飞派遣统制牛皋攻破伪齐镇汝军，俘获守将薛亨。
English: Yuefei dispatched the commanding oxen to defeat the pseudo Qi Zhenru army and captured the guard general Xue Heng.

古文：乙巳，命权殿前司解潜等帅精兵扈从，主管步军司边顺留兵守临安，知临安府梁汝嘉为巡幸随军都转运使。
现代文：初十，命令代理殿前司解潜等率领精锐部队息从高宗亲征，主管步军司边顺留兵镇守临安，临安知府梁汝嘉为巡幸随军都转运使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, he ordered the acting prefect of the palace, Jie Xuan, to lead the elite troops to recruit from Gao Zong himself, the head of the infantry division to stay in the town to guard Lin'an, and the governor of Lin'an, Liang Rujia, to accompany the troops to the capital.

古文：丁未，以秦桧为醴泉观使兼侍读、行宫留守，孟庾提举万寿观兼侍读、同留守。
现代文：十二日，任命秦桧为醛泉观使兼侍读、行宫留守，孟庚提举为万寿观兼侍读、同行宫留守。
English: On the 12th, Qin Zhe was appointed as the attendant of the Aldehyde Spring View and stayed at the palace. Meng Geng was appointed as the attendant of the Manjushri View and stayed at the palace.

古文：戊申，岳飞遣将杨再兴复西京长水县。
现代文：十三日，岳飞派将领杨再兴收复西京长水县。
English: On the 13th, Yuefei sent General Yang Zaixing to recover West Beijing's Changshui County.

古文：己酉，命秦桧、孟庾权参决尚书省、枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，命令秦桧、孟庚暂且参与决定尚书省、枢密院事务。
English: On the 14th, Qin Hui and Meng Geng were ordered to temporarily participate in the decision-making of the Ministry of Education and the Privy Council.

古文：庚戌，蠲虔州残破诸县逋负、梅州夏秋两税，听广东经略安抚司便宜措置盗贼。
现代文：十五日，免除虔州遭受兵火的残破各县拖欠官府的钱物、梅州夏秋两税。允许广东经略安抚司不用上奏自己决定镇压盗贼的事宜。
English: On the 15th, he exempted the ruined counties of Qianzhou, which suffered from the war, from the arrears of money and goods owed to the government, and Meizhou from the summer and autumn taxes. He allowed the Guangdong Economic Relieving Division not to play up the matter of his decision to suppress the thieves.

古文：辛亥，奉神主发临安。
现代文：十六日，崇奉神主从临安出发。
English: On the 16th, they set out from Lin'an to worship the Lord.

古文：丁巳，权罢经筵进讲。
现代文：二十二日，暂且废罢经筵进讲。
English: On the 22nd, it was temporarily abolished.

古文：己未，预借江、浙民来年夏税絁帛，折米输官。
现代文：二十四日，预借江、浙百姓来年夏税帛，折米输纳给官府。
English: On the 24th, the people of Lianjiang and Zhejiang pre-borrowed next year's summer tax money and sent the rice to the government.

古文：庚申，增给职事官米月三斛。
现代文：二十五日，增加供给职事官每月三解米。
English: On the 25th, the supply of rice to civil servants will be increased to three times a month.

古文：是月，张俊城盱眙，进屯泗州。
现代文：这个月，张俊在盯胎修城，进屯泅州。
English: This month, Zhang Jun went to Danzhou to rebuild the city.

古文：岳飞及伪齐李成、孔彦舟连战至蔡州，克之，伪守刘永寿举城降。
现代文：岳飞与伪齐李成、孔彦舟接连交战到蔡州，攻克州城，伪齐守刘永寿率全城投降朝廷。
English: Yue Fei and the pseudo-Qi Li Cheng and Kong Yan Zhou successively fought to Caizhou, conquered the city of Caizhou, and the pseudo-Qi guard Liu Yongshou led the whole city to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：九月丙寅朔，帝发临安。
现代文：九月初一，高宗从临安出发。
English: On the first day of September, Gaozong set out from Lin'an.

古文：岳飞遣统制王贵、郝晸、董先复虢州卢氏县。
现代文：岳飞派统制王贵、郝、董先收复貌州卢氏县。
English: The Yuefei faction led by Wang Gui, Zou and Dong first took over Lu County in Fuzhou.

古文：癸酉，帝次平江。
现代文：初八，高宗到达平江。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Gaozong arrived in Pingjiang.

古文：戊寅，命职事官日一员轮对。
现代文：十三日，命令职事官每天一人面对奏事并提出建议。
English: On the 13th, the staff officer was ordered to face the report and make a suggestion every day.

古文：壬午，岳飞以孤军无援，复还鄂州。
现代文：十七日，岳飞因孤军深人，缺乏援助，又退回到鄂州。
English: On the 17th, Yue Fei retreated back to Ezhou due to the lack of assistance from his outnumbered troops.

古文：癸未，权奉安神主于平江能仁寺。
现代文：十八日，祖宗神主暂且安置在平江能仁寺。
English: On the 18th, the ancestor deity was temporarily placed in Noryu-ji Temple in Pingjiang.

古文：戊子，以户部郎官霍蠡总领岳飞军钱粮。
现代文：二十三日，任命户部郎官霍鑫统一管理岳飞军钱粮。
English: On the 23rd, Huo Xin, the steward of the household department, was appointed to manage the money grain of the Yuefei Army.

古文：庚寅，张浚入奏，复如镇江。
现代文：二十五日，张浚人朝奏事，又到镇江。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Junren reported the matter in the morning and went to Zhenjiang.

古文：辛卯，立贼徒相招首罪赏格。
现代文：二十六日，确定贼徒相互招降首领的奖赏标准。
English: On the 26th, the reward standard for the bandits to recruit and demote each other's leaders was determined.

古文：赏镇淮军功，进统制王德等官。
现代文：赏赐镇淮军战功，统制王德等人升官。
English: He rewarded the military exploits of the Zhenhuai Army, and promoted Wang De and others.

古文：是月，刘豫闻亲征，告急于金主亶求援，亶不许，豫自起兵三十万，命子麟趣合肥，侄猊出涡口，引兵分道入寇。
现代文：这个月，刘豫听说高宗亲征，向金朝皇帝告急求援，没有答应，刘豫自己发兵三十万，命令儿子刘麟到合肥，侄子刘貌出涡口，率兵分路攻打南宋边境。
English: This month, Liu Yu heard of Gao Zong's personal enlistment and sent an urgent appeal to the emperor of the Kim dynasty for help. However, he did not agree. Liu Yu himself sent 300,000 soldiers, ordered his son Liu Lin to Hefei, and his nephew Liu Maoyue to Turukou, and led the soldiers to attack the Southern Song Dynasty border.

古文：冬十月丙申，招西北流寓人补阙额禁军。
现代文：冬十月初二，招征西北地区流寓人补充禁军缺额。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, recruits from the northwest were brought in to make up for the shortage of soldiers.

古文：丁酉，裁定淮南路租额。
现代文：初三，裁定淮南路租额。
English: On the third day of the first month, the rent of Huainan Road was decided.

古文：刘麟寇淮西，张俊遣杨沂中、张宗颜等分兵御之。
现代文：刘麟攻打淮西，张俊派杨沂中、张宗颜等分别率兵抵抗。
English: Liu Lin attacked Huaxi, Zhang Jun sent Yang Yuzhong, Zhang Zongyan and others to lead the resistance separately.

古文：戊戌，沂中至濠州，刘光世已弃庐州而南，浚遣人督还，光世不得已驻兵应沂中，遣统制王德、郦琼及贼将崔皋、贾泽、王遇战，皆败之。
现代文：初四，杨沂中到壕州，刘光世已经放弃庐州南逃，张浚派人督促回兵，刘光世不得已驻兵应援杨沂中，派统制王德、丽仔琼与贼将崔皋、贾泽、王遇交战，都打败他们。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Yang Xizhong went to Hezhou. Liu Guangshi had already given up fleeing south of Ganzhou. Zhang Jun sent someone to urge the soldiers to return. Liu Guangshi had no choice but to station soldiers to support Yang Xizhong. He sent Wang De and Lizai Qiong to fight against the thieves, Cui Yu, Jia Ze and Wang Ji, and defeated them all.

古文：贼兵攻寿春府芍陂砦，守臣孙晖拒战，又败之。
现代文：贼兵攻打寿春府芍破寨，守臣孙浑抵抗作战，又打败贼兵。
English: The bandits attacked Shuchun's castle, and the vassal Sun Hun fought back and defeated the bandits.

古文：辛丑，罢四川监酒官百余员。
现代文：初七，废罢四川监酒官一百多人。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, more than a hundred liquor inspectors in Sichuan went on strike.

古文：壬寅，以梁汝嘉兼浙西、淮东沿海制置使，前护副军都统制王彦副之。
现代文：初八，任命梁汝嘉兼浙西、淮东沿海制置使，前护副军都统制王彦为副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liang Rujia was appointed as the envoy for the western Zhejiang and eastern Huaiyang coasts, and Wang Yan, the deputy commander of the former garrison, was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：癸卯，赵鼎请降敕谕张浚，令光世、沂中及张俊全军引还，为防江之计。
现代文：初九，赵鼎请求下命告谕张浚，命令刘光世、杨沂中及张俊全军回师，为长江防务做长期的准备。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhao Ding requested that Zhang Jun be ordered to order Liu Guangshi, Yang Yuzhong and Zhang Jun to return to the division to make long-term preparations for the defense of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲辰，又诏浚督将士僇力破贼，皆未达。
现代文：初十，又下诏张浚督促将士齐心合力攻击敌军，诏令均未送达军中。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jun urged the soldiers to attack the enemy forces together, but none of the orders were delivered to the troops.

古文：刘猊犯定远县，沂中进战，大败之于藕塘，猊挺身遁，麟在顺昌闻之，拔砦去。
现代文：刘貌攻打定远县，杨沂中与他交战，在藕塘大败刘貌，刘貌脱身逃跑，刘麟在顺昌听说这事，拔寨退走。
English: Liu Maogu attacked Dingyuan County, Yang Jizhong fought with him, defeated Liu Maogu in Shuntang, Liu Maogu escaped and fled, Liu Lin heard about this in Shunchang and withdrew.

古文：刘光世遣王德及沂中追麟，至南寿春而还。
现代文：刘光世派王德和杨沂中追击刘麟到南寿春后退还。
English: Liu Guangxing sent Wang De and Yang Xizhong to chase Liu Lin to Nan Shouchun and then returned him.

古文：孔彦舟亦解光州围而去。
现代文：孔彦舟也在光州解围退走。
English: Kong Yanzhou also withdrew from Gwangju after the siege was lifted.

古文：戊申，命解潜遣兵千人守青龙港口。
现代文：十四日，命令解潜派兵一千人守卫青龙港口。
English: On the 14th, the submarine was ordered to disembark and 1,000 soldiers were sent to guard Qinglong Port.

古文：癸丑，张俊、杨沂中引兵攻寿春府，不克而还。
现代文：十九日，张俊、杨沂中率兵攻打寿春府，没有攻克，退还。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Jun and Yang Hui led the troops to attack Shuchunfu, but failed to conquer it and returned it.

古文：乙卯，诏诸军所俘人民给钱米遣归。
现代文：二十一日，下诏各军供给被俘虏的人民钱米将他们遣送归还。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was decreed that each army should supply the captured people with money and rice to repatriate them.

古文：丁巳，惠州军贼曾衮作乱。
现代文：二十三日，惠州军贼曾衷叛乱。
English: On the 23rd, the Huizhou bandits rebelled wholeheartedly.

古文：庚申，摧锋军统制韩京募敢死士，夜袭破之，衮寻出降。
现代文：二十六日，摧锋军统制韩京招募敢死士兵，夜晚袭击攻破曾衷，曾衷不久投降。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the devastating army controlled Hanking and recruited death-defying soldiers. The night attack broke through Zengcheng, and Zengcheng soon surrendered.

古文：壬戌，日中有黑子没。
现代文：二十八日，太阳黑子消失。
English: On the 28th, the sunspots disappeared.

古文：十二月申午朔，诏降庐、光、濠等州死罪，释流以下囚。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏减轻庐、光、壕等州死罪囚犯罪刑，释放流刑以下的囚犯。
English: On the first day of December, the following edict was issued to commute the sentences of death-row prisoners in counties including Handan, Guangming and Dongcheng, and to release prisoners sentenced to less than exile.

古文：召秦桧赴行在。
现代文：召秦桧赴行在。
English: The call for Qin Hui to leave is here.

古文：张浚入见，请幸建康；赵鼎请还临安。
现代文：张浚朝见高宗，请他到建康；赵鼎请求回到临安。
English: Zhang Jun met Gao Zong in the morning and asked him to go to Jiankang; Zhao Ding asked him to return to Lin'an.

古文：戊戌，韩世忠攻淮阳军，及金人战，败之。
现代文：初五，韩世忠进攻淮阳军，与金军交战，打败金兵。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Han Shizhong attacked the Huaiyang Army, fought with the Jin Army, and defeated the Jin Army.

古文：辛丑，城南寿春府。
现代文：初八，修南寿春府城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Shunan Shuchunfucheng.

古文：壬寅，赵鼎罢。
现代文：初九，赵鼎罢职。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Zhao Ding resigned.

古文：遣右司员外郎范直方宣谕川、陕，抚问吴玠将士。
现代文：派遣右司员外郎范直方宣谕川陕，抚恤慰问吴军将士。
English: He dispatched his right-hand man, Wairo Fan Naokata, to preach to the Chuans and Shens, and offer condolences to the soldiers of the Wu Army.

古文：甲辰，命都督府参议军事吕祉如建康，措置移跸。
现代文：十一日，命令都督府参议军事吕社到建康，处理迁移行宫事宜。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered the military Liushe, the counselor of the governor's office, to Jiankang to deal with the relocation of the transition palace.

古文：丙午，折彦质罢。
现代文：十三日，折彦质罢职。
English: On the 13th, Orihiko resigned.

古文：丁未，赏淮西功，加张俊少保，改镇洮、崇信、奉宁军节度使，杨沂中保成军节度使、殿前都虞候。
现代文：十四日，赏赐淮西战功，加封张俊为少保，改任镇姚、崇信、奉宁军节度使；杨沂中为保成军节度使、殿前都虞候。
English: On the 14th, Huaxi was awarded for its war exploits, Zhang Jun of Jafeng was promoted to Shao Bao, and Zhenyao, Chongxin, and Fengning were appointed as the military festival envoys; Yang Jizhong was awarded as the military festival envoy of Baocheng, and Duyuan was appointed as the prefectural governor.

古文：戊申，命秦桧赴讲筵供职，孟庾为行宫留守。
现代文：十五日，命令秦桧前往讲筵供职，孟庚为行宫留守。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ordered Qin Hui to go to the lecture hall to serve, while Meng Geng stayed behind to go to the palace.

古文：辛亥，以资政殿学士张守参知政事，兼权枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命资政殿学士张守为参知政事，兼代理枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Shou, a Scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed as a co-governor and acting Privy Councillor.

古文：丙辰，以吕颐浩为浙抚西安制置大使、判临安府。
现代文：二十三日，任命吕颐浩为浙西安抚制置大使，判临安府。
English: On the 23rd, Lv Yinghao was appointed as the ambassador of Zhejiang and Xian pacification system, and was sentenced to Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：丁巳，以刘光世为护国、镇安、保静军节度使。
现代文：二十四日，任命刘光世为护国、镇安、保静军节度使。
English: On the 24th, Liu Guangxi was appointed as the chief envoy of the National Protection, Tranquility and Peace Preservation Army.

古文：戊午，诏凡因民事被罪者，不许亲民。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：凡是因民事遭到处罚的，不允许担任县令一类的地方官。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Anyone who has been punished for a civil offense is not allowed to serve as a local official such as a county magistrate.

古文：己未，命辰、沅、靖、澧四州以闲田募刀弩手，三千五百人为额。
现代文：二十六日，命令辰、沉、靖、遭四州，用闲田招募三千五百名刀弩手。
English: On the 26th, Chen, Shen, Jing, and Shang were ordered to go to Shizhou and recruit 3,500 swordsmiths from idle fields.

古文：右司谏陈公辅乞禁程氏学。
现代文：右司谏陈公辅请求禁止二程学问。
English: The Right Rev. Chen Gongyu requested a ban on "two-track learning."

古文：诏： 士大夫之学宜以孔、孟为师，庶几言行相称，可济时用。 
现代文：下诏： 士大夫研习学问应该以孔子、孟子为老师，最重要的是要言行一致，可以帮助解决国家时政问题。 
English: The following edict: Confucius and Mencius should be the teachers for scholars to study and learn, and the most important thing is to be consistent in words and deeds, which can help solve the current political problems of the country.

古文：庚申，以安化郡王王禀死节太原，赐其家田十顷。
现代文：二十七日，因安化郡王王享在太原为国捐躯，赐给他家十顷田。
English: On the 27th, because Wang Wangxuan of Anhua County died for the country in Taiyuan, his family was given ten hectares of land.

古文：辛酉，以山阴、诸暨等四十县为大邑，并命堂除。
现代文：二十八日，以山阴、诸暨等四十县为大县，县令一律由政事堂奏注差遣。
English: On the 28th, 40 counties, including Shanyin and Zhuji, were designated as large counties, and all county ordinances were sent to the highest-ranking officials by the State Council.

古文：七年春正月癸亥朔，帝在平江，下诏移跸建康。
现代文：绍兴七年春正月初一，高宗在平江，下诏迁移行宫到建康。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Shaoxing Spring, Gaozong was in Pingjiang, and moved the transition palace to Jiankang.

古文：蠲无为军税役一年。
现代文：免除无为军赋役一年。
English: He was exempted from compulsory military service for one year.

古文：置建康御前军器局。
现代文：设置建康御前军器局。
English: Jiankang Imperial Armament Bureau was established.

古文：丁卯，赏张浚以破敌功，迁特进。
现代文：初五，奖赏张浚打败金军、伪齐军的功劳，授给特进。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jun was awarded a special promotion for his achievements in defeating the Golden Army and the pseudo Qi Army.

古文：己巳，发米万石济京东、陕西来归之民。
现代文：初七，调发一万石米贩济京东、陕西来归顺的百姓。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, 10,000 koku rice traders were dispatched to help the people in East Beijing and Shaanxi to convert.

古文：张浚入见。
现代文：张浚朝见高宗。
English: Zhang Jun met Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：甲戌，罢都督府诸州市易官。
现代文：十二日，废罢都督府各州市易官。
English: On the 12th, the appointment of governors of prefectures and cities was abolished.

古文：丁丑，解潜罢，以刘锜权主管马军司，并殿前步军司公事。
现代文：十五日，解潜罢职，任命刘简代理主管马军司，以及殿前步军司公事。
English: On the 15th, Liu Jian was relieved of his duties, and Liu Jian was appointed as the acting head of Ma Junji, as well as the forerunner of the Military Affairs Department.

古文：庚辰，筑采石、宣化渡二城。
现代文：十八日，修筑采石、宣化渡二城。
English: On the 18th, the construction of quarry and Xuanhua to the two cities began.

古文：癸未，以翰林学士陈与义参知政事，资政殿学士沈与求同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，任命翰林学士陈与义为参知政事，资政殿学士沈与求为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 21st, Hanlin Scholar Chen Youyi was appointed as a political advisor, and Shen Youku, a scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed as a privy councillor.

古文：诏广西帅臣训练土丁、保丁。
现代文：下诏广西帅臣训练土丁、保丁。
English: The following is the edict of Guangxi Shuaiyuan to train farmers and farmers.

古文：乙酉，复置枢密使、副，知院以下仍旧，张浚改兼枢密使。
现代文：二十三日，重新设置枢密使、副使，知院以下官仍按照原来规定建置，张浚改兼枢密使。
English: On the 23rd, the post of Privy Envoy and Vice-Envoy were re-established, the post of Subordinate to the Privy Council was still established in accordance with the original provisions, and Zhang Jianchang was also appointed as a Privy Envoy.

古文：丙戌，禁诸军互纳亡卒。
现代文：二十四日，禁止各军互相招纳逃亡士兵。
English: On the 24th, all armies were prohibited from recruiting fugitive soldiers from each other.

古文：西蕃三十八族首领赵继忠等来归。
现代文：西蕃三十八族首领赵继忠等来归顺。
English: Zhao Jizhong, the leader of the Thirty-eight Ethnic Minorities of Xidi, and others surrendered.

古文：丁亥，以秦桧为枢密使。
现代文：二十五日，任命秦桧为枢密使。
English: On the 25th, Qin Hui was appointed as a privy envoy.

古文：何藓、范宁之至自金国，始闻上皇及宁德皇后崩。
现代文：何蓟、范宁之出使金朝回国，朝廷才知道徽宗及宁德皇后逝世。
English: When the envoys of Ho Ho and Fanning returned to China, the Imperial Court only learned of the death of Emperor Huizong and Empress Ningde.

古文：己丑，帝成服，下诏降徒囚，释杖以下。
现代文：二十七日，高宗穿应持丧服，下诏减轻徒刑囚犯罪刑，释放杖刑以下的囚犯。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong wore mourning clothes, issued a decree to reduce the criminal punishment of prisoners, and released prisoners with less than cane punishment.

古文：辛卯夜，东北有赤气如火。
现代文：二十九日夜晚，东北方向有红气像火一样。
English: On the evening of the 29th, red gas rose like fire in the northeast direction.

古文：二月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：百官七上表，请遵以日易月之制。
现代文：文武百官七次上表请求遵循以日易月的制度。
English: For the seventh time, the civil and military officials requested to follow the system of changing days and months.

古文：徽猷阁待制、知严州胡寅请服丧三年，衣墨临戎，以化天下。
现代文：徽酞阁待制、严州知州胡寅请求高宗服丧二年，穿着丧服从军，从而作为教化全国的表率。
English: Hu Jintao, who was in charge of Hebei, Jianzhou and Zhizhou, asked Gao Zong to serve two years of mourning and wear mourning clothes to obey the army, thus serving as a model for the whole country.

古文：帝欲遂终服，而张浚连疏论丧服不可即戎，遂诏外朝勉从所请，宫中仍行三年之丧。
现代文：高宗于是想守制完毕，但张浚接连上疏陈述说服丧不可从军，于是下诏外朝勉强采纳这个请求，宫中仍然守丧三年。
English: Gao Zong then wanted to complete the maintenance system, but Zhang Jun successively made a series of statements to persuade Zou not to join the army, so the foreign court reluctantly accepted this request, and the palace still kept Zou for three years.

古文：丙申，太平州火。
现代文：初四，太平州发生火灾。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a fire broke out in Taiping.

古文：丁酉，镇江府火。
现代文：初五，镇江府发生火灾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a fire broke out in Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：庚子，遣王伦等使金国迎奉梓宫。
现代文：初八，派遣王伦等人出使金国迎奉徽宗梓棺回国。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Lun and others were dispatched to welcome the coffin of Huizong Zi back to the country.

古文：岳飞入见。
现代文：岳飞朝见高宗。
English: Yue Fei sees Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：辛丑，以日食，求直言；以久旱，命诸州虑囚。
现代文：初九，因日食访求直言，又因长期干早命令各州讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the morning of the 9th, he asked for frankness because of the solar eclipse visit, and ordered the states to investigate the criminal status of prisoners because of the long-term drought.

古文：乙巳，诏凡辟举官犯赃罪，罪及所举官。
现代文：十三日，下诏：凡是被辟举的官员犯了贪赃罪，一律连同所荐举他的官员一起治罪。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: All officials who had been removed from office and had committed the crime of corruption would be punished together with the officials who had recommended their removal.

古文：丙午，吴玠置银会子于河池。
现代文：十四日，吴在河池置银会子。
English: On the 14th, Wu set up a silver club in Hechi.

古文：丁未，诏席益募陕西、河东、河北兵二千，部送行在充扈卫。
现代文：十五日，下诏席益招募陕西、河东、河北士兵二千人，率领他们到行在担任皇帝的息从。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, Emperor Zhao recruited two thousand soldiers from Shaanxi, Hedong, and Hebei, and led them to Xingyuan to serve as the emperor's retinue.

古文：癸丑，雨雹。
现代文：二十一日，降冰雹。
English: On the 21st, hail fell.

古文：丙辰，始御便殿。
现代文：二十四日，开始到便殿。
English: On the 24th, I started going to the toilet.

古文：果州守臣宇文彬等进《禾登九穗图》，俱夺一官，罢之。
现代文：果州守臣宁文彬等人呈进禾登九穗图》，都被削夺一官，拒绝接受此图。
English: Guozhou governor Ning Wenbin and others submitted the "He Deng Jiuzhou Map," but they were all deprived of one position and refused to accept this map.

古文：丁巳，以岳飞为太尉、湖北京西宣抚使。
现代文：二十五日，任命岳飞为太尉、湖北京西宣抚使。
English: On the 25th, Yue Fei was appointed as the Second Lieutenant and the Western Propaganda Envoy of Hubei Province.

古文：己未，帝发平江。
现代文：二十七日，高宗从平江出发。
English: On the 27th, Gaozong set out from Pingjiang.

古文：三月癸亥朔，次丹阳，韩世忠入见，命世忠扈从，岳飞次之。
现代文：三月初一，高宗在丹阳停留，韩世忠朝见高宗，命令韩世忠启从，岳飞次之。
English: On the first day of March, Gaozong stopped in Danyang. Han Shizhong met with Gaozong in the morning and ordered Han Shizhong to obey, followed by Yuefei.

古文：甲子，次镇江，杨沂中入见，命沂中总领弹压巡幸事务。
现代文：初二，高宗到达镇江，杨沂中朝见高宗，命令杨沂中统一管理镇压、巡幸事务。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Gao Zong arrived in Zhenjiang. Yang Yizhong met with Gao Zong and ordered Yang Yizhong to uniformly manage the suppression and inspection affairs.

古文：乙丑，蠲驻跸及经从州县积年逋赋。
现代文：初三，免除高宗出行中途暂住地区以及所经过州县多年拖欠官府的赋税。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, exempt the temporary residence areas in the middle of Gaozong's travel and the tax arrears of the government that have been in arrears for many years in the states and counties he passed through.

古文：丁卯，以吏部侍郎吕祉为兵部尚书、都督府参谋军事。
现代文：初五，任命吏部侍郎吕社为兵部尚书、都督府参谋军事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Ryusha, the attendant of the cadre department, as the secretary of the military department and the military staff officer of the prefectural government.

古文：辛未，帝至建康。
现代文：初九，高宗到达建康。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Gaozong arrived in Jiankang.

古文：壬申，诏尚书省常程事从参知政事分治。
现代文：初十，下诏尚书省常程事从参知政事分治。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the following edict separated the administration of Shangshu Province from the administration of the prefectural government.

古文：癸酉，减建康流罪以下囚，蠲建康府、太平、宣州逋赋及下户今年身丁钱。
现代文：十一日，减轻建康流刑罪犯以下囚犯的罪刑，免除建康府、太平宣州拖欠赋税以及今年下户身丁钱。
English: On the 11th, the criminal punishment of prisoners below the Jiankang exile criminal was reduced, and the tax arrears of Jiankang Prefecture and Taiping Xuanzhou were exempted, as well as this year's down payment.

古文：岳飞乞并统淮西兵以复京畿、陕右，许之，命飞尽护王德等诸将军。
现代文：岳飞请求合并淮西军队用来收复京瓷、陕右，高宗同意，命令岳飞统一指挥王德等各将军。
English: Yuefei requested the merger of the Huaixi army to recover Kyocera and Shaanxi, Gao Zong agreed and ordered Yuefei to unify the command of Wang De and other generals.

古文：既而秦桧等以合兵为疑，事遂寝。
现代文：不久秦桧等人以为合兵值得怀疑，事情于是拖延下来。
English: Soon, Qin Yu and others thought that the military alliance was doubtful, and the matter was delayed.

古文：戊寅，手诏抚劳将士。
现代文：十六日，高宗亲书诏谕抚恤慰劳将士。
English: On the 16th, Gao Zongxin issued an imperial edict to grant a pension to the laborers.

古文：进沈与求知枢密院事。
现代文：沈与求升为知枢密院事。
English: Shen and his pursuit of promotion became a matter for the Privy Council.

古文：己卯，尊宣和皇后为皇太后。
现代文：十七日，尊宣和皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 17th, Emperor and Empress ascended to the position of empress dowager.

古文：庚辰，以王彦兵隶侍卫马军司。
现代文：十八日，把王彦的军队划归侍卫马军司。
English: On the 18th, Wang Yan's army was assigned to the Horse Guards Division.

古文：吕颐浩为少保兼行宫留守。
现代文：吕颐浩为少保兼行宫留守。
English: Lv Yinghao stayed behind at the palace as a minor bodyguard.

古文：孟庾罢。
现代文：孟庚罢职。
English: Meng Geng resigns.

古文：甲申，以刘光世为少师、万寿观使，以其兵隶都督府，张浚因分为六军，命吕祉节制。
现代文：二十二日，任命刘光世为少师、万寿观使，把他统率的军队划归都督府，张浚把它分为六军，命令吕社调遣管束。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Liu Guangxing as a minor teacher and Wan Shou Guan Envoy, and transferred the army under his command to the governor's office. Zhang Jun divided it into six armies, and ordered the Liushe to dispatch the troops.

古文：乙酉，赐光世第于建康府。
现代文：二十三日，在建康府赐给刘光世住宅。
English: On the 23rd, a house was given to Liu Guangshi in Jiankangfu.

古文：丁亥，命虔、吉、南安军诸县各募土兵百人，责知县训练，防御盗贼。
现代文：二十五日，命令虔、吉、南安军各县分别招募一百名士兵，责成知县训练教阅，用来防御盗贼。
English: On the 25th, he ordered each county of the Qianling, Ji, and Nan'an armies to recruit one hundred soldiers respectively, and ordered them to train and teach in Zhixian, to be used to defend against thieves.

古文：是春，广西大饥，李实变为桃。
现代文：这年春天，广西发生大饥荒，李实变为桃。
English: In the spring of that year, a great famine occurred in Guangxi, and Li Si turned into a peach.

古文：夏四月癸巳，筑太庙于建康，以临安府太庙为圣祖殿。
现代文：夏四月初二，在建康修筑太庙，以临安府太庙为圣祖殿。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the Lin'an Grand Temple was built in Jiankang, with the Lin'an Grand Temple as the sacred ancestral hall.

古文：戊戌，修浚建康城池。
现代文：初七，修建疏浚建康城池。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the construction of the dredging of Jiankang City Pond was completed.

古文：丁未，岳飞乞解官持余服，遂弃军去，诏不许。
现代文：十六日，岳飞请求解除官职，守乘下的丧制。于是弃军离开。下诏不允许。
English: On the 16th, Yuefei requested to be relieved of his official duties and to observe the funeral system. Therefore, he abandoned the army and left. He was not allowed to return.

古文：戊申，日中有黑子。
现代文：十七日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 17th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：庚戌，以张浚累陈岳飞积虑专在并兵，奏牍求去，意在要君，遂命兵部侍郎兼都督府参议军事张宗元权湖北、京西宣抚判官，实监其军。
现代文：十九日，因张浚一再陈述岳飞一心一意想合并军队，并上奏请求解除职务，用意是要挟高宗，于是命令兵部侍郎兼都督府参议军事张宗元代理湖北、京西宣抚判官，其真实用意是让他监视岳飞军。
English: On the 19th, because Zhang Jun had repeatedly stated that Yue Fei was bent on merging the armies, and had petitioned to be relieved of his duties, intending to blackmail Gao Zong, he ordered Zhang Zongyuan, the attendant of the military department and the military counselor of the governor's office, to act as the proclamation judge of Hubei and West Beijing. His real intention was to let him monitor Yue Fei's army.

古文：壬子，张浚如太平州、淮西视师。
现代文：二十一日，张浚到太平州、淮西视察军队。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Jun went to Taiping and Huaxi to inspect the troops.

古文：庚申，以信阳军隶京西路。
现代文：二十九日，把信阳军划归京西路。
English: On the 29th, the Xinyang Army was transferred to the West Beijing Road.

古文：罢淮南提点司，东西两路各置转运兼提点刑狱、提举茶盐常平事。
现代文：废罢淮南提点司，东西两路分别设置转运兼提点刑狱、提举茶盐常平事。
English: It was decided to abolish the Huainan Transfer Station, and the east and west routes were separately set up for transfer and transfer to the prison, and the tea and salt were raised to the normal level.

古文：五月丁卯，诏李纲趣捕虔、吉诸盗。
现代文：五月初六，下诏李纲督促捕捉虔、吉州各盗贼。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Li Gang issued the following edict to urge the capture of thieves in Qian and Jizhou.

古文：壬申，命礼官举文宣王、武成王、荧惑、寿星、岳镇、海、渎、农、蚕、风、雷、雨师之祀。
现代文：十一日，命令礼官举行祭祀，祭祀文宣王、武成王、荧惑、寿星、岳镇、海、读、农、蚕、风、雷、雨师。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered the etiquette officials to hold a ritual, the ritual of King Wen Xuan, King Wu Cheng, Fu Zha, the birthday star, Yue Zhen, the sea, the reading, the farmer, the silkworm, the wind, the thunder and the rain.

古文：甲戌，以胡安国提举万寿观兼侍读，趣赴行在，未至而罢。
现代文：十三日，任命胡安国提举万寿观兼侍读，催促赶往行在，没有到就被罢去。
English: On the 13th, Juan Guo was appointed to promote the concept of longevity and to attend the lecture, and he was urged to hurry and go there, but he was dismissed without arriving.

古文：癸未，以郦琼为行营左护军副都统制。
现代文：二十二日，任命哪琼为行营左护军副都统制。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Ne Qiong as the deputy commander of the left guard of the encampment.

古文：甲申，初试枢密院都督府效士。
现代文：二十三日，初次考试枢密院都督府效士。
English: On the 23rd, the first examination for Privy Council Governor's Office post-graduates was held.

古文：乙酉，命侍从官通举材堪知县者二十人。
现代文：二十四日，命令侍从官推举可以担任知县的人才二十名。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the attendants to nominate 20 talented people who could serve as magistrates.

古文：丙戌，伪齐陷随州。
现代文：二十五日，伪齐军攻陷随州。
English: On the 25th, the pseudo-Qi army invaded Suizhou.

古文：己丑，禁四川增印钱引。
现代文：二十八日，禁止四川增印钱引。
English: On the 28th, it was forbidden to print more money in Sichuan.

古文：六月辛卯朔，改上惠恭皇后谥曰显恭皇后。岳飞入见。
现代文：六月初一，惠恭皇后溢号改为显恭皇后。岳飞朝见高宗。
English: On the first day of June, Empress Huigong's name was changed to Empress Hengong. Yuefei met Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：壬辰，命岁辰戌月祀大火，配以阏伯。
现代文：初二，命令每年辰戊月祭祀大火星，配以阔伯。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, it was ordered that the Great Martian should be sacrificed every year on the day of the full moon, accompanied by Kuo Bo.

古文：乙未，罢江、淮营田司，令诸路安抚、转运司兼领其事。
现代文：初五，废罢江、淮营田司，命令各路安抚、转运司兼管营田事务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he abolished the departments of Caijiang and Huaiying, and ordered the pacification of all roads, and the transfer department also took charge of Yingdian affairs.

古文：丙申，以《重修神宗实录》去取未当，命史馆复加考订。
现代文：初六，因重修神宗实录去取不恰当，命令史馆重新加以考订。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, because it was inappropriate to take the actual records of the Shinto religion, he ordered the history museum to revise them.

古文：丁酉，岳飞引过自劾，诏放罪，慰谕之。
现代文：初七，岳飞承认过错，责怪自己，下诏免罪，并慰问抚谕岳飞。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Yuefei admitted his fault, blamed himself, excused himself, and consoled Fuzhu Yuefei.

古文：戊戌，命刘锜兼都督府咨议军事，率兵戍庐州。
现代文：初八，命令刘倚兼都督府咨议军事，率领军队戍守庐州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Liu Jian, who was also the prefectural governor, to consult the military and lead the army to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：乙巳，沈与求薨。
现代文：十五日，沈与求逝世。
English: On the 15th, Shen Yoku passed away.

古文：召王德以所部兵赴行在。
现代文：召王德率所部军队前往行在。
English: Wang De was summoned to lead the army of the headquarters.

古文：遣吕祉如淮西抚谕诸军。
现代文：派遣吕社到淮西抚谕各军。
English: Liushe was dispatched to Huaxi to advise the armies.

古文：丙辰，诏吴玠、李迨共议四川经费，赡军恤民。
现代文：二十六日，下诏吴、李追共同商议四川经费，赡军恤民。
English: On the 26th, Wu and Li Wei jointly discussed the funding of Sichuan to support the army and the people.

古文：岳飞复职。
现代文：岳飞恢复职务。
English: Yuefei resumed his duties.

古文：秋七月戊辰，诏侍从各举可任监司、郡守者一二人。
现代文：秋七月初八，下诏侍从官分别推举可以担任监司、郡守的人才一至二名。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, one or two talented people who can serve as supervisors and county governors will be elected by the lower officials.

古文：癸酉，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十三日，因早灾祈祷天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 13th, due to the early disaster, the heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community prayed.

古文：甲戌，嗣濮王仲湜薨。
现代文：十四日，嗣攫王赵仲逝世。
English: On the 14th, King Zhao Zhong passed away.

古文：癸未，以久旱，命中外臣庶实封言事。
现代文：二十三日，因长期干早命令朝廷内外臣僚、百姓密封上书直言朝政。
English: On the 23rd, due to long-term dryness, he ordered the imperial court's ministers and people inside and outside the court to seal a letter to the imperial government.

古文：甲申，蠲诸路民积年逋租。
现代文：二十四日，免除各路百姓多年拖欠租税。
English: On the 24th, people from all walks of life were exempted from years of tax arrears.

古文：以建康疫盛，遣医行视，贫民给钱，葬其死者。
现代文：因建康疫灾流行，派医生视察治疗，贫民供给钱，埋葬病死了的人。
English: Due to the epidemic of Jiankang, doctors were sent to inspect and treat, the poor were provided with money, and those who died of the disease were buried.

古文：命疏决滞狱。
现代文：命令清理审决积滞的案件。
English: Order to clear the backlog of cases.

古文：乙酉，诏即建康权正社稷之位。
现代文：二十五日，下诏就在建康权正社翟之位。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued in the position of Jiankang Quan Zhengshe.

古文：戊子，诏户部长贰迭出巡按诸路，考究财赋利病，违者劾之。
现代文：二十八日，下诏户部正副长官分别出行，巡察各路，考察研究财赋利害，违背法令的要进行弹勃。
English: On the 28th, the head and deputy head of the household department will travel separately, inspect all roads, inspect and study financial interests, and those who violate the law will be shot.

古文：己丑，诏诸路归业民垦田，及八年始输全税。
现代文：二十九日，下诏各路回到家园的农民开垦耕种田地，以及八年后开始输纳全税。
English: On the 29th, the peasants who returned to their homes were ordered to cultivate their fields, and eight years later they began to pay full tax.

古文：八月乙未，以张俊为淮西宣抚使，驻盱眙；杨沂中为淮西制置使，主管侍卫马军司刘锜副之，并驻庐州。
现代文：八月初五，任命张浚为淮西宣抚使，驻屯盯胎；杨沂中为淮西制置使，主管侍卫马军司；刘倚为副使，都驻屯庐州。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Zhang Jun was appointed as the envoy of Huaixi Province, stationed in Xiamen; Yang Yuzhong was appointed as the envoy of Huaixi Province, in charge of the Guards and the Military Department; Liu Jie was appointed as the deputy envoy, all stationed in Ganzhou.

古文：命郦琼率兵赴行在。
现代文：命哪琼率兵前往行在。
English: It's time for Joan of Arc to lead the troops to the capital.

古文：戊戌，琼叛，杀中军统制张景等，执吕祉及赵康直、赵不群，以兵四万人奔刘豫。
现代文：初八，丽仔琼叛乱，杀死中军统制张景等，俘获吕社及赵康直、赵不群，率四万军队投奔伪齐刘豫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Lizai Qiong rebelled, killed the Chinese military leader Zhang Jing and others, captured Liushe and Zhao Kangzhi and Zhao Bokun, and led 40,000 troops to join the pseudo Qi Liu Yu.

古文：辛丑，手诏赦庐州屯驻行营左护军。
现代文：十一日，高宗亲笔书诏赦免庐州屯驻行营左护军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gaozong personally pardoned the left-guarding troops stationed in Bozhou.

古文：壬寅，郦琼引兵至淮，杀祉及康直，释不群，使还。
现代文：十二日，丽仔琼率兵到淮河，杀死吕社及赵康直，释放赵不群，让他回国。
English: On the 12th, Lizai Qiong led soldiers to the Huaihe River, killed Liushe and Zhao Kangzhi, released Zhao Fuxun, and let him return to China.

古文：刘锜、吴锡至庐州，以兵追之不及，命张宗元往招之。
现代文：刘倚、吴锡到庐州，率兵追击哪琼，没追上，命令张宗元前往招降他。
English: Liu Jie and Wu Xi went to Zhangzhou and led the troops to chase Ne Qiong. When they couldn't catch up, they ordered Zhang Zongyuan to go to Zhengzhou to recruit him.

古文：张浚乞去位。
现代文：张浚请求离职。
English: Zhang Jun requests to resign.

古文：甲辰，以赵鼎为万寿观使兼侍读。
现代文：十四日，任命赵鼎为万寿观使兼侍读。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Ding was appointed as a Manshukong envoy and attendant.

古文：甲寅，诏命官犯赃，刑部不得擅黥配，听朝廷裁断。
现代文：二十四日，下诏：朝廷任命的官员犯贪赃罪，刑部不得擅自刺配，听从朝廷裁断。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: Officials appointed by the imperial court have committed the crime of corruption, the criminal department must not arbitrarily assign them, and obey the ruling of the imperial court.

古文：乙卯，赐岳飞军钱十万缗。
现代文：二十五日，赐给岳飞军十万络钱。
English: On the 25th, he gave 100,000 rupees to the Yuefei Army.

古文：招归正复业人耕湖北、京西闲田。
现代文：招归正回到家园的人，耕种湖北、京西荒闲田地。
English: Those who are returning to their homes should be recruited to cultivate the idle fields in Hubei and West Beijing.

古文：九月甲子，上太上皇帝谥曰圣文仁德显孝皇帝，庙号徽宗，皇后曰显肃皇后。
现代文：九月初五，敬上太上皇帝溢号为圣文仁德显孝皇帝，庙号徽宗，皇后为显肃皇后。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the honorific prefix for the former empress dowager was Emperor Shengwenrendexianxiao, the temple prefix was Huizong, and the empress was Empress Xianxu.

古文：丁卯，韩世忠、张俊入见，乃命俊自盱眙移屯庐州。
现代文：初八，韩世忠、张俊朝见高宗，于是命令张俊从盯胎移屯庐州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Han Shizhong and Zhang Juntao met Gao Zong, and ordered Zhang Juntao to move from Dengye to Bozhou.

古文：壬申，张浚罢。
现代文：十三日，张浚罢职。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Jun resigned.

古文：癸酉，命参知政事轮日当笔，权三省事，更不分治常程。
现代文：十四日，命令参知政事轮日执笔，代理三省事，再不分治常程。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the assistant governor to write political affairs on a daily basis, acting as the agent of the three provinces, and then to administer the regular course.

古文：罢都督府。
现代文：废罢都督府。
English: Abolish the governor's office.

古文：甲戌，以台谏累疏，落张浚观文殿大学士，仍领宫祠。
现代文：十五日，因台谏接连多次上疏，张浚贬为观文殿大学士，仍领宫祠。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to Taiwanese interference, Zhang Jian was demoted to a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, but he was still a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：丙子，复以赵鼎为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：十七日，重新任命赵鼎为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Ding was reappointed as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's right-hand man, and Shang Shumun's right-hand man.

古文：戊寅，以庐州、寿春府民遭郦琼虏掠，蠲租税一年。
现代文：十九日，因庐州、寿春府百姓遭受哪琼军掳掠，免除一年的租税。
English: On the 19th, the people of Zhangzhou and Shuchun were exempted from paying taxes for one year.

古文：己卯，朝献圣祖于常朝殿。
现代文：二十一日，在常朝殿祭祀圣祖。二十一日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 21st, the ancestor will be enshrined at the Jocho-den, and on the 21st, he will be enshrined at the Taimyo.

古文：庚辰，朝飨太庙。辛巳，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。召刘光世赴行在。戊子，禁诸路进羡余。
现代文：二十二日，在明堂合祭天地，大赦。召刘光世前往行在。二十九日，禁止各路进献无名税收。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was held at the Ming Hall, and Liu Guangxing was called to march. On the 29th, anonymous tax donations were banned.

古文：以刘锜知庐州兼淮西制置副使。
现代文：任命刘倚为庐州知州兼淮西制置副使。
English: Liu Jie was appointed as the deputy envoy of Bozhou, Chizhou and Huaixi Province.

古文：冬十月庚寅朔，诏仍旧开经筵。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏依旧开经筵。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the Lower Pagoda is still open.

古文：辛卯，命后省官看详上书有可采者，条上行之。
现代文：初二，命令后省官仔细审阅上书中可以采用的，分条陈述实行。
English: On the second day of the first month, after the order, the provincial officials carefully reviewed what can be used in the letter, and the itemized statement was implemented.

古文：丁酉夜，敕张浚安置岭表。
现代文：初八夜晚，下命贬张浚，岭表安置。
English: On the evening of the first day of the eighth month, Zhang Jun was ordered to be demoted and Ling table was installed.

古文：戊戌，赵鼎累请浚母老，改永州居住。
现代文：初九，赵鼎多次请求，张浚母亲年岁已高，改为永州居住。
English: At the age of nine, Zhao Ding repeatedly requested that Zhang Jun's mother, who was already old, change her residence to Yongzhou.

古文：伪齐犯泗州，守臣刘纲击走之。
现代文：伪齐攻打泅州，守臣刘纲打退伪齐军。
English: The pseudo Qi attacked Bozhou, and the guardian Liu Gang beat back the pseudo Qi army.

古文：丙午，命户部郎官薛弼、霍蠡同总领江西、湖、广五路财赋。
现代文：十七日，命令户部郎官薛弼、霍蠢同总领江西、湖、广五路财赋。
English: On the 17th, he ordered the head of the household department, Xue Qi, and Huo Yu, as well as the governors of Jiangxi, Hubei, and Guangxi provinces, to collect money from five provinces.

古文：壬子，统制呼延通、王权等袭击金人于淮阳军，败之，丁巳，诏六参日，轮行在百官一员转对。
现代文：二十三日，统制呼延通、王权等在淮阳军袭击金军，打败金兵。二十八日，下诏：军事官员每月朝参皇帝时，轮行在百官一名指陈时政。
English: On the 23rd, Huyan Tong, Wang Quan and other subordinate officers attacked the gold army in Huaiyang Army and defeated the gold soldiers. On the 28th, the following edict was issued: When military officials visit the emperor every month, Chen Shizheng will be one of the hundred officials.

古文：闰月癸亥，赠赵康直徽猷阁待制。
现代文：闰十月初五，赠给赵康直徽酞阁待制之职。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the leap year, Zhao Kangzhiang was given the post of vice-premier.

古文：乙丑，蠲江东路月桩钱万缗。
现代文：初七，免除江东路一万络月椿钱。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Jiangdong Road will be exempted from the 10,000 yuan monthly fee.

古文：发米二万石振京西、湖北饥民。
现代文：调发二万石米贩济京西、湖北饥民。
English: Twenty thousand koku rice traders were dispatched to help the starving people in western Beijing and Hubei.

古文：丙寅，尹焞入见，命为秘书郎兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：初八，尹笋享朝见高宗，命令尹笋享为秘书郎兼崇政殿说书。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yin Xingxiang went to see Gao Zong in the morning and ordered Yin Xingxiang to act as his secretary and deliver a speech to the Emperor.

古文：甲戌，始作徽宗皇帝、显肃皇后神主。
现代文：十六日，开始制作徽宗皇帝、显肃皇后神主。
English: On the 16th, the production of Emperor Huizong and Empress Xiansu began.

古文：庚辰，韩世忠引兵渡淮，逆击金人于刘冷庄，败之。
现代文：二十二日，韩世忠率兵渡淮，在刘冷庄抵抗金军，打败金兵。
English: On the 22nd, Han Shizhong led the soldiers to Duhuai, resisted the gold army in Liu Lengzhuang, and defeated the gold soldiers.

古文：辛巳，李纲罢。
现代文：二十三日，李纲罢职。
English: On the 23rd, Li Gang resigned.

古文：癸未，复汉阳军。
现代文：二十五日，收复汉阳军。
English: On the 25th, the Hanyang army was recovered.

古文：是月，张俊弃盱眙，引兵还建康。
现代文：这个月，张俊放弃盯胎，率兵退到建康。
English: This month, Zhang Jun gave up tracking the fetus and retreated to Jiankang with his soldiers.

古文：十一月丙申，赐吴玠犒军钱百五十万缗。
现代文：十一月初八，赐给吴一百五十万络搞军钱。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, Wu was given 1.5 million rupees for military expenses.

古文：丁酉，以知温州李光为江西安抚制置大使。
现代文：初九，任命温州知州李光为江西安抚制置大使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Wenzhou Chizhou Li Guang was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification system.

古文：丁未，金帅挞懒、兀入汴京，执伪齐刘豫，废为蜀王。
现代文：十九日，金军统帅挞懒、兀率军进人汁京，俘虏伪齐皇帝刘豫，废为蜀王。
English: On the 19th, the commander-in-chief of the Jin army, Zou Lazy, led his army into the capital, captured the pseudo-Qi emperor Liu Yu, and became the king of Shu.

古文：癸丑，诏来春复幸浙西。
现代文：二十五日，下诏来年春天再到浙西。
English: On the 25th, it was announced that it would come to western Zhejiang next spring.

古文：是月，伪齐知临汝军崔虎诣岳飞降。
现代文：这个月，伪齐临汝军知军崔虎率兵到岳飞军中投降。
English: This month, the pseudo-Qilin Ryu's intellectual army, Cui Hu, led his troops to surrender to Yuefei's army.

古文：十二月庚辰，复置都大提举四川茶马监牧官。
现代文：十二月庚辰日，重新设置都大提举四少茶马监牧官。
English: On December Geng Chen Day, the four minor tea and horse overseers were re-appointed.

古文：丁卯，祔徽宗皇帝、显肃皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：初十，奉徽宗皇帝、显肃皇后神主祭于太庙。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Emperor Bonghuizong and Empress Xiansu were enshrined in the main temple.

古文：庚午，以解潜权主管马步军司，命韩世忠留屯楚州，屏蔽江、淮。
现代文：十三日，任命解潜代理主管马步军司，命令韩世忠留屯楚州，屏蔽江、淮。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Ma Bu, the acting chief of anti-submarine warfare, as the acting chief of anti-submarine warfare, and ordered Han Shizhong to stay in Chuzhou and block the Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：己卯，诏内外大将及侍从官，举武臣智略器局堪帅守谋议官者。
现代文：二十二日，下诏内外大将及侍从官，推举武臣有智谋有才识有度量可以担任帅守谋议官的人才。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor issued an edict to the generals at home and abroad, as well as the attendant officers, to nominate officers with wisdom, talent, and prudence who could serve as commanders, advisors, and negotiators.

古文：癸未，王伦等使还，入见，言金国许还梓宫及皇太后，又许还河南诸州。
现代文：二十六日，王伦等出使金国回国，朝见高宗，报告说金国答应归还高宗父亲徽宗的梓宫及皇太后，又答应归还河南各州。
English: On the 26th, Wang Lun and others sent an envoy to Kim Guo to return to the country and meet with Gao Zong, reporting that Kim Guo promised to return Gao Zong's father Huizong's Zi Gong and Empress Dowager, and also promised to return all the states of Henan.

古文：甲申，城泗州。
现代文：二十七日，修泅州城。
English: On the 27th, the construction of Zhangzhou City began.

古文：丁亥，复遣王伦等奉迎梓宫。
现代文：三十日，又派王伦等人奉迎徽宗梓宫。
English: On the 30th, Wang Lun and others were sent to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是冬，吴玠遣裨将马希仲攻熙州，郑宗、李进攻巩州，不克，宗死于城下，希仲遁还，玠斩以徇。
现代文：这年冬，知介派遣副将马希仲攻打熙州，郑宗、李进攻打巩州，没有获胜，郑宗战死在城下，马希仲逃回，被吴斩首示众。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhisui dispatched Vice-General Ma Xizhong to attack Xizhou, and Zheng Zong and Li attacked and fought Gongzhou, but did not win. Zheng Zong died in battle outside the city, and Ma Xizhong fled back and was beheaded by Wu for the public to see.

