古文：肆师之职，掌立国祀之礼，以佐大宗伯。
现代文：肆师的职责是，掌管建立王国的祭祀之礼，而协助大宗伯。
English: The role of the Grand Master is to preside over the rituals that establish the kingdom, and to assist the Grand Master.

古文：立大祀，用玉帛、牲牷；立次祀，用牲币；立小祀，用牲。
现代文：举行大祭祀时，负责察看牺牲，将符合要求的牲拴系在栏圈中，交付给充人和监门负责喂养。
English: When a large-scale sacrifice is held, he is responsible for inspecting the sacrifice, arranging the livestock that meets the requirements in the fence, and delivering it to the gatekeeper and the gatekeeper for feeding.

古文：以岁时序其祭礼，及其祈珥。大祭祀，展牺牲，系于牢，颁于职人。
现代文：凡祭祀占卜日期、祭前三日重申对百官的告诫，以及祭祀前夕确定明日开始祭祀的时间，都告教并协助大宗伯行礼事。
English: Whenever there is a divination date for the ritual, a warning to the centurion reiterated three days before the ritual, and a time set for the ritual to begin the next day on the eve of the ritual, they all inform and assist the great patriarch in performing the ritual.

古文：凡祭祀之卜日，宿为期，诏相其礼；□涤濯，亦如之。祭之日，表齍盛；告絜，展器陈，告备。及果，筑鬻，相治小礼诛其慢怠者。
现代文：视察祭器是否洗涤干净时也这样做。祭祀那天，用标签标明器物中所盛的谷物，报告谷物洁净；察看所陈列的馔具，报告陈列齐备；到将行裸礼时，筑捣郁金香草并煮而用以调和鬯酒。告教并协助群臣行祭祀的小礼，责罚怠慢礼事的人。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, mark the grain contained in the vessel with a label and report that the grain is clean; inspect the utensils on display and report that the display is complete; at the time of the naked ritual, make tulips and boil them to mix with the wine; teach and assist the vassals to perform the small ritual, and punish those who neglect the ritual.

古文：掌兆中庙中之禁令。
现代文：掌管各祭坛兆域中以及庙中的禁令。
English: In charge of all the altars in the triad, as well as the ban in the temple.

古文：凡祭祀礼成，则告事毕。
现代文：凡祭祀的礼仪完成，就报告礼事完毕。
English: When the ritual of sacrifice is complete, the ritual is finished.

古文：大宾客，莅筵几，筑鬻，赞果将。大朝觐，佐傧，共设匪瓮之礼。飨食，授祭，与祝侯禳于疆及郊。
现代文：王如因故不能参加飨礼或食礼，就供给所当设的酒食，派人送到宾客的馆舍去；王亲自为宾客举行飨礼或食礼，就把当祭的食物授给宾以供宾行食前祭礼。同小祝一起在畿疆及国郊举行侯祭和禳祭。
English: If the king is unable to attend the banquet or meal for some reason, he will provide the wine and food that should be set up and send someone to the guest's house; if the king himself holds a banquet or meal for the guests, he will give the food of the festival to the guests for the pre-meal ceremony. Together with the small celebration, the Hou Festival and the Bon Festival are held in Kijiang and the suburbs.

古文：大丧，大渳以鬯，则筑鬻，令外内命妇序哭，禁外内命男女之衰不中法者，且授之杖。
现代文：有大丧，将用郁鬯洗沐尸体，就筑捣郁金香草并煮而调和鬯酒。令外命妇和内命妇依次而哭。禁止外内命夫、命妇的丧服不合定制者，并授给他们丧杖。
English: If there is a great mourning, the body will be washed and washed with tulips, then the tulips and herbs will be pounded and boiled, and the wine will be mixed. The deceased's wife and the deceased's wife will cry in turn. The deceased's husband and the deceased's wife's funeral clothes that do not meet the customization are prohibited, and they will be given a funeral cane.

古文：凡师甸，用牲于社宗，则为位，类造上帝，封于大神。
现代文：凡征伐或田，用牲祭祀军社和迁主，就设置祭位。用类祭祭祀上天，就封土筑坛以向上天行祭礼。
English: When conquering or plowing fields, sacrificing animals to worship the army, the shrine, and the relocated lord, they set up altars. When sacrificing to the heavens, they sealed the soil and built altars to offer sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：祭兵于山川，亦如之。
现代文：为军事而告祭山川，也负责设置祭位。
English: It is also responsible for setting up the altar.

古文：凡师不功，则助牵主车。
现代文：凡军队战败，就协助大司马牵载有迁庙主的斋车。
English: If the army was defeated, he would help the grand steed to carry the cart of the temple's owner.

古文：凡四时之大甸猎，祭表貉，则为位。
现代文：凡四季大田猎，在立表处举行貉祭，就设立神位。
English: In all four seasons of the Ota hunt, a sacrificial feast is held at the starting point, and a shrine is set up.

古文：尝之日，莅卜来岁之芟。
现代文：用尝祭祭先王那天，临视占卜明年是否需要芟除杂草。
English: On the day of the ancestor's festival, the weeding ceremony was used to predict whether weeding would be necessary the next year.

古文：猕之日，莅卜来岁之戒。
现代文：开始田猎那天，临视占卜明年是否有外敌入侵、是否有盗贼。
English: On the day of the start of the field hunt, whether there will be an invasion of foreign enemies next year and whether there will be thieves will be the focus of the divination.

古文：社之日，莅卜来岁之稼。
现代文：祭社神那天，临视占卜明年庄稼好坏。
English: On the day of the shrine god's festival, the fortune-telling of the next year's crops is good or bad.

古文：若国有大故，则令国人祭。
现代文：如果国家遭受大的灾害，就命令国人祭祀。
English: If the country is hit by a major disaster, the people are ordered to stop making sacrifices.

古文：岁时之祭祀，亦如之。
现代文：一年四季的常祀也命令国人进行。
English: Regular worship throughout the four seasons of the year is also ordered to be carried out.

