古文：夫人宵天地之貌，怀五常之性，聪明精粹，有生之最灵者也。
现代文：人模仿天地的形状，具有仁、义、礼、智、信五常的本性，聪慧明理细致淳朴，是有生命的动物中最具有灵性的。
English: Man imitates the shape of heaven and earth. He has the five permanent natures of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom and faith. He is intelligent, rational, meticulous and simple. He is the most spiritual of all living animals.

古文：爪牙不足以供耆欲，趋走不足以避利害，无毛羽以御寒暑，必将役物以为养，用仁智而不恃力，此其所以为贵也。
现代文：人的手和脚不足以供给嗜好和欲望，奔走不足以躲避侵害，没有毛皮与羽毛用来防御寒暑，所以人一定要役使万物来养活自己，使用智慧而不依靠武力，造就是人所以尊贵的原因。
English: Man's hands and feet are not enough to supply his hobbies and desires, running is not enough to avoid encroachment, there is no fur and feathers to defend against cold and heat, so man must use all things to feed himself, use wisdom without relying on force, making is the reason why man is noble.

古文：故不仁爱则不能群，不能群则不胜物，不胜物则养不足。
现代文：因此人不仁爱就不能形成群体，不能形成群体就战胜不了外物，战胜不了外物供养就不充足。
English: Therefore, if people are not benevolent, they cannot form a group, and if they cannot form a group, they cannot overcome external things, and if they cannot overcome external things, their support will not be sufficient.

古文：群而不足，争心将作，上圣卓然先行敬让博爱之德者，众心说而从之。
现代文：形成了群体但物质仍不充足，争夺的心思就将产生，前代的圣人特意率先讲求恭敬谦让和博爱的道德，大众心中高兴就跟从他们了。
English: If a group is formed but the material is still insufficient, the spirit of competition will arise. The saints of the previous generation deliberately took the lead in preaching the morals of respect, humility and love, and the public gladly followed them.

古文：从之成群，是为君矣；归而往之，是为王矣。
现代文：跟从他们的人形成了群体，他们就成了君主；都争着去归附他们，他们就成了王。《尚书。
English: And they that were with him were a great multitude; and he became king over them: and they fought every one against him; and he became king over them.

古文：《洪范》曰： 天子作民父母，为天下王。 
现代文：洪范》上说： 天子做民众的父母，成为天下的帝王。 
English: Hong Fan said, "The Son of Heaven becomes the parent of the people and the emperor of the world.

古文：圣人取类以正名，而谓群为父母，明仁、爱、德、让，王道之本也。
现代文：圣人选取相似的称谓正名分，称君王为父母，他们懂得仁爱和谦让是王道的根本。
English: The sages chose a similar appellation as their proper name, calling the king their father and mother. They understood that benevolence and humility are the fundamentals of the royal way.

古文：爱待敬而不败，德须威而久立，故制礼以崇敬，作刑以明威也。
现代文：仁爱依靠恭敬就不会败坏，恩德必须有威严才能长久存在，所以制定礼制来推崇恭顺，制订刑法来显明威严。
English: Benevolence and love cannot be corrupted by relying on respect, and benevolence must have majesty in order to exist for a long time. Therefore, a ritual system was established to promote obedience, and a criminal law was established to show majesty.

古文：圣人既躬明哲之性，必通天地之心，制礼作教，立法设刑，动缘民情，而则天象地。
现代文：圣人既然自身具有洞察事理的品性，一定通晓天地的思想，制定礼制兴办教育，建立法制设置刑法，动辄顺乎民情，就能依照上天的法则管理大地。
English: Since sages themselves have insight into the nature of things, they must be familiar with the thoughts of heaven and earth, establish a ritual system to establish education, establish a legal system to establish criminal law, and follow the people's feelings at every turn, they can manage the earth according to the laws of heaven.

古文：故曰：先王立礼， 则天之明，因地之性 也。
现代文：所以说前代君王建立礼制，是 根据上天的神明。依照大地的本性 。
English: Therefore, it is said that the previous monarchs established the ritual system according to the gods of heaven and according to the nature of the earth.

古文：刑罚威狱，以类天之震曜杀戮也；温慈惠和，以效天之生殖长育也。
现代文：刑罚和威严的监狱，是用来模仿上天用雷电杀戮的威力；温和慈祥宽厚和谐，是用来效仿上天能生长养育万物。
English: Punitive and majestic prisons are used to imitate the power of heaven to kill with thunder and lightning; gentle, kind, generous and harmonious are used to imitate the power of heaven to grow and nurture all things.

古文：《书》云 天秩有礼 ， 天讨有罪 。
现代文：《尚书》上说 天按等级赏赐有礼的人 ， 天讨伐有罪的人 。
English: The Shangshu says that Heaven rewards the courteous according to their rank, and Heaven strikes down the guilty.

古文：故圣人因天秩而制五礼，因天讨而作五刑。
现代文：所以圣人依照天的次序制定了吉、凶、兵、军、嘉五礼，依照上天的讨罚的原则制订了五刑。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the order of heaven, the sage established the five virtues of good luck, bad luck, soldier, army, and virtue, and in accordance with the principle of heaven's punishment, he established the five punishments.

古文：大刑用甲兵，其次用斧钺；中刑用刀锯，其次用钻凿；薄刑用鞭扑。
现代文：大刑用甲兵，稍轻一点的用斧铁；中刑用刀锯，稍轻一点的用钻凿；小刑用鞭扑。
English: For major punishments, armour was used, and for minor punishments, axes and irons were used; for medium punishments, knives and saws were used, and for minor punishments, drills and chisels were used; and for minor punishments, whips were used.

古文：大者陈诸原野，小者致之市朝，其所繇来者上矣。
现代文：大型的刑罚要陈尸到平原和旷野，小型的刑罚要到街市和朝廷示众，这种情况的由来已很久远了。
English: It has been a long time since large-scale punishments were taken to the plains and wilderness, and small-scale punishments were taken to the streets and the imperial court.

古文：自黄帝有涿鹿之战以定火灾，颛顼有共工之陈以定水害。
现代文：自从黄帝时有涿鹿之战平定了炎帝之乱，颛顼时有共工战役平定了共工之乱。
English: Since the Yellow Emperor had the Battle of the Elk to quell the Emperor's Rebellion, and the Emperor had the Co-worker Campaign to quell the Co-worker Rebellion.

古文：唐、虞之际，至治之极，犹流共工，放讠雚兜，窜三苗，殛鲧，然后天下服。
现代文：唐虞的时候，祭祀天下他平定到了极致，还依然流放共工，放逐了欢兜，驱逐了三苗，诛杀了鲧，然后天下才归顺。
English: At the time of Tang Yu, the sacrificial rites of the world were pacified to the extreme, and the co-workers were still exiled, the glad-hands were exiled, the three seedlings were expelled, and the dragonflies were killed, and then the world surrendered.

古文：夏有甘扈之誓，殷、周以兵定天下矣。
现代文：夏代有启与有扈氏战于甘，到殷、周之时才用兵力平定天下。
English: In the Xia Dynasty, the Youqi and Youyi clans fought in Gan, and it was not until the time of Yin and Zhou that the world was pacified by military force.

古文：天下既定，戢臧干戈，教以文德，而犹立司马之官，设六军之众，因井田而制军赋。
现代文：天下安定后，就收藏起武器，用礼义教化进行教育，但还要设立司马的官职，设置六军部队，划分井田，制定军赋。
English: After the world was stabilized, weapons were collected and education was carried out using etiquette and righteousness, but it was also necessary to establish the official position of Sima, set up the six military units, divide the fields, and formulate military equipment.

古文：地方一里为井，井十为通，通十为成，成方十里；成十为终，终十为同，同方百里；同十为封，封十为畿，畿方千里。
现代文：土地面积一里就划为一井，十井就形成一通，十通就形成一成，一成有十里见方；十成就形成一终，十终形成一同，一同有百里见方；十同形成一封，十封形成一畿，畿有千里见方。
English: The land area of one mile is divided into one well, ten wells form one channel, ten channels form one channel, one channel has ten miles square; ten achievements form one end, ten ends form together, together have one hundred miles square; ten together form one letter, ten letters form one kilometer square, and one kilometer square has one thousand miles square.

古文：有税有赋。
现代文：有田租有兵赋。
English: Arita rent has military equipment.

古文：税以足食，赋以足兵。
现代文：田租用来满足食用，兵赋用来满足兵用。
English: The land rent is used to meet food needs, and the military expenditure is used to meet military needs.

古文：故四井为邑，四邑为丘。
现代文：所以四井就形成一邑，四邑就形成丘。
English: Therefore, the four wells form one township, and the four townships form a hill.

古文：丘，十六井也，有戎马一匹，牛三头。
现代文：丘，就是十六井，有军马一匹，牛三头。
English: The hill, that is, Jurokui, has one war horse and three cows.

古文：四丘为甸。
现代文：四丘形成一甸。
English: The four hills form a moat.

古文：甸，六十四井也，有戎马四匹，兵车一乘，牛十二头，甲士三人，卒七十二人，干戈备具，是谓乘马之法。
现代文：一甸有六十四井，有军马四匹，兵车一辆，牛十二头，兵士三人，士卒七十二人，武器具备，造就叫乘马之法。
English: There are sixty-four wells, four war horses, one chariot, twelve oxen, three soldiers, and seventy-two foot soldiers. They have weapons and are able to ride horses.

古文：一同百里，提封万井，除山川沈斥，城池邑居，园囿术路，三千六百井，定出赋六千四百井，戎马四百匹，兵车百乘，此卿大夫采地之大者也，是谓百乘之家。
现代文：一同有百里，总共有一万井，除去山川和盐咸地、水洼地，城池村庄，园囿大道外，一共有三千六百井，规定缴纳兵赋的六千四百井，军马四百匹，兵车百辆，这是卿大夫官地中较大的，称作百乘之家。
English: There are 100 li in total, with a total of 10,000 wells. Excluding mountains and rivers, salt and salty lands, water depressions, towns and villages, and outside the garden and boulevard, there are a total of 3,600 wells, 6,400 wells that are required to pay the military tax, 400 war horses, and 100 military vehicles. This is the largest of the doctor's official sites, known as the hundred-rider home.

古文：一封三百一十六里，提封十万井，定出赋六万四千井，戎马四千匹，兵车千乘，此诸侯之大者也，是谓千乘之国。
现代文：一封有三百一十六里，总共有十万井，规定缴兵赋的六万四千井，兵马四千匹，兵车千辆，这是诸侯中最大的，称作千乘之国。
English: There are three hundred and sixteen li in a letter, with a total of one hundred thousand wells, and the required number of soldiers is sixty-four thousand wells, four thousand soldiers and horses, and one thousand chariots. This is the largest among the princes, known as the country of a thousand rides.

古文：天子畿方千里，提封百万井，定出赋六十四万井，戎马四万匹，兵车万乘，故称万乘之主。
现代文：天子的王畿有千里见方，总共有一百万井，规定缴兵赋的六十四万井，兵马四万匹，兵车万辆，所以称为万乘之主。
English: The King of Heaven's Son has a thousand li square, a total of one million wells, six hundred and forty thousand wells for the provision of troops, forty thousand soldiers and horses, and ten thousand chariots, so he is called the Lord of Ten Thousand Horses.

古文：戎马、车徒、干戈素具，春振旅以搜，夏拔舍以苗，秋治兵以狝，冬大阅以狩，皆于农隙以讲事焉。
现代文：兵马车夫武器平素都准备齐全，春猎以整顿部队，夏天拔草以修整营地，秋天进行练兵打猎，冬天打猎对军队进行大检阅，都在农时的空隙来讲演训练。
English: The coachman's weapons are always ready, spring hunting is used to reorganize the troops, summer weeding is used to repair the camp, autumn is used for hunting practice, and winter hunting is used for a major inspection of the army, all of which are performed in the gaps of farming time.

古文：五国为属，属有长；十国为连，连有帅；三十国为卒，卒有正；二百一十四为州，州有牧。
现代文：五个封国为一属，每属都有长官；十个封国为一连，每连有统帅；三十国为一卒，每卒有正官；二百一十国为一州，每州有牧官。
English: Five fiefs are one clan, and each clan has a leader; ten fiefs are one company, and each company has a commander; thirty kingdoms are one pawn, and each pawn has an official; two hundred and ten kingdoms are one state, and each state has a shepherd.

古文：连师比年简车，卒正三年简徒，群牧五载大简车、徒，此先王为国立武足兵之大略也。
现代文：连宫和帅官每年检阅兵车，卒官和正官每三年检阅人员，群牧每五年大规模检阅兵车和人员，这是先王为国家建立武装、充实兵力的大方针。
English: The Lian Gong and the field marshal inspected the military vehicles every year, the non-commissioned officers and the regular officers inspected the personnel every three years, and the herdsmen inspected the military vehicles and personnel on a large scale every five years. This was the great policy of the former king to build up the armed forces and strengthen the armed forces for the country.

古文：周道衰，法度堕，至齐桓公任用管仲，而国富民安。
现代文：周代王道衰败，法令制度被毁坏后，到齐桓公任用管仲，国家才富强人民才安定。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, after the decline of the royal way and the destruction of the legal system, Qi Huan was appointed as the official intermediary, and the country was rich and strong, and the people were stable.

古文：公问行伯用师之道，管仲曰： 公欲定卒伍，修甲兵，大国亦将修之，而小国设备，则难以速得志矣。 
现代文：齐桓公询问称霸用兵的方法，管仲答道： 您想安定军队，整治武备，大国也将这样做，而小国要想立军备来制敌，就难以很快地达到目标。 
English: When Qi Kuan Gong inquired about the method of using troops to seek hegemony, Guanzhong replied: If you want to stabilize the army and improve the military preparedness, the big countries will do the same, but if the small countries want to set up armaments to control the enemy, it is difficult to achieve the goal quickly.

古文：于是乃作内政而寓军令焉，故卒伍定虖里，而军政成虖郊。
现代文：于是就依靠制定内政来整治军队法令，因此在里中定卒伍制度，军队政事就在封邑治理中完成。
English: As a result, they relied on the formulation of internal affairs to rectify the army's decrees. Therefore, in the middle of the country, the regiment system was established, and the army's political affairs were completed in the governance of fiefdoms.

古文：连其什伍，居处同乐，死生同忧，祸福共之，故夜战则其声相闻，昼战则其日相见，缓急足以相死。
现代文：把十人、五人的连在一起，共同生活同享欢乐，死生同忧，祸福共担，所以夜晚作战就可以相互听到声音，白天作战就可看到彼此，危急的时候足以为对方而死。
English: To connect ten or five people together, to live together and share joys, to live and die together and share sorrows, to share blessings and misfortunes, so that when fighting at night, they can hear each other's voices, and when fighting during the day, they can see each other, and in times of crisis, it is enough to die for the other side.

古文：其教已成，外攘夷狄，内尊天子，以安诸夏。
现代文：这种教化形成，对外排除了夷狄的侵扰，对内尊崇天子，安定国内诸侯。
English: The formation of this kind of enlightenment eliminated the intrusion of the Yidi to the outside world, revered the Son of Heaven to the inside, and stabilized the domestic princes.

古文：齐桓既没，晋文接之，亦先定其民，作被庐之法，总帅诸侯，迭为盟主。
现代文：齐桓公没落后，晋文公加以继承，也是先安定了他的人民，制定被庐之法，统率诸侯，接替做了盟主。
English: Qi Kuan didn't lag behind, and Jin Wengu succeeded him. He also stabilized his people first, established the law of banishment, led the princes, and succeeded as the leader.

古文：然其礼已颇僭差，又随时苟合以求欲速之功，故不能充王制。
现代文：但他的礼制已超出本分差错很多，又随时苟合以求急功近利，所以不能算作是先王的法制。
English: However, his etiquette went beyond the call of duty and contained many errors, and he was always looking for quick wins, so it cannot be considered the legal system of the previous king.

古文：二伯之后，浸以陵夷，至鲁成公作丘甲，哀公用田赋，搜、狩、治兵、大阅之事皆失其正。
现代文：齐桓公、晋文公之后，渐渐衰落，到鲁成公时制定使丘地缴纳田赋的法令，哀公又另计田亩和家财各为一赋，狩猎、治理军队和盛大的阅兵等事情都失去正统。
English: After the reigns of King Qi Huan and King Jinwen, it gradually declined, and by the time of King Lu Cheng, a decree was made to make the hills pay a field tax, and the mourning king was also given a field mu and family wealth, and hunting, army management, and grand military parades all lost their legitimacy.

古文：《春秋》书而讥之，以存王道。
现代文：《春秋》对此加以记载并进行指责，以保存王道。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded and criticized this in order to preserve the royal road.

古文：于是师旅亟动，百姓罢敝，无伏节死难之谊。
现代文：这之后，战事屡次发生，百姓羸弱疲困，没有了殉节而死和殉难而死的情义。
English: After that, the war occurred repeatedly, the people were weak and exhausted, and there was no sense of martyrdom and martyrdom.

古文：孔子伤焉，曰： 以不教民战，是谓弃之。 
现代文：孔子对此感到伤心，就说： 用未经受过训练的人民去作战，这是在抛弃他们。 
English: Confucius was saddened by this and said: To fight with untrained people is to abandon them.

古文：故称子路曰： 由也，千乘之国，可使治其赋也。 
现代文：因此他称赞子路说： 仲由，到一个有一千辆兵车的国家，可以让他负责兵赋工作。 
English: Therefore, he praised Zi Lu, saying: Zhong Yue, to a country with a thousand chariots, can let him be in charge of the armament work.

古文：而子路亦曰： 千乘之国，摄虖大国之间，加之以师旅，因之以饥馑，由也为之，比及三年，可使有勇，且知方也。 
现代文：而子路也说： 有一千辆兵车的国家，被夹在几个大国的中间，外有军队侵犯它，内又有灾荒，我去治理，等到三年，可以使人人都有勇气，而且懂得道理。 
English: And Zilu also said: A country with a thousand chariots is caught in the middle of several great countries. Outside armies invade it, and inside there are disasters. I will govern it, and after three years, I can make everyone have courage and understand the truth.

古文：治其赋兵教以礼谊之谓也。
现代文：这是说治理税赋和军队同时也要教导以礼义的情况。
English: This means managing taxes and the military while also teaching civility.

古文：春秋之后，灭弱吞小，并为战国，稍增讲武之礼，以为戏乐，用相夸视。
现代文：春秋以后，弱小国家被吞并，合并而形成战国时期，略微增加了一些讲习武事的礼仪，作为游戏取乐，用来互相夸耀。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period, weak and small countries were annexed and merged to form the Warring States Period. Some martial arts training etiquette was slightly added as a game for fun and for mutual boasting.

古文：而秦更名角抵，先王之礼没于淫乐中矣。雄桀之士因势辅时，作为权诈以相倾覆，吴有孙武，齐有孙膑，魏有吴起，秦有商鞅，皆擒敌立胜，垂著篇籍。
现代文：秦朝时改名为 角抵 ，先王的礼仪淹没在不合正道的音乐之中了非凡杰出的人士根据时势辅助时局，机变狡诈互相倾轧，吴国有孙武，齐国有孙膑，魏国有吴起，秦国有商鞅，都会擒敌取胜，垂名书籍篇辜之中。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, the name was changed to "Cheng Zui," and the etiquette of the former king was drowned in unorthodox music. Extraordinary and outstanding people, according to the current situation, assisted the current situation, and the cunning and cunning of each other, Sun Wu of Wuzhou, Sun Qi of Qi, Wu Qi of Wei, and Shangguo of Qin, will fight the enemy to win, and will be among the famous books.

古文：当此之时，合纵连衡，转相攻伐，代为雌雄。
现代文：在这个时候，合纵连横，转而互相攻击，迭相争霸。
English: At this time, merging vertically and horizontally, turning to attack each other, competing for supremacy.

古文：齐愍以技击强，魏惠以武卒奋，秦昭以锐士胜。
现代文：齐愍王以齐技击而强大，魏惠王以魏武卒而奋发图强，秦昭王以秦锐士取胜。
English: King Qizhi was strong with the combination of martial arts, King Weihui was strong with the combination of martial arts, and King Qin Zhao was strong with the combination of martial arts.

古文：世方争于功利，而驰说者以孙、吴为宗。
现代文：世俗正为功利而相争，而游说的人以孙膑、吴起为尊奉对象。
English: The secular world is competing for the sake of utilitarianism, while the lobbyists regard Sun Yat-sen and Wu Qi as objects of veneration.

古文：时唯孙卿明于王道，而非之曰： 彼孙、吴者，上势利而贵变诈；施于暴乱昏嫚之国，君臣有间，上下离心，政谋不良，故可变而诈也。
现代文：当时衹有孙卿懂得王道，就批判这种状况说：孙膑、吴起他们这些人，崇尚权势和财利而且重视机变狡诈；施用于凶暴动乱昏聩轻慢的国家，就使君臣有隔阂，上下不团结，政治谋划不善，所以他们可以机变而狡诈。
English: At that time, even Sun Ch'ing, who knew the way of kings, criticized this state of affairs, saying: Sun Yat-sen and Wu Qi were the first to advocate power and financial gain, and they valued cunning and deviousness. When applied to a violent, turbulent, reckless and imprudent country, it caused the monarchs and ministers to have estrangement, lack of unity between the upper and lower levels, and poor political planning, so they could be cunning and devious.

古文：夫仁人在上，为下所卬，犹子弟之卫父兄，若手足之扞头目，何可当也？
现代文：仁慈的人在上面，就被下面的人所仰慕，就像儿子弟弟卫护父亲兄长，手和足捍卫大脑和眼睛，有什么可与他们相比的呢？
English: The benevolent man above is admired by those below, as the son defends the younger brother against the elder father, as the hands and feet defend the brain and eyes. What can compare with them?

古文：邻国望我，欢若亲戚，芬若椒兰，顾视其上，犹焚灼仇雠。
现代文：邻近的国家远望我们，像亲戚一样喜悦，像椒兰一样芬芳，回头再观望他们的君上，就像看见仇敌眼中冒火。
English: The neighboring countries are looking at us from afar, as happy as relatives, as fragrant as peppers, and looking back at their princes is like seeing fire in the eyes of the enemy.

古文：人情岂肯为其所恶而攻其所好哉？
现代文：人的性情难道有肯为了他所憎恶的而去攻击他所喜好的吗？
English: Is the human nature disposed to attack what it likes for what it hates?

古文：故以桀攻桀，犹有巧拙；以桀诈尧，若卵投石，夫何幸之有！
现代文：因此用桀来攻击桀，还可以投机取巧；以桀去诈骗尧，就像用蛋去碰石头，哪裹还有侥幸的呢！
English: Therefore, to attack a centipede with a centipede can also be opportunistic; to defraud a centipede with a centipede is like touching a stone with an egg, and there is nothing lucky about it!

古文：《诗》曰： 武王载旆，有虔秉钺，如火烈烈，则莫我敢遏。 
现代文：《诗》上说： 武王举着旗帜，虔诚地握着兵器，像火一样猛烈，没有人敢阻止我们。 
English: "Poetry" said: King Wu marched with a banner, reverently holding weapons, fierce as fire, and no one dared to stop us.

古文：言以仁谊绥民者，无敌于天下也。
现代文：是说用仁义来安抚人民的，就会无敌于天下。
English: That is to say, if you appease the people with benevolence and righteousness, you will be invincible in the world.

古文：若齐之技击，得一首则受赐金。
现代文：像齐国比赛击剑的技巧，得到一颗头颅就受到赏金。
English: Like the fencing skills of the Qigong competition, getting a head is rewarded.

古文：事小敌脆，则偷可用也；事巨敌坚，则焕然离矣。
现代文：军事规模小，敌人脆弱，则这种技巧苟且可以使用；军事规模巨大，敌人坚强，就会涣然离散。
English: If the military scale is small and the enemy is weak, this technique can be used; if the military scale is huge and the enemy is strong, it will be scattered.

古文：是亡国之兵也。
现代文：这是亡国的军队。
English: This is the army of the dead.

古文：魏氏武卒，衣三属之甲，操十二石之弩，负矢五十个，置戈其上，冠胄带剑，嬴三日之粮，日中而趋百里，中试则复其户，利其田宅。
现代文：魏氏用武装的士兵，穿着三层钟甲，操用十二石的箭弩，背着箭矢五十枚，把：戈放在行装上面，戴着头盔携带宝剑，带着三天的粮食，一天之内奔走百里，考试合格就免除他的赋税，给他以田地住宅的实惠。
English: Mr. Wei uses armed soldiers, wears three layers of armor, uses a twelve-stone arrowhead, carries fifty arrows on his back, puts the crossbow on the carriage, wears a helmet and carries a sword, carries three days of grain, and runs a hundred miles in one day. If he passes the exam, he will be exempted from paying taxes and given the benefits of a field residence.

古文：如此，则其地虽广，其税必寡，其气力数年而衰。
现代文：如果这样，那么他们国家土地虽然广阔，税收一定很少，而人的气力经过几年后就衰弱了。
English: If so, then their country, though vast in land, must be small in revenue, and the strength of the people must in a few years be enfeebled.

古文：是危国之兵也。
现代文：这是危害国家的军队。
English: This is an army that is endangering the country.

古文：秦人，其生民也狭厄，其使民也酷烈。
现代文：秦国的人，教养人民很狭隘，役使人民却残酷暴烈。
English: The people of Qin were very narrow-minded in educating the people, but they were cruel and violent in serving the people.

古文：劫之以势，隐之以厄，狃之以赏庆，道之以刑罚，使其民所以要利于上者，非战无由也。
现代文：用势力来威胁人民，用穷困去折磨他们，使人民贪求赏赐，用刑罚来引导人民，使他的人民凡对上邀功行赏，不去打仗就没有别的出路。
English: To threaten the people with force, to torment them with poverty, to make the people greedy for rewards, to guide the people with punishment, and to reward his people who perform their duty to the highest bidder, there is no other way out but to fight.

古文：功赏相长，五甲首而隶五家，是最为有数，故能四世有胜于天下。
现代文：功劳和赏赐相互激增，能够得到五个穿着钟甲的人的首级的可以奴役五家，这是最有效率的，所以能经过四代而拥有天下。
English: Merit and reward are mutually proliferated, and it is most efficient to enslave five families if you can get the heads of five bell-wearing people, so you can own the world in four generations.

古文：然皆干赏蹈利之兵，庸徒鬻卖之道耳，未有安制矜节之理也。
现代文：然而都是求取赏赐追逐利益的军队，是干庸之辈作买卖的办法，却没有稳定制度保持节操。
English: However, they are all reward-seeking, profit-chasing armies, which are a way for mediocre people to do business, but there is no stable system to maintain discipline.

古文：故虽地广兵强，鳃鳃常恐天下之一合而共轧己也。
现代文：所以即使土地广阔，军队强大，战战兢兢常怕天下同心协力来共同倾轧自己。
English: Therefore, even if the land is vast and the army is strong, it is always afraid of the world's concerted efforts to work together.

古文：至乎齐桓、晋文之兵，可谓入其域而有节制矣。然犹未本仁义之统也。
现代文：至于齐桓公、晋文公的军队可以说达到了一定的境界是有节制的，然而仍未遵照仁义的纲领。
English: As for the armies of Prince Qi Kuan and Prince Jinwen, it can be said that they have reached a certain level of restraint, but they still have not followed the program of benevolence.

古文：故齐之技击不可以遇魏之武卒，魏之武卒不可以直秦之锐士，秦之锐士不可以当桓、文之节制，桓、文之节制不可以敌汤、武之仁义。 
现代文：所以齐国击刺的方法不能用以抵挡魏国武装的兵士，魏国武装的兵士不能抵挡秦国精锐的士兵，秦国精锐的士兵不可以与齐桓公、晋文公的节制之兵相比较，齐桓公、晋文公的节制之兵不能与商汤、周武王的仁义之师相匹敌。
English: Therefore, the stabbing method of Qi can't be used to resist the soldiers of Wei, the soldiers of Wei can't resist the elite soldiers of Qin, the elite soldiers of Qin can't be compared with the temperate soldiers of Qi Huan and Jin Wengong, and the temperate soldiers of Qi Huan and Jin Wengong can't be compared with the benevolent teachers of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：故曰： 善师者不陈，善陈者不战，善战者不败，善败者不亡。 
现代文：所以说： 善于统率军队的人不摆阵法，善于摆阵的人不进行战斗，善于战斗的人不会失败，善于失败的人不会灭亡。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who are good at leading armies do not take positions, those who are good at taking positions do not fight, those who are good at fighting do not fail, and those who are good at failing do not perish.

古文：若夫舜修百僚，咎繇作士，命以 蛮夷猾夏，寇贼奸轨 ，而刑无所用，所谓善师不陈者也。
现代文：至于说到舜治理百官，任命咎繇为负责司法的官员，告诉他 蛮夷扰乱华夏，是一群劫掠杀人为非作歹的人 ，而刑法无所作用，这就是说善于统率军队的人不必布阵。
English: As for appointing Guan Yu as the official in charge of justice, tell him that the barbarians who disturbed China are a group of robbers and killers, and the criminal law has no effect, which means that those who are good at leading the army do not need to set up a formation.

古文：汤、武征伐，陈师誓众，而放擒桀、纣，所谓善陈不战者也。
现代文：商汤、周武王进行征伐，排列好军队进行战前动员，桀、纣于是被擒，造就是说善于摆阵的人不作战。
English: Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu carried out the conquest, lined up the army for pre-war mobilization, and then were defeated, which means that those who are good at setting up the battle do not fight.

古文：齐桓南服强楚，使贡周室，北伐山戎，为燕开路，存亡继绝，功为伯首，所谓善战不败者也。
现代文：齐桓公南面征服强大的楚国，使它进贡周室，又北面讨伐山戎，为燕国打先锋，能够存危亡，续断绝，功劳为霸王之最，这是说善于作战的人不失败。
English: In the south, King Qi Huan conquered the powerful state of Chu and made it pay tribute to the Zhou Dynasty, and in the north, he fought against Mount Rong and played a vanguard for the state of Yan. He was able to survive danger, continue to break away, and his merit was the greatest of the overlord. This means that people who are good at fighting will not fail.

古文：楚昭王遭阖庐之祸，国灭出亡，父老送之。
现代文：楚昭王遭受到阑庐的战祸，国家被灭，国王流亡，百姓来为他送别。
English: King Chu Zhao suffered the calamity of war, the country was destroyed, the king went into exile, and the people came to see him off.

古文：王曰： 父老反矣！
现代文：楚昭王说： 你们回去吧！
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: Go back!

古文：何患无君？ 
现代文：何愁没有君主呢？ 
English: What's the point of having a monarch?

古文：父老曰： 有君如是其贤也！ 
现代文：百姓说： 哪有如此贤明的君主呢！ 
English: And the people said, Who is so wise a prince?

古文：相与从之。
现代文：就一同跟从他。
English: And they all followed him.

古文：或奔走赴秦，号哭请救，秦人为之出兵。
现代文：有的人奔走到秦国，号哭着请求帮忙，秦国就为他们派兵。
English: Some people ran to Qin, crying and begging for help, and Qin sent soldiers for them.

古文：二国并力，遂走吴师，昭王返国，所谓善败不亡者也。
现代文：两个国家齐心协力，驱逐走吴国军队，楚昭王返回了楚国，这是说善于失败的人不会灭亡。
English: The two countries made concerted efforts to expel the troops of the State of Wu, and King Chu Zhao returned to the State of Chu. This means that those who are good at failure will not perish.

古文：若秦因四世之胜，据河山之阻，任用白起、王翦豺狼之徒，奋其爪牙，禽猎六国，以并天下。
现代文：像秦国凭藉四代的胜利，占据黄河和高山的险要，使用白起、王翦这样的豺狼之辈，举用他们的党徒，获取了六国，吞并了天下。
English: For example, the Qin Dynasty, by virtue of the victory of four generations, occupied the Yellow River and the cusp of the high mountains, used the wolf-like generation of Baiqi and Wang Qi, and used their party members to acquire six countries and annex the world.

古文：穷武极诈，士民不附，卒隶之徒，还为敌仇，起云合，果共轧之。
现代文：用尽武力和奸诈，军士和人民都不归附，服役的士兵隶徒，又成为敌仇，像狂风一样兴起，像云彩一样聚合，最后共同颠覆了它。
English: With the use of force and treachery, the soldiers and the people did not adhere to it, and the soldiers who served became enemies, rising like a storm, gathering like a cloud, and finally overthrowing it together.

古文：斯为下矣。
现代文：这就是最末流的用兵之策。
English: This is the lowest form of military strategy.

古文：凡兵，所以存亡继绝，救乱除害也。
现代文：凡军队，是用来使灭亡的国家重新存在，使断绝了的后代重新接续，拯救危乱铲除祸害的。
English: All armies are used to bring back to life a ruined country, to bring back to life the generations that have been cut off, to save from danger and to eradicate evil.

古文：故伊、吕之将，子孙有国，与商、周并。
现代文：所以伊尹、吕望这样的将领，子孙都有国家，同商朝、周朝共盛衰。
English: Therefore, the descendants of generals such as Yi Yin and Lvang all had their own states, and they prospered and declined together with the Shang and Zhou dynasties.

古文：至于末世，苟任诈力，以快贪残，急城杀人盈城，争地杀人满野。
现代文：到了他们的末代，随便使用狡诈之术，以贪婪残暴为快乐，为争夺城市杀人满城，争夺土地杀人充满原野。
English: In their last days they will practice every kind of deception; they will delight in greed and violence; they will fill the cities with bloodshed and the country with bloodshed.

古文：孙、吴、商、白之徒，皆身诛戮于前，而国灭亡于后。
现代文：孙膑、吴起、商鞅、白起之流，都是自身被诛杀在前，国家灭亡于后。
English: The Sun Yat-sen, Wu Qi, Shang Qi, and Bai Qi were all killed before they were killed, and the country was destroyed after.

古文：报应之势，各以类至，其道然矣。
现代文：报应的趋势是各自依照类别到来的，他们的下场就是这样。
English: Retribution tends to come in categories, and that's what happened to them.

古文：汉兴，高祖躬神武之材，行宽仁之厚，总揽英雄，以诛秦、项。
现代文：汉朝建立后，高祖自身有神明威武的禀赋，行为宽厚仁慈，统领英雄豪杰，诛杀秦王、项羽。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Gaozhu himself had the endowment of divine power and martial arts, acted generously and benevolently, led heroes and heroes, and killed Qin Wang and Xiang Yu.

古文：任萧、曹之文，用良、平之谋，骋陆、郦之辩，明叔孙通之仪，文武相配，大略举焉。
现代文：采用萧何、曹参的文治，使用张良、陈平的计谋，尽情施展陆买、郦生的辩才，彰明叔孙通的礼仪，文武之道相互配合，大方针都已齐全。
English: Adopting the civil administration of Xiao He and Cao San, using the stratagems of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping, giving full play to the argumentation skills of Lu Mai and Xing Sheng, highlighting the etiquette of uncle and grandson, and the mutual cooperation of the literary and martial arts, the general policy is complete.

古文：天下既定，踵秦而置材官于郡国，京师有南、北军之屯。
现代文：天下安定后，依照秦国在郡国设置材官，京师有南北二军驻扎。
English: After the world was stabilized, the Qin state set up a liaison office in the county, and the Beijing division had two armies stationed in the north and south.

古文：至武帝平百粤，内增七校，外有楼船，皆岁时讲肄，修武备云。
现代文：到武帝平定百粤，又在内增设七校，在外有战船，每年每季都加以讲授演习，军备得以治理。
English: By the time of Emperor Wu's subjugation of Guangdong, seven additional schools had been established in Guangdong, and warships were stationed outside the province. Drills were taught every quarter of the year, and armaments could be managed.

古文：至元帝时，以贡禹议，始罢角抵，而未正治兵振旅之事也。
现代文：到元帝时，按照贡禹的建议，才废除角抵的游戏，但没有端正治理兵军重振军心的方略。
English: By the time of Emperor Yuan, in accordance with the suggestion of Gong Yu, the game of jousting was abolished, but there was no proper strategy for governing the troops and reinvigorating the military.

古文：古人有言： 天生五材，民并用之，废一不可，谁能去兵？ 
现代文：古人曾说： 天生有金、木、水、火、土五种性质，人类都加以利用，去掉其中一样都不可以，有谁能去掉军队呢？ 
English: The ancients once said: People are born with the five natures of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, and humans use them all. It is impossible to remove any of them. Who can remove the army?

古文：鞭扑不可弛于家，刑罚不可废于国，征伐不可偃于天下。用之有本末，行之有逆顺耳。
现代文：治家不可废弃鞭打，治国不能废除刑罚，征伐不可能从天下消失；使用起来要分清本末，实行起来要有逆有顺。
English: Whipping should not be abandoned when governing a family, punishment should not be abolished when governing a country, and conquest should not disappear from the world. It is necessary to distinguish between the beginning and the end when using it, and between the opposite and the right when implementing it.

古文：孔子曰： 工欲善其事，必先利其器。 
现代文：孔子说： 工匠要把事情办好，一定要先使他的工具锐利。 
English: Confucius said, "A craftsman must first sharpen his tools if he is to do his work well."

古文：文德者，帝王之利器；威武者，文德之辅助也。
现代文：文德，是帝王锐利的武器；威武，是文德的辅助。
English: Wende is the sharp weapon of the emperor; Weiwu is the auxiliary of Wende.

古文：夫文之所加者深，则武之所服者大；德之所施者博，则威之所制者广。
现代文：礼乐教化影响的程度深，那么武力就能使服从的人多；道德所施用的范围广，那么威信所制服的地方就大。
English: If the influence of etiquette and music education is deep, then force can make more people obey; if the scope of morality is wide, then the place where authority is subdued is large.

古文：三代之盛，至于刑错兵寝者，其本末有序，帝王之极功也。
现代文：三代强盛，达到了刑止兵息的地步，它们本未有序，这是帝王最极至的功业。
English: Three generations of strong prosperity have reached the point of punishing and stopping soldiers. They are not orderly, which is the emperor's greatest achievement.

古文：昔周之法，建三典以刑邦国，诘四方：一曰，刑新邦用轻典；二曰，刑平邦用中典；三曰，刑乱邦用重典。
现代文：以前周代的法律，建立轻、中、重三类刑法来规范国家，责罚各民族：一为惩治新国用轻法；二为惩治承平守成的国家用中法；三为惩治无秩序的国家用重法。
English: The laws of the previous Zhou Dynasty established three types of criminal law, light, medium and heavy, to regulate the country and punish all ethnic groups: one is to punish the new country with light law; the second is to punish the country with medium law; and the third is to punish the disorderly country with heavy law.

古文：五刑：墨罪五百，劓罪五百，宫罪五百，刖罪五百，杀罪五百，所谓刑平邦用中典者也。
现代文：五刑中墨刑有五百种，劓刑有五百种，宫刑有五百种，刖刑有五百种，死刑有五百种，这些就是所谓的惩治承平守成的国家用中刑。
English: Among the five punishments, there are five hundred kinds of ink punishment, five hundred kinds of whipping punishment, five hundred kinds of palace punishment, five hundred kinds of whipping punishment, and five hundred kinds of death penalty. These are the so-called national punishments for the punishment of Heping and Shoucheng.

古文：凡杀人者踣诸市，墨者使守门，劓者使守关，宫者使守内，刖者使守囿，完者使守积。
现代文：凡是杀人的人就在市上斩首，遭墨刑的人让他去守城门，遭劓刑的让他去守关，遭宫刑的人让他去把守宫内，受刖刑的让他去守苑囿，接受完刑被剃去鬓发的犯人的让他去看守积聚的物资。
English: Anyone who had committed murder would be beheaded in the market, those who had been inked would guard the gate, those who had been flogged would guard the gate, those who had been punished in the palace would guard the palace, those who had been flogged would guard the courtyard, and those who had been shaved would guard the goods.

古文：其奴，男子入于罪隶，女子入舂槁。
现代文：那些奴隶，男的没入官府为奴隶，女子没入官服舂米和作饭的劳役。
English: Those slaves, men enslaved in government offices, women enslaved in government uniforms, and rice and cooking labor.

古文：凡有爵者，与七十者，与未者，皆不为奴。
现代文：凡是有爵位的人，以及年满七十岁和七岁左右还没有换牙齿的儿童，都不没入官府为奴。
English: Anyone with a title of nobility, as well as children over the age of seventy and children around the age of seven who have not had their teeth replaced, were all enslaved by the government.

古文：周道既衰，穆王眊荒，命甫侯度时作刑，以诘四方。
现代文：周朝衰落后，穆王昏愤放纵，叫甫侯根据时宜制订刑法，用来刑责天下。
English: After the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, King Mu lost his temper and indulged himself. He ordered his vassals to formulate a criminal law according to the needs of the time, which would be used to punish the whole world.

古文：黑罚之属千，劓罚之属千，髌罚之属五百，宫罚之属三百，大辟之罚其属二百。
现代文：墨刑处罚的条有一千条，劓刑处罚的条闩有一千条，髋刑处罚的条目有五百条，宫刑处罚的条曰有三百条，死刑处罚的条目有二百条。
English: There are one thousand articles for the punishment of ink, one thousand articles for the punishment of whipping, five hundred articles for the punishment of whipping, three hundred articles for the punishment of palace punishment, and two hundred articles for the punishment of death.

古文：五刑之属三千，盖多于平邦中典五百章，所谓刑乱邦用重典者也。
现代文：五刑的条目共有三千条，这些都多于承平国家的中刑五百条的数日，追就是所谓的治理动乱的邦国用重刑。
English: There are a total of 3,000 articles of the five punishments, which are more than the 500 days of the medium punishment of the Heping country, and the pursuit is the so-called heavy punishment of the state and the country to control the turmoil.

古文：春秋之时，王道浸坏，教化不行，子产相郑而铸刑书。
现代文：春秋的时候，王道逐渐被破坏，政教风化不普及，子产为郑国相时就铸刑法于鼎上。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the royal road was gradually destroyed, the political and religious demeanor was not widespread, and the criminal law was cast on the Ding Shang when Zheng Guozhong was born.

古文：晋叔向非之曰： 昔先王议事以制，不为刑辟。
现代文：晋国叔向指责他说： 以前先王先讨论犯罪的情况，然后再确定罪行。
English: Uncle Jin Guo said to the accused: In the past, the king first discussed the circumstances of the crime, and then determined the crime.

古文：惧民之有争心也，犹不可禁御，是故闲之以谊，纠之以政，行之以礼，守之以信，奉之以仁；制为禄位以劝其从，严断刑罚以威其淫。
现代文：不制定刑法，是害怕人民有争斗的思想，这样仍然不能加以禁止防御，所以就用道义来防范，用政令来督察，用礼来示范，用诚信来保持操守，用仁来进行教化；制定官禄地位来勉励他们服从，严厉判处罪犯来使他们为放纵感到害怕。
English: Not to enact a criminal law is to fear that the people will have a combative spirit, so it is still impossible to prohibit defense, so it is necessary to use morality to prevent, use government orders to inspect, use etiquette to demonstrate, use honesty to maintain integrity, and use benevolence to educate; establish official status to encourage them to obey, and severely sentence criminals to make them afraid of indulgence.

古文：惧其未也，故诲之以忠，竦之以行，教之以务，使之以和，临之以敬，莅之以强，断之以刚。
现代文：害怕还达不到目标，所以用忠诚来教诲他们，根据行为来奖励他们，用时务来教导他们，温和地役使他们，严肃地面对他们，用强大力量监视他们，果敢地断刑。
English: They are afraid of not reaching the goal, so they use loyalty to teach them, reward them according to their behavior, use time to teach them, serve them gently, face them seriously, monitor them with great power, and decisively punish them.

古文：犹求圣哲之上，明察之官，忠信之长，慈惠之师。
现代文：如此，还要寻求具有超凡道德才智的公侯，明察的官员，忠诚守信的长者，仁慈恩惠的老师。
English: Thus, one should also look for a prince with extraordinary moral intelligence, a clear-sighted official, a loyal and trustworthy elder, and a kind and benevolent teacher.

古文：民于是乎可任使也，而不生祸乱。
现代文：这样百姓就可以服从指挥了，不会发生灾祸动乱。
English: In this way, the people can obey the command, and there will be no disaster or turmoil.

古文：民知有辟，则不忌于上，并有争心，以征于书，而侥幸以成之，弗可为矣。
现代文：百姓知道有刑法，就不会害怕长官，有了争辩的心思，就在刑典上加以求证，心存侥幸而逃避刑法，就不可治理了。
English: If the people know that there is a criminal law, they will not be afraid of the officers. If they have a mind to argue, they will seek evidence in the criminal code. If they think it is a fluke and evade the criminal law, they cannot be governed.

古文：夏有乱政而作禹刑，商有乱政而作汤刑，周有乱政而作九刑。
现代文：夏朝有违反政令的人就制订了 禹刑，商朝有违反政令的人就制订了 汤刑 ，周朝有违反政令的人就制订了 九刑 。
English: In the Xia Dynasty, those who violated government orders were given the Yu punishment, in the Shang Dynasty, those who violated government orders were given the Tang punishment, and in the Zhou Dynasty, those who violated government orders were given the Nine punishments.

古文：三辟之兴，皆叔世也。
现代文：三代刑法的兴起，都在每代末世。
English: The rise of three generations of criminal law has been in each generation of the last century.

古文：今吾子相郑国，制参辟，铸刑书，将以靖民，不亦难乎！
现代文：现在您治理郑国，参照夏、商、周三代的刑法，铸刑律于鼎上，用以治理人民，不也很难吗！
English: Now that you are governing Zheng, you should refer to the criminal laws of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, and cast the criminal law on the top of the pyramid to govern the people. Isn't it also difficult?

古文：《诗》曰： 仪式刑文王之德，日靖四方。 又曰： 仪刑文王，万邦作孚。 如是，何辟之有？
现代文：《诗》上说： 按照文王以德教化的作法，那么每天四方都安宁，又说： 刑罚如文王，那么万邦都诚信归顺，如此，何必制订刑律？
English: "Poetry" said: According to King Wen's practice of moral education, every day is peaceful in all directions. It also said: If the punishment is like King Wen, then all nations will faithfully submit. So, why is it necessary to formulate a criminal law?

古文：民知争端矣，将弃礼而征于书。
现代文：人民知道争讼，就要放弃礼义而去求证于刑书。
English: When the people know of a dispute, they must abandon propriety and go to the punishment book for proof.

古文：锥刀之末，将尽争之，乱狱滋丰，货赂并行。
现代文：像锥刀尖端般的小事，都在尽力争夺，将使错乱的案件更加繁多，贿赂的行为并举。
English: Small things, like the tip of a cone, are being fought over with all their might, which will lead to more and more cases of disorder, including acts of bribery.

古文：终子之世，郑其败虖！ 
现代文：在您活着的时候，郑国恐怕要衰败吧！ 
English: While you are alive, I'm afraid Zheng Guo will decline!

古文：子产报曰： 若吾子之言，侨不材，不能及子孙，吾以救世也。 
现代文：子产回信说道： 按照您所说的，公孙侨没有才能，不能考虑到子孙，我衹用此挽救当代。 
English: Zifang replied: According to what you said, the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of overseas Chinese have no talent and cannot take into account the grandchildren. We should use this to save the current generation.

古文：偷薄之政，自是滋矣。
现代文：轻薄的政治，就从这里开始蔓延。
English: This is where frivolous politics begins to spread.

古文：孔子伤之，曰： 导之以德，齐之以礼，有耻且格；导之以政，齐之以刑，民免而无耻。 礼乐不兴，则刑罚不中；刑罚不中，则民无所错手足。 
现代文：孔子对此感到哀痛，就说： 用道德来诱导他们，用礼教来整顿他们，人民不但有廉耻之心，而且人心归服；用政令来诱导他们，用刑罚来整顿他们，人民衹是暂时地免于罪过，却没有廉耻之心  礼乐制度不兴起，刑罚就不会得当；刑罚不得当，百姓就连手脚都不知道摆在哪裹才好。 
English: Confucius was saddened by this, and said: To induce them with morality, to rectify them with etiquette, the people not only have a sense of shame, but also the hearts of the people are submissive; to induce them with government decrees, to rectify them with punishment, the people are temporarily free from sin, but they do not have a sense of shame; if the ritual system does not arise, the punishment will not be appropriate; if the punishment is not appropriate, the people do not even know where to wrap their hands and feet.

古文：孟氏使阳肤为士师，问于曾子，亦曰： 上失其道，民散久矣。
现代文：孟氏任阳肤为士师官，他就向曾子请教，曾子答道： 在上位的人去了规范，百姓早就离心离德了。
English: When Meng appointed Yang Gui as an officer, he asked his great-grandson for advice. The great-grandson replied, "The people at the higher levels have gone to the norm, and the people have long been separated from virtue."

古文：如得其情，则哀矜而勿喜。 
现代文：你如果能够审出罪犯的真情，就应该加以同情和怜悯，而不要白呜得意。 
English: If you can judge the true feelings of the criminal, you should have sympathy and pity, but not vainglory.

古文：陵夷至于战国，韩任申子，秦用商鞅，连相坐之法，造参夷之诛；增加肉刑、大辟，有凿颠、抽胁、镬亨之刑。
现代文：王道衰落一直到了战国，韩国任用申不害，秦国任用商鞅，实行一人犯法，株连他人同时治罪的法律，制造了诛杀三族的法令；增加了肉刑、大辟的科目，有凿颠、抽胁、护烹的刑法。
English: The decline of the royal way continued until the Warring States period. South Korea appointed Shen Nihong, and Qin State appointed Shang Qian. They implemented the law of one person breaking the law and simultaneously punishing others, and created the law of killing the three ethnic groups. They increased the subjects of corporal punishment and beating, and had the criminal law of chiseling, threatening, and protecting the kitchen.

古文：至于秦始皇，兼吞战国，遂毁先王之法，灭礼谊之官，专任刑罚，躬操文墨，昼断狱，夜理书，自程决事日县石之一。
现代文：到了秦始皇的时候，他兼并了战争中的各国，于是废毁了先代帝王的法则，消灭了礼义的官职，专门使用刑罚，亲自操作文书写作，白天审判诉讼，晚上处理文书，自己按定额处理事情，一天以一百二十斤竹简为量。
English: By the time of Qin Shihuang, he had annexed all the countries in the war, so he abolished the rules of the previous emperor, eliminated the official duties of etiquette, specialized in the use of punishment, personally operated the writing of documents, tried lawsuits during the day, handled documents at night, and dealt with things according to the quota, with a daily amount of one hundred and twenty pounds of bamboo strips.

古文：而奸邪并生，赭衣塞路，囹圄成市，天下愁怨，溃而叛之。
现代文：但是邪恶不正的人都出现了，犯罪的人塞满道路，牢狱多如市场，天下的人都忧愁怨恨，纷纷反叛秦国。
English: However, evil and dishonest people appeared, criminals filled the roads, prisons were as numerous as markets, and the people of the world were sad and resentful, and they rebelled against Qin.

古文：汉兴，高祖初入关，约法三章曰： 杀人者死，伤人及盗抵罪。 
现代文：汉王兴起后，高祖刚开始进入关中，就以三条法令相约束，说： 杀人的人要判死刑，伤害别人以及盗窃的人抵偿他应负的罪责。 
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, as soon as Gaozu entered the Guanzhong, he was bound by three decrees, saying: Those who kill people should be sentenced to death, those who hurt others and those who steal should pay for their crimes.

古文：蠲削烦苛，兆民大说。
现代文：免除繁多苛刻的刑法，亿万人民大为高兴。
English: Hundreds of millions of people are very happy to be exempted from a variety of harsh criminal laws.

古文：其后四夷未附，兵革未息，三章之法不足以御奸，于是相国萧何攈摭秦法，取其宜于时者，作律九章。
现代文：这之后，四方少数民族没有归附，兵事没有停止，三条法令不足以防止邪恶的人，于是相国萧何采集秦朝法令，选取其中合乎时宜的，制订了九章法律。
English: After that, the ethnic minorities in the four directions did not accede, the military did not stop, and three laws were not enough to prevent evil people. Therefore, Xiao He collected the laws of the Qin Dynasty, selected the most timely ones, and formulated nine chapters of laws.

古文：当孝惠、高后时，百姓新免毒蠚，人欲长幼养老。
现代文：到了孝惠帝、高后的时候，百姓刚免除战争的毒害，人人都想抚育儿童事奉老人。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiao Hui and Emperor Gao, the people had just been freed from the poison of war, and everyone wanted to raise children and serve the elderly.

古文：萧、曹为相，填以无为，从民之欲而不扰乱，是以衣食滋殖，刑罚用稀。
现代文：萧何、曹参任丞相，用无为之策来安定百姓，顺从他们的要求，而不加以扰乱，因此百姓衣食丰盛，刑罚使用得很少。
English: Xiao He and Cao San, who were appointed as chancellors, tried to stabilize the people by doing nothing, and obeyed their demands without disturbing them. As a result, the people had plenty of food and clothing, and punishments were rarely used.

古文：及孝文即位，躬修玄默，劝趣农桑，减省租赋。
现代文：等到孝文帝即位，亲自修行清静无为的政治，鼓励人们去耕织，减免田租和兵赋。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne, he personally practiced the politics of calm and inaction, encouraged people to cultivate, and reduced and exempted land rent and military expenses.

古文：而将相皆旧功臣，少文多质，惩恶亡秦之政，论议务在宽厚，耻言人之过失。
现代文：而且他的将相都是从前的功臣，少华美而多朴实，以秦国灭亡的政治作为教训，定罪评议一定要宽厚，以议论他人的过失为耻。
English: Moreover, his generals are all former heroes, less glamorous and more down-to-earth, with the politics of the fall of Qin as a lesson, the conviction review must be lenient, and it is shameful to discuss the mistakes of others.

古文：化行天下，告讦之俗易。
现代文：教化流行天下，揭人隐私的习俗改变了。
English: Indoctrination has spread around the world, and the custom of revealing one's private life has changed.

古文：吏安其官，民乐其业，畜积岁增，户口浸息。
现代文：官吏安于本职，百姓高兴地生产，积累逐年增加，人逐渐增长。
English: Officials are satisfied with their duties, the people are happy to produce, the accumulation is increasing year by year, and the number of people is gradually increasing.

古文：风流笃厚，禁罔疏阔。
现代文：风俗教化真诚纯一，法令简略。
English: The customs and education are sincere and pure, and the laws are simple.

古文：选张释之为廷尉，罪疑者予民，是以刑罚大省，至于断狱四百，有刑错之风。
现代文：选拔张释之任廷尉，有疑点难以定罪的人从民心处罚，因此刑罚大大地减省。以至于被判罪的全年衹有四百人，形成刑法搁置不用的风气。
English: Zhang Xie was selected as a courtier, and people who were difficult to convict were punished from the people's hearts, so the punishment was greatly reduced. So much so that there were 400 people convicted throughout the year, forming a culture of not using criminal law.

古文：即位十三年齐太仓令淳于公有罪当刑，诏狱逮系长安。
现代文：孝文帝在位十三年后，齐国太仓令淳于公有罪应当判刑，奉诏令逮捕捆送长安。
English: Thirteen years after Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the Taicang Emperor of the State of Qi decreed that Jun Yu should be sentenced for public guilt, and ordered him to be arrested and sent to Chang'an.

古文：淳于公无男，有五女，当行会逮，骂其女曰： 生子不生男，缓急非有益！ 
现代文：淳于公没有儿子，有五个女儿，当要被逮捕的时候，他骂他的女儿说： 生孩子没有男孩，紧要关头没有用处！ 
English: When he was about to be arrested, he scolded his daughter, saying, "Having a child without a boy is of no use in a time of crisis!

古文：其少女缇萦，自伤悲泣，乃随其父至长安，上书曰： 妾父为吏，齐中皆称其廉平，今坐法当刑。
现代文：他最小的女儿缇萦，独自哀伤悲泣，就同他的父亲一起到长安，给皇上写信说道： 我的父亲为官吏，齐国中都称赞他廉洁公平，现在犯罪应当受罚。
English: His youngest daughter, Zou, grieving and weeping alone, went to Chang'an with her father and wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: My father is a government official. All of Qi praised him for his honesty and fairness. Now crime should be punished.

古文：妾伤夫死者不可复生，刑者不可复属，虽后欲改过自新，其道亡繇也。
现代文：我哀痛那些死了的人不能复生，被行刑的人不能恢愎，即使以后想改正过错重新做人，也没有道路可走了。
English: I grieve that those who have died cannot be revived, and those who have been executed cannot be restored to life. Even if they want to correct their mistakes and become human again in the future, there is no way to go.

古文：妾愿没入为官婢，以赎父刑罪，使得自新。 
现代文：我愿意被没入官府为奴婢，以此赎解父亲的刑罚，使他得以重新做人。 
English: I am willing to be absorbed into the government as a slave, in order to redeem my father's punishment, so that he can be human again.

古文：书奏天子，天子怜悲其意，遂下令曰： 制诏御史：盖闻有虞氏之时，画衣冠、异章服以为戮，而民弗犯，何治之至也！
现代文：信到了天子那裹，天子哀悯她的心意，就下令道： 制诏御史：曾听说有虞氏的时候，用画着不同图文标志的衣服帽子表示不同等级的制服作为刑杀的象征，而百姓不去犯罪，这是何等地太平！
English: When the letter reached the heavenly son, the heavenly son took pity on her heart and ordered, "Censure history: I once heard that when there was a yu clan, they used clothes and hats with different graphic symbols to indicate different levels of uniforms as a symbol of torture and killing, but the people did not commit crimes. How peaceful it was!

古文：今法有肉刑三，而奸不止，其咎安在？
现代文：现在刑法有三种肉刑，但邪恶仍然没有停止，过失到底在哪裹？
English: Now the law stipulates that there are three kinds of corporal punishment, but the crime of treason cannot be prohibited. Where is the fault?

古文：非乃朕德之薄而教不明与？
现代文：难道是朕的道德浅薄，教化不明确不成！
English: Is it because my morality is shallow and my enlightenment is not clear?

古文：吾甚自愧。
现代文：我很惭愧。
English: I am deeply ashamed of myself.

古文：故夫训道不纯而愚民陷焉，《诗》曰： 恺弟君子，民之父母。 
现代文：因为训诫引导不正，愚民就陷入罪恶了。《诗》上说： 和乐简易的君子，是百姓的父母。 
English: Because the precepts lead to injustice, the foolish people fall into sin. "Poetry" said: "The gentleman with easy music is the parent of the people."

古文：今人有过，教未施而刑已加焉，或欲改行为善，而道亡繇至，朕甚怜之。
现代文：现在人有罪过，还没有进行教育而刑法就已加上来了，有人想改正行为去做善事，却没有道路可到达，朕很哀怜他们。
English: Nowadays, people have committed crimes, and criminal laws have been added without education. Some people want to correct their behavior and do good deeds, but there is no way to reach them. I feel very sorry for them.

古文：夫刑至断支休，刻肌肤，终身不息，何其刑之痛而不德也！
现代文：刑罚至人截断肢体，刀刻肌肤，终生都不能再生长复原，这种刑罚何等地痛苦而又不道德啊！
English: The punishment of having one's limbs amputated, one's skin cut off with a knife, and not being able to regrow or grow back for the rest of one's life, how painful and immoral is this punishment!

古文：岂为民父母之意哉！
现代文：难道合乎是人民的父母的含意吗？
English: Does it really meet the meaning of being the people's parents?

古文：其除肉刑，有以易之；及令罪人各以轻重，不亡逃，有年而免。
现代文：我命令废除肉刑，予以改替；现令罪犯各自根据轻重，不逃亡的，满了年数就免为平民。
English: I order that corporal punishment be abolished and replaced by corporal punishment. Now, the criminals are ordered according to their respective weights. If they do not escape, they will be exempted from becoming civilians after a certain number of years.

古文：具为令。 
现代文：以上作为条令。 
English: The above is a regulation.

古文：丞相张仓、御史大夫冯敬奏言： 肉刑所以禁奸，所由来者久矣。
现代文：丞相张苍、御史大夫冯敬上奏说道： 肉刑用来禁止邪恶，所据由来已久了。
English: Minister of Justice Zhang Cang and Chief Historian Feng Jing said: The use of corporal punishment to prohibit evil has a long history.

古文：陛下下明诏，怜万民之一有过被刑者终身不息，及罪人欲改行为善而道亡繇至，于盛德，臣等所不及也。
现代文：陛下下达英明的诏令，怜悯万民中一旦有过错被处罚的人终生受苦不息，等到罪人想改正行为去做善事却没有道路可以通达，这样盛大的恩德，是臣下等人所比不上的。
English: His Majesty issued a wise edict to have mercy on the people of the world, and those who were punished once for a mistake would suffer for the rest of their lives. When a sinner wants to correct his behavior and do good deeds, but there is no way to do so, such a grand grace is incomparable to that of his subjects.

古文：臣谨议请定律曰：诸当完者，完为城旦舂；当黥者，髡钳为城旦舂；当劓者，笞三百；当斩左止者，笞五百；当斩右止，及杀人先自告，及吏坐受赇枉法，守县官财物而即盗之，已论命复有笞罪者，皆弃市。
现代文：臣等谨慎地建议请求确定刑法为：所有应当处完刑的人，把完刑改为城旦刑舂刑；应当处黥刑的，把剃去头发而以铁圈束颈的刑罚改为城旦刑舂刑；应当处劓刑的，用竹板打三百；应当斩左脚的，用竹板打五百；应当斩右脚的，以及杀了人先自首的，加上官吏犯了接受贿赂而枉法，看守官府财产物品而自己盗取，已被判罪而又犯笞罪的人，都要处以弃市。
English: The ministers and others cautiously proposed and requested that the criminal law be determined as follows: all those who should be sentenced to death should be changed from death to imprisonment; those who should be sentenced to death should be changed from imprisonment to imprisonment; those who should be sentenced to imprisonment should be changed from imprisonment to imprisonment; those who should be sentenced to imprisonment should be beaten with a bamboo board three hundred times; those who should be beheaded should be beaten with a bamboo board five hundred times; those who should be beheaded should be beaten with a bamboo board five hundred times; and those who killed a person who surrendered first, as well as officials who committed the crime of accepting bribes and abused the law, those who guarded the property

古文：罪人狱已决，完为城旦舂，满三岁为鬼薪、白粲。
现代文：罪犯的案件已判决，服完刑改为服白天守城门的城旦刑和舂刑的，满三年改为服鬼薪白粲刑。
English: The criminal's case has been adjudicated, and if the criminal's sentence is changed to serving the punishment of guarding the city gate during the day and the punishment of whipping, the criminal's sentence will be changed to serving the punishment of whipping for three years.

古文：鬼薪、白粲一岁，为隶臣妾。
现代文：服鬼薪白粲刑满一年的，改为服隶臣、隶妾刑。
English: If one year has passed since serving the sentence of the devil's salary, the sentence will be changed to serving the sentence of a subordinate subject or subordinate concubine.

古文：隶臣妾一岁，免为庶人。
现代文：服隶臣、隶妾刑满一年，就免罪为平民。
English: If a subordinate subject or a subordinate concubine has served one year of his or her sentence, he or she will be exonerated as a commoner.

古文：隶臣妾满二岁，为司寇。
现代文：服隶臣、隶妾刑满二年，就改为服司寇刑。
English: If a subordinate subject or a subordinate concubine has served two years of his or her sentence, the sentence will be changed to that of a subordinate subject.

古文：司寇一岁，及作如司寇二岁，皆免为庶人。
现代文：服司寇刑一年，以及服如同司寇刑的刑满二年，都免罪为乎民。
English: Those who have served one year of the scold's punishment, and those who have served two years of the scold's punishment, are exempt from the crime.

古文：其亡逃及有罪耐以上，不用此令。
现代文：其中逃亡的以及犯有重罪的，不适用这个法令。
English: The decree does not apply to fugitives or those who have committed serious crimes.

古文：前令之刑城旦舂岁而非禁锢者，完为城旦舂岁数以免。
现代文：在此法令之前服城旦刑舂刑但没有禁锢的，与完刑改为服城旦刑舂刑一样免除刑罚。
English: Prior to this decree, those who had served a sentence of imprisonment without confinement were exempted from punishment in the same way as those who had completed their sentence and changed to serving a sentence of imprisonment.

古文：臣昧死请。 
现代文：臣等冒死请示。 
English: A vassal risked the death penalty to make this request.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：是后，外有轻刑之名，内实杀人。
现代文：这以后，在外有刑轻的名声，在内实际上在杀人。
English: Since then, he has had a reputation for light sentences, but inside he is actually killing people.

古文：斩右止者又当死。
现代文：斩右脚的人又要被处死刑。
English: Those who cut off their right foot will also be sentenced to death.

古文：斩左止者笞五百，当劓者笞三百，率多死。
现代文：斩左脚的罪犯要用竹板打五百，应当服则刑的用竹板打三百，服刑的人大都被打死了。
English: Criminals who cut off their left foot were to be beaten 500 times with a bamboo board, and those who were to serve their sentence were to be beaten 300 times with a bamboo board. Most of those who served their sentence were beaten to death.

古文：景帝元年，下诏曰： 加笞与重罪无异，幸而不死，不可为人。
现代文：景帝元年，皇上下令说： 加笞刑与死刑没有区别，侥幸没有死的，也不能自理。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the Emperor issued the following order: "There is no difference between flogging and the death penalty. If you are lucky enough not to die, you cannot take care of yourself.

古文：其定律：笞五百曰三百，笞三百曰二百。 
现代文：确定的刑法应是这样：笞五百改为三百，笞三百改为二百。 
English: The determined criminal law should be as follows: 500 should be changed to 300, and 300 to 200.

古文：狱尚不全。
现代文：这样罪犯仍不能保全生命。
English: That still doesn't save a criminal's life.

古文：至中六年，又下诏曰： 加笞者，或至死而笞未毕，朕甚怜之。
现代文：到了景帝六年，又下令说： 加答刑的人，有的到死而答数还没打完，朕很哀怜他们。
English: When he reached the sixth year of his reign, Emperor Jing gave another order: "I feel very sorry for those who have not completed the number of questions by the time they die.

古文：其减笞三百曰二百，笞二百曰一百。 
现代文：减笞三百为二百，笞二百为一百。 
English: And three hundred minus three hundred is two hundred, and two hundred minus two hundred is one hundred.

古文：又曰： 笞者，所以教之也，其定箠令。 
现代文：又说： 打竹板，是用来教导他们的，要确定行刑刑具的法令。 
English: He also said: The bamboo board is used to teach them to determine the order of the execution tool.

古文：丞相刘舍、御史大夫卫绾请： 笞者，箠长五尺，其本大一寸，其竹也，末薄半寸，皆平其节。
现代文：丞相刘舍、御史大夫卫绾请示： 竹板，杖长五尺，主干一寸，竹的末端厚半寸，都把竹节削平。
English: Minister of War Liu She and Imperial Historian Wei Wei, please instruct: A bamboo board, a stick five feet long, the main stem one inch, and the end of the bamboo half an inch thick, all scrape the bamboo knots flat.

古文：当笞者，笞臀。
现代文：应当受笞刑的要扪。臀部。
English: He who deserves to be flogged, let him be flogged.

古文：毋得更人，毕一罪乃更人。 
现代文：不得更改行刑的人，惩罚完一个罪犯后才更换行刑人员。 
English: It is not allowed to change the person who executes the punishment, and the executioners should be changed only after punishing a criminal.

古文：自是笞者得全，然酷吏犹以为威。
现代文：从这以后受笞刑的人得以保全，但残酷的官吏仍把造作为威吓。
English: Since then, those who were flogged have been spared, but cruel officials still use the punishment as a threat.

古文：死刑既重，而生刑又轻，民易犯之。
现代文：死刑既然太重，而生刑又太轻，那么百姓就容易犯法。
English: Since the death penalty is too heavy, but the life sentence is too light, people are more likely to break the law.

古文：及至孝武即位，外事四夷之功，内盛耳目之好，征发烦数，百姓贫耗，穷民犯法，酷吏击断，奸轨不胜。
现代文：等到孝武帝即帝位，外面追求征讨四夷的功劳，在内大肆追求声色的欲求，征集动用民间的人力和物资频繁，百姓耗损严重，贫困的人犯法，残酷的官吏掌握判刑的权力，为非作歹的人仍不止。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaowu came to the throne, the outside world was pursuing the glory of conquering the barbarians, the inside world was pursuing the desire for fame and glory, the recruitment and use of civilian manpower and materials were frequent, the people were seriously depleted, the poor people were breaking the law, the cruel officials had the power to sentence, and there were still more and more people who did bad things.

古文：于是招进张汤、赵禹之属，条定法令，作见知故纵、监临部主之法，缓深故之罪，急纵出之诛。
现代文：于是招进张汤、赵禹之辈，一条一条确定法令，制作了知人犯法不举告、负责实地监察部主有罪一同判罪的法令，放宽酷吏执法苛刻的罪过，立即诛杀放出犯人的官员。
English: As a result, Zhang Tang and Zhao Yu were brought in, one by one, to determine the laws and regulations, to make a law that the acquaintance did not report the crime, and to be responsible for the on-site supervision department to be convicted together, to relax the crime of harsh officials enforcing the law, and to immediately kill the officials who released the prisoners.

古文：其后奸猾巧法，转相比况，禁罔浸密。
现代文：这以后邪恶狡猾的官吏钻法律的空子，互相比较，法纲逐渐峻密。
English: Since then, evil and cunning officials have been exploiting loopholes in the law, comparing each other, and the legal framework has gradually become more and more strict.

古文：律、令凡三百五十九章，大辟四百九条，千八百八十二事，死罪决事比万三千四百七十二事。
现代文：法令一共有三百五十九条，死刑有四百零九条，一千八百八十二件细节，死罪的判决和旧例相比较为一万三干四百七十二条。
English: There are a total of 359 articles in the decree, including 409 articles on the death penalty and 1,882 details. Compared with the old cases, there are 13,0472 articles on the death penalty.

古文：文书盈于几阁，典者不能遍睹。
现代文：文件充满几案书架，重要的文献不能全都看到。
English: Documents fill several case bookshelves, and important documents cannot all be seen.

古文：是以郡国承用者驳，或罪同而论异。
现代文：因此郡国接受使用的相矛盾，有人罪相同而判处相异。
English: Therefore, the county accepted the use of contradictory, there are people with the same crime and sentenced differently.

古文：奸吏因缘为市，所欲活则傅生议，所欲陷则予死比，议者咸冤伤之。
现代文：奸吏趁机会做交易，想要人活就附上使他活的评议，想要陷害人就与死罪案例相比附，以构成死罪。
English: The swindler takes advantage of the opportunity to make a deal. If he wants to save a person's life, he will attach a comment that will keep him alive. If he wants to frame a person, he will attach a comparison with a capital case to constitute a capital crime.

古文：宣帝自在闾阎而知其若此。
现代文：议论的人都为此感到冤枉哀痛。
English: Everyone who talks about it feels unjustified grief.

古文：及即尊位，廷史路温舒上疏，言秦有十失，其一尚存，治狱之吏是也。语在《温舒传》。
现代文：宣帝在民间时就知道情况如此，等到登上帝位，廷史路温舒上奏书，说秦朝有十种过失，其中还有一种被保存，那就是治理罪犯的官吏。所说的话在《温舒传》。
English: Emperor Xuan knew this when he was a commoner. When he ascended to the throne, Ting Shi Lu Wenshu wrote a report, saying that the Qin Dynasty had ten kinds of faults, one of which was preserved, that is, the officials who governed criminals. The words are in "Wenshu Biography."

古文：上深愍焉，乃下诏曰： 间者吏用法，巧文浸深，是朕之不德也。
现代文：宣帝为此感到深深哀痛，就下令道： 近来官吏使用法律，舞文弄墨量刑日益加重，这是朕的不德。
English: Emperor Xuan was deeply saddened by this, and issued an order: Recently, officials have been using the law, and sentences have been getting heavier and heavier. This is my immorality.

古文：夫决狱不当，使有罪兴邪，不辜蒙戮，父子悲恨，朕甚伤之。
现代文：判案不适当，让有罪的人起邪恶的念头，无辜的人反而遭到杀戮，父和子相悲伤痛恨，朕对此很哀痛。
English: I am very saddened by the fact that the verdict was inappropriate, causing the guilty to have evil thoughts, and the innocent to be killed, causing the father and son to grieve and hate each other.

古文：今遣廷史与郡鞠狱，任轻禄薄，其为置廷平，秩六百石，员四人。
现代文：现派廷史与郡国一同审讯囚犯，任务轻俸禄薄，现设置廷平，官俸六百石，人员四个。
English: Ting Shi is now sent to interrogate prisoners together with the county and state, the task is low-paid, and Ting Ping is now set up, the official salary is 600 koku, and there are four people.

古文：其务平之，以称朕意。 
现代文：一定要公平对待，以使朕感到满意。 
English: You must treat me fairly in order to make me feel satisfied.

古文：于是选于定国为廷尉，求明察宽恕黄霸等以为廷平，季秋后请谳。
现代文：于是选拔于定国任廷尉，求得明察宽恕的黄霸等人任廷平，秋季的第三个月到朝廷议罪。
English: As a result, Yu Dingguo was selected to serve as a courtier, Huang Ba and others, who asked for clemency, were appointed as court officials, and in the third month of autumn, they went to the imperial court to discuss the crime.

古文：时上常幸宣室，斋居而决事，狱刑号为平矣。
现代文：当时皇上经常到宣室殿去，在那裹居住着进行斋戒并处理案件，官司刑法号称公平。
English: At that time, the emperor often went to the Xuanwu Palace, where he lived and fasted and dealt with cases. The judicial criminal law was known to be fair.

古文：时涿郡太守郑昌上疏言： 圣王置谏争之臣者，非以崇德，防逸豫之生也；立法明刑者，非以为治，救衰乱之起也。
现代文：当时涿郡太守郑昌上奏说道： 英明的君王设置直言规劝的大臣，不是发扬圣德，而是为防备安乐的生活；建立法制彰明刑令，不是为了太平，而是为了拯救衰败动乱以重新兴起。
English: At that time, Zheng Chang, the eunuch of Handan County, said: The wise king set up the minister of direct speech and exhortation, not to promote holiness, but to prevent a happy life; the establishment of the legal system to clarify the punishment order, not for peace, but to save the decay and turmoil to re-emerge.

古文：今明主躬垂明听，虽不置廷平，狱将自正；若开后嗣，不若删定律令。
现代文：现在英明的主上亲自听取案情，即使不设置廷乎，官司也将自然判案公正；如果为开创后世，不如删改确定法令。
English: Now that the wise Lord personally hears the case, even if there is no court, the court will naturally judge the case fairly; if it is to create a future generation, it is better to delete and amend the determination decree.

古文：律令一定，愚民知所避，奸吏无所弄矣。
现代文：法律一旦确定，百姓就知道所要躲避的，邪恶的官吏就无法玩弄法律了。
English: Once the law is determined, the people will know what to avoid, and evil officials will not be able to play with the law.

古文：今不正其本，而置廷平以理其末也，政衰听怠，则廷平将招权而为乱首矣。 
现代文：现在不端正法律的根本，而去设置廷平治理法律的末端，政治衰败治理松懈，那么廷平将会揽权而成为动乱的祸首。 
English: If we do not rectify the fundamentals of the law now, but set up the end of the law for the governance of Tingping, and the governance of political decay is lax, then Tingping will seize power and become the scourge of unrest.

古文：宣帝未及修正。
现代文：宣帝没有来得及修改纠正。
English: Emperor Xuan did not have time to revise and correct.

古文：至元帝初立，乃下诏曰： 夫法令者，所以抑暴扶弱，欲其难犯而易避也。
现代文：到元帝刚被立为皇帝，就下令说： 法令，是用来抑制强暴扶助弱小，是希望人们难以触犯而容易避免。
English: As soon as Emperor Yuan was enthroned, he issued a decree saying: "Laws are used to suppress violence and support the weak. It is hoped that they will be difficult to violate and easy to avoid.

古文：今律、令烦多而不约，自典文者不能分明，而欲罗元元之不逮，斯岂刑中之意哉！
现代文：现在法令烦复而不简明，自己主管法文条例的人都不能分辨清楚，却想用它去控制知识所不及的平民，这难道是刑法适当的意思！
English: Now the law is cumbersome and not concise, and those who are in charge of French regulations cannot distinguish clearly, but they want to use it to control civilians who are beyond knowledge, is this the proper meaning of criminal law!

古文：其议律、令可蠲除轻减者，条奏，唯在便安万姓而已。 
现代文：令讨论律令中可以免除减轻的部分，逐条上奏，衹求能使百姓方便安定。 
English: to discuss the parts of the ritsuryo that can be exempted from mitigation, to play up the articles one by one, and to seek to make the people convenient and stable.

古文：至成帝河平中，复下诏曰： 《甫刑》云 五刑之属三千，大辟之罚其属二百 ，今大辟之刑千有余条，律、令烦多，百有余万言，奇请它比，日以益滋，自明习者不知所由，欲以晓喻众庶，不亦难乎！
现代文：到成帝河平年间，又下韶说： 《甫刑》上说 五刑的条目有三千，死刑的刑罚条目有二百 ，现在死刑的条目有一千多条，法令繁杂，有一百多万字，于法律正文之外又另引案例判案，一天比一天增多，本来在研究的人都不知道它们的来由，想明白开导群众，不是很难吗！
English: During the Heping era of Emperor Chengdu, the lower court also said: "According to "Imperial Punishment," there are three thousand articles of five punishments, and two hundred articles of capital punishment. Now there are more than one thousand articles of capital punishment. The laws are complicated and have more than one million words. In addition to the main text of the law, there are more and more cases to be judged every day. People who are studying them do not know their origin. Isn't it difficult to understand and enlighten the masses?

古文：于以罗元元之民，夭绝亡辜，岂不哀哉！
现代文：用它来控制善良的百姓，使不知过错的无辜的人天亡，难道不是很悲哀的事！
English: Isn't it a sad thing to use it to control good-hearted people and cause innocent people who know no wrongdoing to perish!

古文：其与中二千石、二千石、博士及明习律、令者议减死刑及可蠲除约省者，令较然易知，条奏。
现代文：命令同中二千石、二千石、博士以及明白熟习法令的人讨论减免死刑以及可以省略的律条，使它们明白易懂，分条上奏。
English: It was ordered to discuss the reduction and remission of the death penalty, as well as the rules that could be omitted, with the middle school students, high school students, doctoral students, and those who are familiar with the laws and regulations, so that they are easy to understand.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 惟刑之恤哉！ 
现代文：《书》上不是说吗？ 应当对刑法感到忧虑！
English: Isn't that what the Book says? We should be worried about criminal law!

古文：其审核之，务准古法，朕将尽心览焉。 
现代文：要审查核实，一定要以古代法律为基础，朕将尽全心去披览。 
English: To review and verify, we must be based on ancient laws, and we will do our best to review.

古文：有司无仲山父将明之材，不能因时广宣主恩，建立明制。为一代之法，而徒钩摭微细，毛举数事，以塞诏而已。
现代文：但官府中没有仲山父那样有明察才能的人，不能抓住时机广泛宣传主上的恩德，建立圣明的制度，作为一代的法律，而衹是求取细微的东西，列举毫毛大小的事情，作为应付韶令而已。
English: However, there was no one in the government with the ability to see things as clearly as Father Nakayama. He could not seize the opportunity to widely publicize the Lord's benevolence and establish the system of holiness as the law of the generation. Instead, he was looking for small things, listing the minutest things, as a way to meet the king's order.

古文：是以大议不立，遂以至今。
现代文：因此皇帝的理论没有建立，一直到了现在。
English: Therefore, the emperor's theory has not been established until now.

古文：议者或曰，法难数变，此庸人不达，疑塞治道，圣智之所常患者也。
现代文：议论的人中有人说，法令难以多次变更，这是平庸的人不明白，疑虑重重堵塞了治理的道路，是聪明智慧的人所经常忧患的。
English: Some of the commentators said that it is difficult to amend the law many times, which is not understood by the mediocre, and the road of governance is blocked by doubts, which is often worried by the intelligent and wise.

古文：故略举汉兴以来，法令稍定而合古便今者。
现代文：所以大略列举自建立汉朝以来，法令稍加确定而且合乎古法便于当代的法令条文。
English: Therefore, since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the laws and regulations that are slightly more certain and conform to the ancient law and are convenient for the present are roughly listed.

古文：汉兴之初，虽有约法三章，网漏吞舟之鱼。然其大辟，尚有夷三族之令。
现代文：汉朝建立的初期，即使有三条法令约束，但还是疏漏得像是漏掉了可以吞下船只的鱼的纲，然而大辟之刑中，尚还有灭三族的法令。
English: In the early days of the establishment of the Han Dynasty, even if there were three laws and regulations, they were still overlooked as if they had missed the outline of a fish that could swallow a ship. However, there was still a decree to exterminate the three ethnic groups in the great punishment.

古文：令曰： 当三族者，皆先黥，劓，斩左右止，笞杀之，枭其首，菹其骨肉于市。
现代文：法令说： 当杀三族的，都先用刀刺面额再用墨涂，割鼻，斩左右脚，用竹板打死他，斩下头悬挂木上，在市上把他骨肉剁成肉酱。
English: The decree said: When killing the three ethnic groups, they should first stab the denomination with a knife and then paint it with ink, cut the nose, cut off the left and right feet, beat him to death with a bamboo board, cut off the head and hang it on a tree, and chop his bones and flesh into meat sauce in the market.

古文：其诽谤詈诅者，又先断舌。 
现代文：其中诽谤骂人诅咒的，又要先斩断他的舌头。 
English: And he that curseth, or blasphemeth, let him first cut out his tongue.

古文：故谓之具五刑。
现代文：所以称这为具备了五刑。
English: Therefore, it is said to have five punishments.

古文：彭越、韩信之属皆受此诛。
现代文：彭越、韩信之辈都受到这样的杀害。
English: Peng Yue, Han Xin and others were all killed in this way.

古文：至高后元年，乃除三族罪、袄言令。
现代文：到高后元年，才免除灭三族的罪刑、妖言令。
English: It was not until the first year after graduation that he was exempted from the punishment for exterminating the three ethnic groups and from the order to speak evil of others.

古文：孝文二年，又诏丞相、太尉、御史： 法者，治之正，所以禁暴而卫善人也。
现代文：孝文帝二年，又下令丞相、太尉、御史： 法律，是治天下的保证，用它来禁止残暴保卫善良的人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowen, he also ordered the chancellor, the captain, and the historian: The law is the guarantee of ruling the world, and it is used to prohibit cruelty and protect good people.

古文：今犯法者已论，而使无罪之父、母、妻、子、同产坐之及收，朕甚弗取。
现代文：现在犯法的人已经被判决，却使无罪的父母妻子儿女一同去接受惩罚，朕感到很不可取。
English: Now that the criminal has been sentenced, I feel it is very undesirable to make innocent parents, wives and children go to be punished together.

古文：其议。 
现代文：你们议论一下。 
English: Let's have a discussion.

古文：左、右丞相周勃、陈平奏言： 父、母、妻、子、同产相坐及收，所以累其心，使重犯法也。
现代文：左右丞相周勃、陈平上奏说道： 父母妻子儿女及同母所生兄弟一同定罪并拘捕，是用来重诫他的思想，使他难以去违法。
English: Zhou Bo and Chen Ping Shangso, the left and right ministers of justice, said: The conviction and arrest of parents, wives, children and brothers born of the same mother are used to re-instruct his thoughts and make it difficult for him to break the law.

古文：收之之道，所由来久矣。
现代文：拘捕他们的方法，已实行很久了。
English: The method of arresting them has been in place for a long time.

古文：臣之愚计，以为如其故便。 
现代文：臣等的愚计，认为还是与原来一样为好。 
English: stupidity of his ministers, he thought it would be better to remain as he was.

古文：文帝复曰： 朕闻之，法正则民悫，罪当则民从。
现代文：文帝又说： 朕听说，法律端正那么百姓就谨慎，罪罚得当那么人民就听从。
English: Emperor Wen also said, "I have heard that if the law is correct, then the people will be cautious, and if the punishment is appropriate, then the people will obey.

古文：且夫牧民而道之以善者，吏也；既不能道，又以不正之法罪之，是法反害于民，为暴者也。
现代文：治理人民并用善来加以引导的，是官吏；既不能引导，又用不正当的刑法来处罚他们，这是刑法，反而害民，成为暴力。
English: It is the officials who govern the people and guide them with good; they can neither guide nor punish them with unjust criminal law, which is criminal law, but harms the people and becomes violence.

古文：朕夫见其便，宜熟计之。 
现代文：我没有看见它的便利，你们应仔细加以考虑。 
English: I don't see it as a convenience, you should consider it carefully.

古文：平、勃乃曰： 陛下幸加大惠于天下，使有罪不收，无罪不相坐，甚盛德，臣等所不及也。
现代文：陈平、周勃才说： 陛下有幸把大恩惠施行给天下，使有罪的人不受拘捕之罪，无罪的不相牵连同受罚，这样盛大的德操，是臣等所比不上的。
English: Chen Ping and Zhou Bocai said, "Your majesty has the honor of bestowing great favors on the world, so that the guilty are not subject to arrest, and the innocent are not implicated and punished. Such a grand moral conduct is unmatched by any vassal.

古文：臣等谨奉诏，尽除收律、相坐法。 
现代文：臣等谨慎地奉行诏令，彻底废除拘捕法、连坐法。 
English: The courtiers and others carefully followed the edict and completely abolished the laws of arrest and detention.

古文：其后，新垣平谋为逆，复行三族之诛。
现代文：这以后，新垣平阴谋造，重新使用诛杀三族的刑罚。
English: After that, Arakakidaira plotted to reinstate the punishment of killing the three ethnic groups.

古文：由是言之，风俗移易，人性相近而习相远，信矣。
现代文：因此说，风俗变更，人的性情相近而习俗则相差很远，确实是这样。
English: Therefore, it is true that as customs change, people's dispositions are similar, but customs are far apart.

古文：夫以孝文之仁，平、勃之知，犹有过刑谬论如此甚也，而况庸材溺于末流者乎？
现代文：以孝文帝的仁慈，陈平、周勃的智慧，尚且有如此大的错刑和荒谬的议论，更何况那些沉溺于不良风习的庸才之辈呢？
English: With the benevolence of Emperor Xiaowen, the wisdom of Chen Ping and Zhou Bo, there are still such great wrong punishments and absurd discussions, let alone those mediocre talents who indulge in bad habits?

古文：《周官》有五听、八议、三刺、三宥、三赦之法。
现代文：《周官》有五听、八议、三刺、三宥、三赦的审案规定。
English: "Zhou Guan" has five hearings, eight discussions, three lashes, three pardons, and three pardons.

古文：五听：一曰辞听，二曰色听，三曰气听，四曰耳听，五曰目听。
现代文：五听：一叫听言辞，二叫观脸色，三叫观气息，四叫察听力，五叫测视力。
English: Five listening: one is to listen to the words, the second is to watch the face, the third is to watch the breath, the fourth is to observe the hearing, and the fifth is to measure the vision.

古文：八议：一曰议亲，二曰议故，三曰议贤，四曰议能，五曰议功，六曰议贵，七曰议勤，八曰议宾。
现代文：八议：一叫王的五代以内的亲族，有罪考虑减免刑罚，二叫王的故旧，有罪考虑减免刑罚，三叫有德行的人，可以考虑减免刑罚，四叫有技能的人，可考虑减免刑罚，五是有功劳的人，可以减免刑罚，六是爵位高的人，有罪可以减免刑罚，七是为国事勤劳的人，有罪可以减免刑罚，八是前王朝的后人，有罪可考虑减免刑罚。
English: Eight opinions: the first is that the king's relatives within five generations are guilty of considering the reduction and remission of punishment; the second is that the king's ancestors are guilty of considering the reduction and remission of punishment; the third is that people with virtues can consider the reduction and remission of punishment; the fourth is that people with skills can consider the reduction and remission of punishment; the fifth is that people with merits can consider the reduction and remission of punishment; the sixth is that people with high ranks can consider the reduction and remission of punishment; the seventh is that people who work hard for national affairs can consider the reduction and remission of punishment; the eighth is that the descendants of the former dynasty

古文：三刺：一曰讯群臣，二曰讯群吏，三曰讯万民。
现代文：三刺：一是询问群臣，二是询问群吏，三是询问万民。
English: Three thorns: one is to inquire about vassals, the second is to inquire about officials, and the third is to inquire about the people.

古文：三宥：一曰弗识，二曰过失，三曰遗忘。
现代文：三宥：一是不审慎，二是无意，三是遗忘。
English: Sanyu: First, imprudence, second, inadvertence, and third, forgetting.

古文：三赦：一曰幼弱，二曰老眊，三曰蠢愚。
现代文：三赦：一是幼小儿童，二是高龄的老人，三是天生的痴呆。
English: Three exemptions: First, young children, second, the elderly, and third, congenital dementia.

古文：凡囚， 上罪梏而桎，中罪梏桎，下罪梏；王之同族，有爵者桎，以待弊。 
现代文：凡是囚犯， 大罪两手同时上铐并且铐住脚，中罪铐住手和脚，小罪铐住手；王的同族铐住双手，有爵位的铐脚，以等待判决。 
English: All prisoners, for major crimes, have their hands and feet shackled at the same time; for minor crimes, their hands and feet are shackled; for minor crimes, their hands are shackled; for kings, their hands are shackled; and for nobles, their feet are shackled while awaiting trial.

古文：高皇帝七年，制诏御史： 狱之疑者，吏或不敢决，有罪者久而不论，无罪者久系不决。
现代文：高皇帝七年，下诏御史： 官司有疑问的，官吏有的不敢判决，有罪的很久不加以定罪，无罪的长期关押不判。
English: Emperor Gao, in the seventh year of his reign, issued the following imperial edict: If there is doubt about the outcome of a lawsuit, some officials will not dare to make a judgment, the guilty will not be convicted for a long time, and the innocent will not be sentenced to long-term detention.

古文：自今以来，县道官狱疑者，各谳所属二千石官，二千石官以其罪名当报。
现代文：从今以后，县和道中的官司有疑问的，各自上报所属的二千石官审判定罪，二千石官员把犯人所犯的罪及判处的情况上报。
English: From now on, if there is any doubt about a lawsuit in a county or a province, they will each report to the 2,000-koku official to whom they belong for trial and conviction, and the 2,000-koku official will report the crime committed by the criminal and the status of the sentence.

古文：所不能决者，皆移廷尉，廷尉亦当报之。
现代文：所不能判决的，都移交给廷尉，廷尉也把判处的结果上报。
English: All those who could not be sentenced were handed over to the imperial lieutenant, who also reported the results of the sentencing.

古文：廷尉所不能决，谨具为奏，傅所当比律、令以闻。 
现代文：廷尉所不能判决的，谨慎地仔细上奏，附上所应参照的法令让我知。 
English: If the Lieutenant is unable to decide, he should carefully and carefully play it, and let me know by attaching the relevant ordinance.

古文：上恩如此，吏犹不能奉宣。
现代文：皇上的恩德如此，官吏仍不能照着去办。
English: Such was the Emperor's benevolence that the officials still could not do the same.

古文：故孝景中五年复下诏曰： 诸狱疑，虽文致于法而于人心不厌者，辄谳之。 
现代文：所以孝景帝五年又重新下令说： 各种有疑问的官司，即使是舞文弄法已判人罪，但人心有不服的，立即复议审定。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaojing issued a new order in the fifth year, saying: All kinds of doubtful lawsuits, even those that have been convicted, but the people are not satisfied, should be immediately reconsidered and approved.

古文：其后狱吏复避微文，遂其愚心。
现代文：这之后，司法官吏又开始避开细碎的法律条文，达到自己愚蠢的用心。
English: After that, judicial officials began to evade the fine points of the law to achieve their own stupid goals.

古文：至后元年，又下诏曰： 狱，重事也。
现代文：到后元年，又下令说： 官司，是国家的大事。
English: After the first year of the year, he also issued an order saying: "Court litigation is a major matter for the country.

古文：人有愚智，官有上下。
现代文：人有愚蠢和智慧之分，官有上下之分。
English: People are divided into stupidity and wisdom, and officials are divided into upper and lower ranks.

古文：狱疑者谳，有令谳者已报谳而后不当，谳者不为失。 
现代文：官司有疑问被判罪了的，命令审判定罪的已经呈报罪状而后发现不适当的，判罪的人不为过失。 
English: If the court has doubts about whether the defendant has been convicted, or orders a trial to convict a defendant who has been charged with a crime and is later found to have acted improperly, the person who has been convicted shall not be guilty of negligence.

古文：自此之后，狱刑益详，近于五听三宥之意。
现代文：从此以后，刑法更加详细，同五听三宥的意义相近。
English: Since then, the criminal law has become more detailed, with a meaning similar to that of "five hears and three pardons."

古文：三年复下诏曰： 高年老长，人所尊敬也；鳏、寡不属逮者，人所哀怜也。
现代文：过了三年又下令说： 年龄高的老人长辈，是人人应尊敬的；鳏寡没有依靠，是人们应哀怜的。
English: Three years later, he issued another decree: "Elderly elders are to be respected by everyone; widows and widowers without support are to be pitied."

古文：其著令：年八十以上，八岁以下，及孕者未乳，师、朱儒当鞠系者，颂系之。 
现代文：应颁布命令：年龄在八十岁以上，八岁以下，以及怀孕了还没生产的妇女，乐师、侏儒应当审讯拘捕的，可宽容不带刑具。 
English: An order should be issued: musicians and dwarfs over the age of eighty and under the age of eight, as well as women who are pregnant and have not yet given birth, should interrogate those who have been arrested, and may be tolerated without instruments of torture.

古文：至孝宣元康四年，又下诏曰： 朕念夫耆老之人，发齿堕落，血气既衰，亦无逆乱之心，今或罗于文法，执于囹圄，不得终其年命，朕甚怜之。
现代文：到孝宣帝元康四年，又下诏令说： 朕惦念老年人，头发和牙齿都掉落，血气已经衰弱，也就没有凶暴叛逆的念头，现在有老人陷入莫须有罪行之中，被关在牢房，不得善终有生之年，朕很怜悯他们。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yuan Kang of the Xiao Xuan Dynasty, he issued another edict, saying: "I feel sorry for the old people. Their hair and teeth have fallen out, their blood has weakened, and they have no thoughts of violent rebellion. Now there are old people who are caught up in unnecessary crimes and are locked up in a cell, unable to do good for the rest of their lives. I feel very sorry for them.

古文：自今以来，诸年八十非诬告、杀伤人，它皆勿坐。 
现代文：从今以后，各位年龄在八十岁不是诬告、杀伤的罪犯，其他的都不要判刑。 
English: From now on, if you are 80 years old, you are not a criminal who falsely accuses, kills or injures, and you should not be sentenced to anything else.

古文：至成帝鸿嘉元年，定令： 年未满七岁，贼斗杀人及犯殊死者，上请廷尉以闻，得减死。 
现代文：到成帝鸿嘉元年，制定法令： 年龄不满七岁，打架斗殴杀人以及犯下斩首死罪的人，向上请示廷尉，让他们知道，得以免死。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Hongjia's reign, a decree was issued: Those who are under the age of seven and fight, beat, kill, and commit the crime of beheading, should ask the court lieutenant to let them know that they can be spared from death.

古文：合于三赦幼弱、老眊之人。
现代文：同三赦幼弱、年老人相合。
English: With the three amulets, the young, the weak, and the old are matched.

古文：此皆法令稍近古而便民者也。
现代文：这些都是法令稍加制定，就和古代相近似而且对百姓有利的。
English: These are all laws and regulations, which are similar to ancient times and are beneficial to the people.

古文：孔子曰： 如有王者，必世而后仁；善人为国百年，可以胜残去杀矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 如果有称王的人，一定要经过三十年仁政才成；有道德的人治理国家一百年，可以战胜邪恶不进行杀戮。 
English: Confucius said: If there is a kingly person, it must be achieved after thirty years of benevolent government; a moral person can rule the country for a hundred years, and can defeat evil without killing.

古文：言圣王承衰拨乱而起，被民以德教，变而化之，必世然后仁道成焉；至于善人，不入于室，然犹百年胜残去杀矣。
现代文：这是说英明的君王在衰败混乱的时代嵋起，把道德教化施予人，对他们加以改变和感化，一定要过三十年然后仁政才能形成；至于有道德的人，虽不被列入圣人之列，但也要百年才能战胜邪恶不进行杀戮。
English: This is to say that it must take thirty years for a wise king to rise up in an era of decay and chaos, to teach morality to people, to change and influence them, and then benevolent government can be formed; as for moral people, although they are not included in the list of saints, it will take a hundred years to defeat evil without killing.

古文：此为国者之程式也。
现代文：这是治理国家的程式。
English: It's a formula for governing a country.

古文：今汉道至盛，历世二百余载，考自昭、宣、元、成、哀、平六世之间，断狱殊死，率岁千余口而一人，耐罪上至右止，三倍有余。
现代文：现在汉朝道运极盛，经过了两百多年，考察从昭帝、宣帝、元帝、成帝、哀帝到平帝造六代之间，判处死刑的，大概每年一千多人中衹有一个，从耐罪向上到斩右脚刑，一千人中有三人。
English: Now that the Han Dynasty is in full bloom, after more than two hundred years, an examination of the six generations from Emperor Zhao, Emperor Xuan, Emperor Yuan, Emperor Cheng and Emperor Yao to Emperor Ping shows that about one in a thousand people are sentenced to death every year, and three out of a thousand people are sentenced to death from crime tolerance to amputation of the right foot.

古文：古人有言： 满堂而饮酒，有一人乡隅而悲泣，则一堂皆为之不乐。 
现代文：古代的人曾说： 满屋的人饮酒，有一人向着墙壁而哭泣，那么一屋的人都为此感到不高兴。 
English: The ancients said: If a house is full of people drinking, and one person is crying against the wall, then the whole house is unhappy.

古文：王者之于天下，譬犹一堂之上也，故一人不得其平，为之凄怆于心。
现代文：帝王对于天下，就好像在一屋之中，所以衹要有一人没有得到平等，就要为此而心中悲痛。
English: The emperor is to the world as if he were in a room, so if one person does not receive equality, he must grieve in his heart for this.

古文：今郡、国被刑而死者岁以万数，天下狱二千余所，其冤死者多少相覆，狱不减一人，此和气所以未洽者也。
现代文：现在郡国中遭受刑罚而死的人每年有一万多，天下的监狱有二千多所，其中受冤而死的入上下相覆盖，监狱没有减少一人，这是和谐的气氛没有形成的原因。
English: At present, there are more than ten thousand people who die as a result of being punished in counties and provinces every year, and there are more than two thousand prisons in the world. Among them, those who died as a result of being wronged are included in the upper and lower phases, and the prison has not reduced by one person. This is the reason why a harmonious atmosphere has not been formed.

古文：原狱刑所以蕃若此者，礼教不立，刑法不明，民多贫穷，豪杰务私，奸不辄得，狱不平之所致也。
现代文：考察官司刑法如此之多的原因，是由于礼义教化没有建立，刑法不明确，百姓大多贫苦穷困，有地位有势力的人谋求私利，邪恶的人不能立即被迫究，判决不公平所带来的后果。
English: The reason why there are so many criminal laws under investigation by the judicial authorities is due to the fact that the edification of etiquette and righteousness has not been established, the criminal law is not clear, most of the people are poor and impoverished, people with status and influence seek self-interest, evil people cannot be immediately investigated, and the consequences of unfair judgments.

古文：《书》云 伯夷降典，哲民惟刑 ，言制礼以止刑，犹堤之防溢水也。
现代文：《尚书》上说 伯夷颁布法典，依照刑法审理案件 ，是说制造礼法来防止用刑，就像用堤来防范水流出来。
English: "Shangshu" said that Bei promulgated the code and tried cases according to the criminal law, which means that creating etiquette to prevent the use of punishment is like using a dike to prevent water from flowing out.

古文：今堤防凌迟，礼制未立；死刑过制，生刑易犯；饥寒并至，穷斯滥溢；豪杰擅私，为之囊橐，奸有所隐，则狃而浸广：此刑之所以蕃也。
现代文：现在堤坝被破坏，礼制没有建立；死刑超过了限制，生刑又容易违反；饥饿寒冷一同到来，穷困到处泛滥；豪杰白谋私利，像用口袋来装物品的，邪恶一有所隐瞒，那么犯罪的习惯将逐渐扩大，造就是刑罚之所以多的缘故。
English: Now that the dam has been broken, and the ceremonial system has not been established; now that the death penalty has exceeded its limits, and the life sentence is easy to violate; now that hunger and cold have come together, and poverty has spread everywhere; now that the hero is free to seek personal gain, like a person who uses a bag to carry things, and the evil one is hiding something, then the habit of crime will gradually expand, and that is why there are so many punishments.

古文：孔子曰： 古之知法者能省刑，本也；今之知法者不失有罪，末矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 古代懂法的人能够减除刑罚，这是本；现在懂得刑法的人不放过有罪的，这是末。 
English: Confucius said: In ancient times, those who understood the law could reduce the punishment, this is the present; now, those who understand the criminal law will not let the guilty go, this is the end.

古文：又曰： 今之听狱者，求所以杀之；古之听狱者，求所以生之。 
现代文：又说： 现在审理官司的人，追求的是怎么去杀死罪犯；古代审理官司的人，追求的是怎样使人活命。 
English: He also said: People who try cases nowadays are looking for ways to kill criminals; people who tried cases in ancient times were looking for ways to keep people alive.

古文：与其杀不辜，宁失有罪。
现代文：与其杀死无辜的人，不如放过有罪的。
English: It is better to let the guilty go free than to kill the innocent.

古文：今之狱吏，上下相驱，以刻为明，深者获功名，平者多患害。
现代文：现在的司法官员，上下追逐，把刻毒作为高明，厉害的人获得功劳名声，公正的人多后患。
English: Today's judicial officials, chasing up and down, regard those who are tough on drugs as clever, and those who are tough gain a reputation for merit, while those who are fair suffer the most.

古文：谚曰： 鬻棺者欲岁之疫。 
现代文：谚语说： 卖棺材的人盼望有疾病的年头。 
English: A proverb says: The coffin-seller hopes for years of illness.

古文：非憎人欲杀之，利在于人死也。
现代文：不是他憎恨想去杀死别人，而是他想从死人中获利。
English: It wasn't that he hated to kill, it was that he wanted to profit from the dead.

古文：今治狱吏欲陷害人，亦犹此矣。
现代文：现在管理司法的官吏想陷害人，也跟这一样。
English: It is the same with the magistrates who now administer justice, who want to set people up.

古文：凡此五疾，狱刑所以尤多者也。
现代文：总共有这五种弊端，是官司所以多的原因。
English: All in all, these five drawbacks are the reasons why there are so many lawsuits.

古文：自建武、永平，民亦新免兵革之祸，人有乐生之虑，与高、惠之间同，而政在抑强扶弱，朝无威福之臣，邑无豪杰之侠。
现代文：从建武、永平以来，百姓也刚免除战争的祸害，人们有了安居乐业的考虑，与高后、惠帝之间的情况相同，而政治在于抑制强暴扶持弱小，朝廷没有了作威作福的大臣，乡邑没有了豪杰大侠。
English: Since Jianwu and Yongping, the people have just been exempted from the scourge of war. People have the consideration of living in peace and contentment, which is the same as the situation between Gao Hou and Hui Di. And politics is to restrain violence and support the weak. The imperial court has no high-handed minister, and the townships have no great heroes.

古文：以口率计，断狱少于成、哀之间什八，可谓清矣。
现代文：以人口大致统计，审理案件比成帝、哀帝之间少十分之八，可以说是很太平了。
English: According to general population statistics, the number of trials is eight-tenths less than that between Emperor Chengdi and Emperor Pengdi, which can be said to be very peaceful.

古文：然而未能称意比隆于古者，以其疾未尽除，而刑本不正。
现代文：然而和占代相比还不能称意，这是因为弊病没有全被革除，而且刑法的根本就不端正的缘故。
English: However, it is still not satisfactory compared to the Zhan Dynasty, because the ills have not been completely eliminated, and the criminal law is fundamentally incorrect.

古文：善乎！孙卿之论刑也，曰： 世俗之为说者，以为治古者无肉刑，有象刑、墨鲸之属，菲履赭衣而不纯，是不然矣。
现代文：荀子对刑罚的评论真是太好了！他说： 世俗中著书立说的人，认为上古天下太平的时候没有肉刑，有像刑墨黥之类的刑罚，用穿草履、布衣无领来代替，实际上不是这样的。
English: The mule's comment on punishment was really great! He said: People who write books in the secular world think that when the world was at peace in ancient times, there was no physical punishment, but there were punishments such as torture and torture, which were replaced by wearing sandals, cloth and no collar. In fact, this is not the case.

古文：以为治古，则人莫触罪邪，岂独无肉刑哉，亦不待象刑矣。
现代文：认为太平的古代，人们没有去触犯刑法的，不但没有肉刑，也用不着象刑了。
English: It is believed that in the ancient times of peace, people did not violate the criminal law. Not only was there no physical punishment, but there was no need for symbolic punishment.

古文：以为人或触罪矣，而直轻其刑，是杀人者不死，而伤人者不刑也。
现代文：认为人们如有犯罪的，就直接减轻他们的刑罚，这是使杀了人的不处死刑，伤了入的不受刑罚。
English: The idea that if people commit a crime, their punishment will be directly reduced. This means that people who kill will not be sentenced to death, and those who injure others will not be punished.

古文：罪至重而刑至轻，民无所畏，乱莫大焉，凡制刑之本，将以禁暴恶，且惩其未也。
现代文：罪行极重而刑罚极轻，人们无所畏刑，那么祸乱没有比这个再大的了。大凡制定刑法的本意，是用来禁止凶暴邪恶，而且防患于未然。
English: There is no greater calamity than that for which the crime is the greatest and the punishment the lightest, and for which there is no fear of punishment.

古文：杀人者不死，伤人者不刑，是惠暴而宽恶也。
现代文：杀人的人不被处死，伤人的人不受处罚，这是恩遇凶暴的人，宽恕邪恶的人。
English: He who kills will not be put to death, and he who injures will not be punished. This is a blessing for those who are violent and a blessing for those who are wicked.

古文：故象刑非生于治古，方起于乱今也。
现代文：所以象刑并非产生于太平的古代，而是刚兴起于动乱的当世。
English: Therefore, elephant torture did not originate in the peaceful ancient times, but in the turbulent contemporary world.

古文：凡爵列官职，赏庆刑罚，皆以类相从者也。
现代文：凡是爵位官职，赏庆刑罚，都是根据功过的等级相应施予的。
English: All titles of nobility, government posts, and rewards and punishments are awarded according to the level of merit.

古文：一物失称，乱之端也。
现代文：一种事物失去了平衡，就形成了动乱的开端。
English: When one thing is out of balance, it is the beginning of turmoil.

古文：德不称位，能不称官，赏不当功，刑不当罪，不祥莫大焉。
现代文：道德与爵位不相称，才能与官职不相称，奖赏与功绩不相当，刑罚与罪行不相符，没有比这更不吉祥的了。
English: Morality is not commensurate with the title, talent is not commensurate with the post, reward is not commensurate with merit, punishment is not commensurate with the crime, there is nothing more inauspicious.

古文：夫征暴诛悖，治之威也。
现代文：征伐残暴，诛杀叛乱，是治理天下的威力。
English: The power to rule the world comes from the brutality of conquest and the killing of rebels.

古文：杀人者死，伤人者刑，是百王之所同也，未有知其所由来者也。
现代文：杀人的人要被处死，伤人的人要受到刑罚，这是历代帝王所认同的，没有人知道它是从什么时候开始的。
English: People who kill are to be put to death, and those who injure others are to be punished. This has been recognized by emperors throughout the ages, and no one knows when it began.

古文：故治则刑重，乱则刑轻，犯治之罪故重，犯乱之罪故轻也。
现代文：所以天下太平那么刑罚就重，天下大乱那么刑罚就轻，触犯了太平时代的法律罪行就显得重了，触犯了动乱时代的法律罪行就显得轻了。
English: Therefore, if the world is at peace, the punishment will be heavy; if the world is in turmoil, the punishment will be light; if the world is in a period of peace, the legal crimes will be heavy; if the world is in a period of turmoil, the legal crimes will be light.

古文：《书》云 刑罚世重世轻 ，此之谓也。 
现代文：《尚书》上说 刑罚随着时代有重有轻，就是说明了这个道理。 
English: "Shangshu" said that the severity of punishment changes with the times, which illustrates this truth.

古文：所谓 象刑惟明 者，言象天道而作刑，安有菲屦赭衣者哉？
现代文：所说的 制作象刑就明白了 ，是说依照天的规律而制作刑罚，哪裹有草履赭衣之类的事呢？
English: What is meant by "making it like a punishment" is clear; it means making a punishment in accordance with the laws of heaven, but where is there such a thing as straw sandals?

古文：孙卿之言既然，又因俗说而论之曰： 禹承尧、舜之后，自以德衰而制肉刑，汤、武顺而行之者，以俗薄于唐、虞故也。
现代文：荀子的言论是如此的，再根据世俗的言论加以评论道：夏禹继承尧舜，自己认为道德衰落就制定了肉刑，商汤、武王沿袭并加以实行，是因为世风比唐、虞时不醇厚的缘故。
English: Xunzi's speech is like this, and then he commented on it based on secular speech: Xia Yu inherited Xun, and he thought that moral decline would lead to the establishment of corporal punishment. Shang Tang and King Wu followed suit and implemented it, because the world was not mellow compared to the Tang and Yuan dynasties.

古文：今汉承衰周暴秦极敝之流，俗已薄于三代，而行尧、舜之刑，是犹以鞿而御駻突，违救时之宜矣。
现代文：现在汉朝承继衰落的周朝、残暴的秦朝的极端流弊，世风已薄于三代，却使用尧、舜的刑罚，就像以缰绳来驾驭凶悍的马匹一样，违反拯救时代的合适方针。
English: Now the Han Dynasty, inheriting the extreme abuses of the declining Zhou Dynasty and the brutal Qin Dynasty, has been in power for less than three generations. However, it uses the punishment of shackles and fetters, just like using reins to drive fierce horses, violating the appropriate policy of saving the times.

古文：且除肉刑者，本欲以全民也，今去髡钳一等，转而入于大辟，以死罔民，失本惠矣。
现代文：况且废除肉刑，本意是想保全百姓，现在减去髡钳刑罚一等，转移到死刑中。用死来控制百姓，失去了恩惠的本意。
English: Moreover, the abolition of corporal punishment, which was originally intended to protect the people, has now been reduced to the first degree of capital punishment and transferred to the death penalty. Using death to control the people has lost its benevolent intention.

古文：故死者岁以万数，刑重之所致也。
现代文：所以死的人每年以万计，是刑法太重所带来的结果。
English: That is why tens of thousands of people die every year, as a result of the criminal law being too severe.

古文：至乎穿之盗，忿怒伤人，男女淫佚，吏为奸臧，若此之恶，髡钳之罚又不足以惩也。
现代文：至于穿壁翻墙的强盗，忿怒伤人，男女淫乱，官吏邪恶贪污，像这样的邪恶，髡钳这样的刑罚又不足以用来惩罚。
English: As for the robber who breaks through the wall, anger hurts people, men and women fornicate, officials are evil and corrupt, such evil, such punishment is not enough to punish.

古文：故刑者岁十万数，民既不畏，又曾不耻，刑轻之所生也。
现代文：所以受刑的每年有十多万，百姓既不畏惧，又不曾感到可耻，是刑罚太轻所产生的结果。
English: As a result, more than a hundred thousand people are punished every year, and the people are neither afraid nor ashamed, which is the result of the punishment being too light.

古文：故俗之能吏，公以杀盗为威，专杀者胜任，奉法者不治，乱名伤制，不可胜条。
现代文：所以世俗认为能干的官吏，公开地以杀死盗贼作为威严，专意于刑杀的人被看作能胜任官职，守法的人被看作不能治理，扰乱声名伤害制度，不可一一列举。
English: Therefore, officials who are considered capable by the world openly use the killing of thieves as majesty, those who are dedicated to torture and killing are considered to be competent for official duties, and those who abide by the law are considered to be unable to govern, disrupting the reputation damage system, and cannot be listed.

古文：是以罔密而奸不塞，刑蕃而民愈嫚。
现代文：因此法纲严密但邪恶没有得到控制。刑罚繁多但百姓更加轻慢。
English: Therefore, the legal system is strict but the evil is not controlled, the punishments are numerous but the people are more careless.

古文：必世而未仁，百年而不胜残，诚以礼乐阙而刑不正也。
现代文：经过了三十年而仁政没有得到实行，经过了一百年却没有战胜残暴，实在是礼乐缺少而且刑罚不端正根本的缘故。
English: After thirty years, benevolent government has not been implemented, and after a hundred years, brutality has not been defeated. This is really due to the lack of liturgy and the fact that the punishment is not correct.

古文：岂宜惟思所以清原正本之论，删定律、令，二百章，以应大辟。
现代文：实在应该思考一下清理源头，端正根本的议论，删减确定法令，撰写二百章，用来对应死刑。
English: We really should think about cleaning up the source, rectifying the fundamental arguments, deleting the definitive decree, and writing two hundred chapters to correspond to the death penalty.

古文：其余罪次，于古当生，今触死者，皆可募行肉刑。
现代文：其余的罪行等级，按照古代应当活命的，现在触犯死刑的，都可服肉刑。
English: The rest of the crime levels, according to ancient times should be alive, now the death penalty, can serve corporal punishment.

古文：及伤人与盗，吏受赇枉法，男女淫乱，皆复古刑，为三千章。
现代文：至于偷盗和伤害他人，官吏接受贿赂贪脏枉法，男女淫乱，都恢复古代刑罚，制定三千章。
English: As for stealing and harming others, corrupt officials accepting bribes, and male and female fornication, the ancient punishments have been restored and 3,000 chapters have been formulated.

古文：诋欺文致微细之法，悉蠲除。
现代文：诬告欺骗，舞文弄法的细小刑法，都免除。
English: False accusation and deception are exempted, as are minor criminal offenses.

古文：如此，则刑可畏而禁易避，吏不专杀，法无二门，轻重当罪，民命得全，合刑罚之中，殷天人之和，顺稽古之制，成时雍之化。
现代文：如果这样，那么刑罚就可使人感到畏惧而容易避免禁闭，官吏不独断杀人，法律没有两样，轻重符合罪行，百姓性命得以保全，符合刑罚的节度， 晅应天人的和谐，符合古代的制度，形成和善的风气。
English: If this is the case, then the punishment can make people feel intimidated and it is easy to avoid confinement, officials do not arbitrarily kill people, the law is no different, the weight is consistent with the crime, the lives of the people are preserved, consistent with the severity of the punishment, in line with the harmony of heaven and man, consistent with the ancient system, and the formation of a good atmosphere.

古文：成、康刑错，虽未可致，孝文断狱，庶几可及。《诗》云 宜民宜人，受禄于天 。
现代文：像成、康时代的刑罚拦置，虽然不能达到，孝文帝时候的处理官司的境界，差不多可以赶得上了。《诗经》上说 顺应人民，受福于天 。
English: Although it cannot reach the level of punishment and deterrence of the Cheng and Kang dynasties, it can almost catch up with the level of handling lawsuits at the time of Emperor Xiaowen. "The Book of Songs" says, "Obey the people and be blessed by heaven."

古文：《书》曰 立功立事，可以永年 。
现代文：《尚书》上说 建立功业，可以不朽 。
English: "Shangshu" said that building a career can lead to immortality.

古文：言为政而宜于民者，功成事立，则受天禄而永年命，所谓 一人有庆，万民赖之 者也。
现代文：是说为政的能顺应民意，功绩事业都有了，就承受天福而不朽，就是所谓的 一人有福，万人依赖 。
English: That is to say, if a politician is able to conform to the public opinion and has achievements and undertakings, he will inherit the heavenly blessing and immortality, which is the so-called "one person is blessed, ten thousand people are dependent."

