古文：○苏逢吉
现代文：苏逢吉，京兆长安人。
English: Su Fengji, a resident of Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：苏逢吉，京兆长安人也。汉高祖镇河东，父悦为高祖从事，逢吉常代悦作奏记，悦乃言之高祖。
现代文：漠高祖镇守河东，父亲苏悦任漠高祖的从事，苏逢吉常常代替苏悦写奏记，苏悦于是告诉了汉高祖。
English: Mogao Zu was in charge of Hedong, while his father, Su Yue, was in charge of Mogao Zu. Su Fengji often took the place of Su Yue in writing musical scores, and Su Yue then told Hango Zu.

古文：高祖召见逢吉，精神爽秀，怜之，乃以为节度判官。
现代文：汉高祖召见苏逢吉，见他精神爽秀，怜爱他，就任他为节度判官。
English: Han Gao Zu summoned Su Fengji, saw his brilliant spirit, pitied him, and appointed him as the judge of the festival.

古文：高祖性素刚严，宾佐稀得请见，逢吉独入，终日侍立高祖书阁中。
现代文：汉高祖性格素来严肃，宾客僚佐们很少能够请求进见，惟独苏逢吉能进入，整天在汉高祖的书房中侍立。
English: Henkel's character has always been serious. Guests and colleagues can rarely ask for advice, but Su Fengji can enter and stand in Henkel's study all day.

古文：两使文簿盈积，莫敢通，逢吉辄取内之怀中，伺高祖色可犯时以进之，高祖多以为可，以故甚爱之。
现代文：两使的文簿堆满了，没有人敢通报，苏逢吉就取来放在怀中，等到漠高祖的神色可以冒犯时进献，汉高祖大多认可了，因此很喜欢他。
English: The two envoys' notebooks were piled up, and no one dared to inform them. Su Fengji took it and put it in his arms, and offered it to Mogao Zu when Mogao Zu's countenance could be offended. Hangao Zu mostly approved, and therefore liked him very much.

古文：然逢吉为人贪诈无行，喜为杀戮。
现代文：但苏逢吉为人贪婪狡诈没有德行，喜好杀人。
English: However, Su Fengji was greedy, cunning and had no virtue. He liked to kill people.

古文：高祖尝以生日遣逢吉疏理狱囚以祈福，谓之 静狱。 
现代文：汉高祖曾因他的生日派苏逢吉整顿清理狱中囚犯以求福，叫做 静狱 。
English: For his birthday, Han Gao Zu once sent Su Fengji to rectify and clean up the prisoners in the prison to seek blessings, which is called Jingjing.

古文：逢吉入狱中阅囚，无轻重曲直悉杀之，以报曰： 狱静矣。 
现代文：苏逢吉进入狱中察看囚犯，无论轻重曲直都杀掉，报告说： 监狱清静了。 
English: Su Fengji went into the prison to inspect the prisoners and killed them all, no matter how serious they were, and reported: "The prison is quiet now.

古文：高祖建号，拜逢吉中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：汉高祖建立国号后，拜苏逢吉为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: After the founding of the Han Dynasty by the founder of the Han Dynasty, Baisufengji became the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the head of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：是时，制度草创，朝廷大事皆出逢吉，逢吉以为己任。
现代文：这时，制度刚开始建立，朝廷大事都由苏逢吉决定，苏逢吉以此为己任。
English: At this time, the system was just beginning to be established, and the major events of the imperial court were decided by Su Fengji, and Su Fengji took this as his responsibility.

古文：然素不学问，随事裁决，出其意见，是故汉世尤无法度，而不施德政，民莫有所称焉。
现代文：但他素来不懂学问，随事裁决，出自他个人的看法，因此汉代尤其没有法度，而不施行德政，老百姓没有人称赞它。
English: However, he has always been ignorant of learning, arbitrates arbitrarily, and comes from his personal opinion. Therefore, the Han Dynasty in particular has no laws and regulations, but does not implement moral government, and no one praises it.

古文：高祖既定京师，逢吉与苏禹珪同在中书，除吏多违旧制。
现代文：汉高祖平定京师后，苏逢吉和苏禹珪同在中书省，拜官授职常常违反旧制。
English: After Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty subdued the Beijing division, Su Fengji and Su Yuya were both in the Central Literature Department, and the appointment of officials often violated the old system.

古文：逢吉尤纳货赂，市权鬻官，谤者喧哗。
现代文：苏逢吉尤其喜好接收贿赂财货，卖权卖官，指责的人吵闹不停。
English: Su Fengji is particularly fond of accepting bribes and goods, selling rights and selling officials, and the accusers are constantly noisy.

古文：然高祖方倚信二人，故莫敢有告者。
现代文：但汉高祖正倚仗信任他们两人，因此没有人敢上报。
English: But Henkel is relying on the trust of both of them, so no one dares to report it.

古文：凤翔李永吉初朝京师，逢吉以永吉故秦王从严子，家世王侯，当有奇货，使人告永吉，许以一州，而求其先王玉带，永吉以无为解，逢吉乃使人市一玉带，直数千缗，责永吉偿之；前客省使王筠自晋末使楚，至是还，逢吉意筠得楚王重赂，遣人求之，许以一州，筠怏怏，以其橐装之半献之。
现代文：凤翔李永吉初到京师朝见，苏逢吉因李永吉是过去秦王李从暇的儿子，世代王侯之家，应常有奇异的财物，就派人告诉李永吉，答应给他一个州，而索求他祖上的玉带，李永吉以没有玉带作解释，苏逢吉于是派人买了一条玉带，价值几千缙，要求李永吉抵偿；前客省使王筠在晋末出使楚，到这时纔回来，苏逢吉猜想王筠得到楚王的厚重财物，派人索求，答应给他一个州，王筠快怏不乐，把口袋中装的一半财物献给他。
English: Fengxiang Li Yongji first came to Beijing to meet with the emperor. Su Fengji, because Li Yongji was the son of the former Qin King Li Congfei, the generation of the royal family, should often have strange wealth, sent a person to tell Li Yongji, promised him a state, and asked for his ancestor's jade belt. Li Yongji explained that there was no jade belt. Su Fengji then sent a person to buy a jade belt worth thousands of baht, and asked Li Yongji to compensate. The former guest province sent Wang Yao to Chu in the late Jin Dynasty, and when he returned, Su Fengji guessed that Wang Yao had obtained

古文：而皆不得州。
现代文：但两人都没有得到许诺的州。
English: But neither got the promised state.

古文：晋相李崧从契丹以北，高祖入京师，以崧第赐逢吉，而崧别有田宅在西京，逢吉遂皆取之。
现代文：晋宰相李崧随契丹北去，汉高祖进入京师，把李崧的宅第赐给苏逢吉，而李崧在西京另有田产住宅，苏逢吉于是都占为己有。
English: Jin prime minister Li Qian followed Qidan to the north, and Emperor Gaozhu entered Beijing and gave Li Qian's mansion to Su Fengji, while Li Qian had another farmhouse in West Beijing, which Su Fengji then occupied as his own.

古文：崧自北还，因以宅券献逢吉，逢吉不悦，而崧子弟数出怨言。
现代文：李崧从北方回来，因而把宅第契券献给苏逢吉，苏逢吉不高兴，而李崧的子弟多次口出怨言。
English: When Li Lan returned from the north, he presented the deed of the house to Su Fengji. Su Fengji was not happy, and Li Lan's son complained many times.

古文：其后，逢吉乃诱人告崧与弟屿、义等，下狱，崧款自诬伏： 与家僮二十人，谋因高祖山陵为乱。 
现代文：后来，苏逢吉就诱使人诬告李崧和弟弟李屿、李巍等人，投入狱中，李崧凭空自己冤枉自己伏罪： 和家僮二十人，图谋藉汉高祖的陵墓作乱。 
English: Later, Su Fengji induced people to falsely accuse Li Yu and his brother Li Yu, Li Yu and others, and put them in prison. Li Yu falsely accused himself of setting up a crime out of thin air: He and 20 members of his family plotted to use the mausoleum of Han Gao Zu to create a disturbance.

古文：狱上中书，逢吉改 二十人 为 五十人 ，遂族崧家。
现代文：狱状上报中书省，苏逢吉改 二十人 为 五十人 ，于是将李崧家灭族。
English: When Su Fengji changed the number of prisoners from 20 to 50, he ordered the annihilation of Li Xuan's family.

古文：是时，天下多盗，逢吉自草诏书下州县，凡盗所居本家及邻保皆族诛。
现代文：这时，天下盗贼很多，苏逢吉亲自起草诏书下发州县，凡是盗贼所住本家和邻居都减族。
English: At this time, there were a lot of thieves in the world. Su Fengji personally drafted the edict to Fuzhou County, and all the thieves' homes and neighbors were reduced.

古文：或谓逢吉曰： 为盗族诛，已非王法，况邻保乎！ 
现代文：有人对苏逢吉说： 做盗贼被灭族，已不是先王的法制，何况邻居呢！ 
English: Someone said to Su Fengji: "Being a thief and being exterminated is no longer the legal system of the former king, let alone a neighbor!

古文：逢吉甗以为是，不得已，但去族诛而已。
现代文：苏逢吉不情愿地承认对，迫不得已，只是去掉减族一项罢了。
English: Reluctantly, Su Fengji admitted that he was right, that he had no choice but to remove the ethnic minority clause.

古文：于是郓州捕贼使者张令柔尽杀平阴县十七村民数百人。
现代文：因此郫州捕贼使者张令柔将平阴县十七个村的老百姓敷百人全部杀死。
English: As a result, Zhang Lingrou, the emissary of Zhangzhou's thief-catchers, killed hundreds of ordinary people from seventeen villages in Pingyin County.

古文：卫州刺史叶仁鲁闻部有盗，自帅兵捕之。
现代文：卫州刺史叶仁鲁听说按察区域中有盗贼，亲自带兵追捕。
English: Ye Renlu, the governor of Weizhou Province, heard that there were thieves in the Acha region, and personally led soldiers to hunt them down.

古文：时村民十数共逐盗，入于山中，盗皆散走。
现代文：当时十多个村民一齐追赶盗贼，进入山中，盗贼都逃散了。
English: At that time, more than ten villagers chased the thieves together, entered the mountains, and the thieves all fled.

古文：仁鲁从后至，见民捕盗者，以为贼，悉擒之，断其脚筋，暴之山麓，宛转号呼，累日而死。
现代文：叶仁鲁随后到，见追捕盗贼的村民，以为是盗贼，把他们全部抓获，割断他们的脚筋，把他们丢弃在山脚示众，这些人长声悲号，几天就死了。
English: Ye Renlu then arrived, saw the villagers chasing after the thieves, thought they were thieves, captured them all, cut their hamstrings, and dumped them at the foot of the mountain for the public to see. These people wailed loudly and died in a few days.

古文：闻者不胜其冤，而逢吉以仁鲁为能，由是天下因盗杀人滋滥。
现代文：听到的人都为他们呜冤叫屈，而苏逢吉把叶仁鲁当成能人，从此天下因做盗贼被杀的事就泛滥成灾了。
English: Everyone who heard them complained about them, and Su Fengji took Ye Renlu as a capable person. From then on, the world was flooded with disasters due to the fact that he was killed for being a thief.

古文：逢吉已贵，益为豪侈，谓中书堂食为不可食，乃命家厨进羞，日极珍善。
现代文：苏逢吉显贵后，更加奢侈无度，称中书堂的食物是不能吃的，于是命令家厨进献食品，每天都吃最珍贵最好的。
English: After Su Fengji became prominent, he became even more extravagant, saying that the food in the Central Library could not be eaten, so he ordered the chef to donate food and eat the most precious and best every day.

古文：继母死，不服丧。
现代文：继母死了，不服丧致哀。
English: My stepmother died, and I was heartbroken.

古文：妻武氏卒，讽百官及州镇皆输绫绢为丧服。
现代文：妻子武氏死后，暗示百官和各州镇送丝绸做丧服。
English: After the death of his wife, Mr. Takei suggested that officials and towns in all prefectures send silk to make mourning clothes.

古文：武氏未期，除其诸子为官。
现代文：武氏的丧期未完，就任命他的儿子们做官。
English: Before the period of mourning was over, he appointed his sons as officials.

古文：有庶兄自外来，未白逢吉而见其诸子，逢吉怒，托以佗事告于高祖，杖杀之。
现代文：有一个庶出兄弟从外地归来，没有告诉苏逢吉就见他的儿子们，苏逢吉发怒，借口别的事向汉高祖告状，被用棍棒打死了。
English: There was an illegitimate brother who came back from abroad and met his sons without telling Su Fengji. Su Fengji got angry, accused Henkel's ancestor of something else, and was beaten to death with a club.

古文：逢吉尝从高祖征鄴，数使酒辱周太祖于军中，太祖恨之。
现代文：苏逢吉曾随漠高祖征伐邺都，多次在军中发酒疯侮辱周太祖，周太祖很怨恨他。
English: Su Fengji had accompanied the great-great-grandfather in the conquest of the Yangtze River and repeatedly insulted Zhou Taizu while drunk in the army. Zhou Taizu resented him very much.

古文：其后隐帝立，逢吉素善李涛，讽涛请罢太祖与杨邠枢密。
现代文：后来漠隐帝登位，苏逢吉素来和李涛很好，暗示李涛请求罢免周太祖和杨合枢密使的职务。
English: Later, when Emperor Muyin ascended to the throne, Su Fengjisulei and Li Tao were on good terms, suggesting that Li Tao request the removal of Zhou Taizu and Yang He from their positions as imperial envoys.

古文：李太后怒涛离间大臣，罢涛相，以杨邠兼平章事，事悉关决。
现代文：李太后愤怒李涛挑拨大臣的关系，罢免李涛的宰相，以杨合兼平章事，事情都报告给他决定。
English: Empress Dowager Li was angry with Li Tao for instigating the relationship between the ministers, dismissing Li Tao's prime minister, and appointing Yang He Jianping as the prime minister. All matters were reported to him for decision.

古文：逢吉、禹珪由是备位而已。
现代文：苏逢吉、苏禹珪从此备位充数罢了。
English: Su Fengji and Su Yuya have been filling the vacant positions since then.

古文：乾祐二年，加拜司空。
现代文：干佑二年，加拜为司空。
English: Two years later, Gabai became the company's CEO.

古文：周太祖镇鄴，不落枢密使，逢吉以谓枢密之任，方镇带之非便，与史弘肇争，于是卒如弘肇议。
现代文：周太祖镇守邺都，没有免去枢密使之职，苏逢吉认为枢密使的职责，由方镇担当不便，和史弘肇发生争执，最终还是依照史弘肇的意见。
English: Zhou Taizuzhen, who was in charge of the capital, did not relieve the privy councilor of his duties. Su Fengji believed that it was inconvenient for Fangzhen to be in charge of the duties of the privy councilor, and had a dispute with Shi Hongzhao. In the end, he followed Shi Hongzhao's opinion.

古文：弘肇怨逢吉异己，已而会饮王章第，使酒坐中，弘肇怒甚。
现代文：史弘肇怨恨苏逢吉和自己作对，不久在王章家中相见，苏逢吉在座上发酒疯，史弘肇更加愤怒。
English: Shi Hongzhao resented Su Fengji for opposing him, and they soon met at Wang Zhang's home. Su Fengji went mad from drinking at the party, and Shi Hongzhao was even more angry.

古文：逢吉谋求出镇以避之，既而中辍，人问其故，逢吉曰： 苟舍此而去，史公一处分，吾齑粉矣！ 
现代文：苏逢吉谋求外出任职来躲避他，不久又作罢，有人问他原因，苏逢吉说： 如果舍弃这里离去，史公一旦处置我，我就粉身碎骨了。 
English: Su Fengji sought an outside position to avoid him, but soon gave it up. When someone asked him why, Su Fengji said: "If I give up and leave here, once Shi Gong disposes of me, I will be crushed."

古文：是时，隐帝少年，小人在侧。
现代文：这时，汉隐帝年龄小，小人在他身旁弄权。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Yin was still young, and villains were jockeying for power around him.

古文：弘肇等威制人主，帝与左右李业、郭允明等皆患之。
现代文：史弘肇等人作威凌驾皇帝，皇帝和他手下的李业、郭允明等人都很忧虑。
English: Shi Hongzhao and others were dominating the emperor, and the emperor and his subordinates Li Ye, Guo Yunming and others were very worried.

古文：逢吉每见业等，以言激之，业等卒杀弘肇，即以逢吉权知枢密院。
现代文：苏逢吉每次见到李业等人，都用言语激怒他们，李业等人终于杀掉史弘肇，任苏逢吉权知枢密院。
English: Every time Su Fengji saw Li Ye and others, he used words to provoke them. Li Ye and others finally killed Shi Hongzhao and appointed Su Fengji to the Privy Council.

古文：方命草麻，闻周太祖起兵，乃止。
现代文：正让人起草诏书，听说周太祖起兵，纔作罢。
English: They are having someone draft the imperial edict. I heard that Zhou Taizu has raised an army. Don't make it up.

古文：逢吉夜宿金祥殿东阁，谓司天夏官正王处讷曰： 昨夕未暝，已见李崧在侧，生人接死者，无吉事也。 
现代文：苏逢吉晚土住在金祥殿束阁，对司天夏官正王处讷说： 昨晚天未黑，就梦见李崧在一旁，活人和死人交接，没有吉祥的事情。 
English: Su Fengji stayed in the pavilion of Jinxiang Hall in the late afternoon, and said to Siti Xia Guanzheng Wang Duan: Last night, before it got dark, I dreamed that Li Qian was by my side, and the living and the dead were handing over. There was nothing auspicious about it.

古文：周太祖至北郊，官军败于刘子陂。
现代文：周太祖到北郊，官军在刘子陂被打败。
English: Zhou Taizu went to the northern suburbs, and the government army was defeated in Liu Zixu.

古文：逢吉宿七里，夜与同舍酣饮，索刀将自杀，为左右所止。
现代文：苏逢吉在七里住宿，晚上和同住的人畅饮，要准备自杀，被手下人劝止。
English: Su Fengji stayed in Qili, and in the evening he drank with the people who lived with him. He wanted to commit suicide, but was dissuaded by his subordinates.

古文：明日与隐帝走赵村，自杀于民舍。
现代文：第二天和漠隐帝逃跑到赵村，在老百姓家中自杀。
English: The next day, he ran away with the Emperor to Zhao Village and committed suicide in a commoner's home.

古文：周太祖定京师，枭其首，适当李崧被刑之所。
现代文：周太祖平定京师，割下他的头示众，正是在李崧被杀的地方。
English: Zhou Taizu subdued Jingding and cut off his head to show it to the public, right at the place where Li Yong was killed.

古文：广顺初，赐其子西京庄并宅一区。
现代文：广顺初，赐给他的儿子西京庄园和一处住宅。
English: At the beginning of the Guangshun era, he gave his son the Xijing Manor and a residence.

古文：○史弘肇史弘肇，字化元，郑州荥泽人也。
现代文：史弘肇字化元，郑州荣泽人。
English: Shi Hongzha Zhaozhi Huayuan, Zhengzhou Rongze people.

古文：为人骁勇，走及奔马。
现代文：为人骁悍勇猛，能够追赶上奔驰的战马。
English: He is brave and courageous, able to catch up with the galloping horse.

古文：梁末，调民七户出一兵，弘肇为兵，隶开道指挥，选为禁兵。
现代文：梁末，微调老百姓七户人家中出一个兵，史弘肇当兵，隶属开道指挥，被选为禁兵。
English: At the end of the year, the fine-tuning of the seven households of the common people produced a soldier, Shi Hongzhao, who was a soldier, was subordinate to the commander of the opening, and was selected as a forbidden soldier.

古文：汉高祖典禁兵，弘肇为军校。
现代文：漠高祖统率禁兵，史弘肇任军校。
English: Mogao Zu-tong led the ban on soldiers, and Shi Hongzhao was appointed to the military school.

古文：其后，汉高祖镇太原，使将武节左右指挥，领雷州刺史。
现代文：后来，汉高祖镇守太原，让他统率武节左右指挥，领雷州刺史。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu, the town guard of Taiyuan, let him lead the martial arts festival and command the left and right, leading the history of Leizhou.

古文：高祖建号于太原，代州王晖拒命，弘肇攻破之，以功拜忠武军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：漠高祖在太原建立国号，代州王晖拒不受命，史弘肇攻破了他，因功拜为忠武军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使。
English: Mogao Zu established the country name in Taiyuan. Daizhou Wang Yao refused to accept the order, and Shi Hongzhao defeated him. Because of his service, he was the commander of the loyal army and the commander of the guards and infantry.

古文：是时契丹北归，留耿崇美攻王守恩于潞州。
现代文：这时契丹北归，留下耿崇美在潞州进攻王守恩。
English: At this time, Khitan returned to the north, leaving Geng Chongmei to attack Wang Shouen in Zhangzhou.

古文：高祖遣弘肇前行击之，崇美败走，守恩以城归汉。
现代文：汉高祖派史弘肇先去攻打他，耿崇美战败逃走，王守恩以潞州城向汉投降。
English: Han Gao's ancestor sent Shi Hong to attack him first, Geng Chongmei was defeated and fled, and Wang Shouen surrendered to Han with Zhangzhou City.

古文：而河阳武行德、泽州翟令奇等，皆迎弘肇自归。
现代文：而河阳武行德、泽州翟令奇等人，都迎接史弘肇，亲自前来归附。
English: On the other hand, Heyang Wu Xingde, Zhezhou Hao Lingqi and others all welcomed Shi Hongzhao and came to join him in person.

古文：弘肇入河阳，高祖从后至，遂入京师。
现代文：史弘肇进入河阳，汉高祖随后到来，于是进入京师。
English: Shi Hongzhao entered Kheyang, Han Gaozu arrived later, and then entered Beijing Division.

古文：弘肇为将，严毅寡言，麾下尝少忤意，立楇杀之，军中为股忄栗，以故高祖起义之初，弘肇行兵所至，秋亳无犯，两京帖然。
现代文：史弘肇任将，严肃刚毅，沉默寡言，部下有人曾稍有违背他的意愿，立即鞭打致死，军中人人为此两腿发抖，因此汉高祖最初起义时，史弘肇行军所到的地方，秋毫无犯，两京安定。
English: Shihong Zhao was a stern, resolute and taciturn general. Some of his subordinates had been whipped to death for the slightest infraction against his wishes. Everyone in the army trembled in their boots because of this. As a result, when the founder of the Han Dynasty rebelled, Shihong Zhao marched to a place where there was no crime and the two capitals were stable.

古文：迁侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，领归德军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：升任侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，领归德军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: He was promoted to the position of the bodyguard of the pro-army horse-marching troops, commanded the envoys, led the German army's festival envoys back to the capital, and signed the peace treaty with the emperor.

古文：高祖疾大渐，与杨邠、苏逢吉等同授顾命。
现代文：汉高祖病情加剧，和杨郇、苏逢吉等人一起接受临终委托。
English: Han Gaozu's condition worsened, and he was entrusted to die together with Yang Hui, Su Fengji and others.

古文：隐帝时，河中李守贞、凤翔王景崇、永兴赵思绾等皆反，关西用兵，人情恐惧，京师之民，流言以相惊恐。
现代文：汉隐帝时，河中李守贞、凤翔王景崇、永兴赵思绾等人都反叛了，关西打仗，人心恐惧，京城的老百姓，谣言流传互相惊恐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Yin, Li Shouzhen, Fengxiang Wang Jingsong, Yongxing Zhao Sijun and others in Hechu rebelled. The people in Kansai were at war, and their hearts were filled with fear. The people in Beijing were terrified of each other as rumors spread.

古文：弘肇出兵警察，务行杀戮，罪无大小皆死。
现代文：史弘肇出兵警戒探察，总是杀人，无论大小罪行都被杀死。
English: Shi Hongzhao sent soldiers to watch and investigate, and they always killed people, no matter how big or small the crime.

古文：是时太白昼见，民有仰观者，辄腰斩于市。
现代文：这时白天出现太白星，老百姓有人抬头观望的，立即将他斩杀在街上。
English: At this time, a white star appeared in the daytime, and some people looked up and watched, and immediately killed him in the street.

古文：市有醉者忤一军卒，诬其讹言，坐弃市。
现代文：街上有酒醉者忤逆一兵士，诬告他讹言，被斩于街上。
English: There were drunks on the street who provoked a soldier, falsely accused him of slander, and were beheaded in the street.

古文：凡民抵罪，吏以白弘肇，但以三指示之，吏即腰斩之。
现代文：凡是百姓无辜获罪的，狱吏告诉史弘肇，仅用三个指头示意，狱吏即判腰斩。
English: Prison officers told Shi Hongzhao that if any innocent people were convicted, they could be sentenced to beheading with just three finger gestures.

古文：又为断舌、决口、斮筋、折足之刑。
现代文：又定下割舌、破嘴、断筋、断足的刑法。
English: It also established the criminal law of cutting the tongue, breaking the mouth, breaking the sinew and breaking the foot.

古文：李崧坐奴告变族诛，弘肇取其幼女以为婢。
现代文：李崧因家嫂告他谋反被族灭，史弘肇把他的小女儿取来当作婢女使唤。
English: Li Yan was killed by the clan because his sister-in-law accused him of plotting a rebellion, and Shi Hongzhao took his little daughter as a servant.

古文：于是前资故将失职之家，姑息僮奴，而厮养之辈，往往胁制其主。
现代文：于是以前有资望而今失职的旧将人家，都姑息迁就家僮奴仆，而受人豢养的人，常常胁迫钳制他的主人。
English: As a result, former generals, who once had prestige but are now out of office, are tolerated as domestic servants, while a dependent person often coerces and controls his master.

古文：侍卫孔目官解晖狡酷，因缘为奸，民抵罪者，莫敢告诉。
现代文：侍卫孔目官解晖狡猾残酷，仗势做坏事，老百姓无辜获罪的，没有人敢上告申诉。
English: The guards of the Confucius Institute are cunning and cruel, and they do bad things. If innocent people are convicted, no one dares to appeal.

古文：燕人何福进有玉枕，直钱十四万，遣僮卖之淮南以鬻茶。
现代文：燕人何福进有一个玉枕，值钱十四万，派僮仆卖到淮南以便买茶。
English: The swallow-man He Fuxin had a jade pillow, worth 140,000, which he sent his servant to sell to Huainan in order to buy tea.

古文：僮隐其钱，福进笞责之，僮乃诬告福进得赵延寿玉枕，以遗吴人。
现代文：僮仆把钱藏起来，何福进鞭打僮仆索求，僮仆于是诬告何福进得到趟延寿玉枕，用来送给昊人。
English: The manservant hid the money, and He Fuxin whipped the manservant to demand it. The manservant then falsely accused He Fuxin of obtaining a jade pillow to give to Hao.

古文：弘肇捕治，福进弃市，帐下分取其妻子，而籍其家财。
现代文：史弘肇抓到何福进治罪，何福进被杀，他的部下分别占有他的妻子儿女，登记没收他的家财。
English: Shi Hongzhao caught He Fuxin committing crimes, He Fuxin was killed, his subordinates separately occupied his wife and children, registered and confiscated his family wealth.

古文：弘肇不喜宾客，尝言： 文人难耐，呼我为卒。 
现代文：史弘肇不喜欢宾客，曾说： 文人墨客叫人难以忍受，称我为兵。 
English: Shi Hongzhao did not like guests. He once said: "Literati and writers are unbearable. They call me a soldier."

古文：弘肇领归德，其副使等月率私钱千缗为献。
现代文：史弘肇统领归德，他的副使等人每月大都用私钱一千缙进献。
English: Shi Hongzhao led the general to return to Germany, and his deputy envoys and others mostly used private money of one thousand baht per month to make donations.

古文：颍州麹场官麹温与军将何拯争官务，讼之三司，三司直温。
现代文：颖州面场官曲温和军将何拯争执官事，诉讼到三司，三司认为曲温对。
English: Yingzhou face-to-face official Qu Wen and military commander He Zheng dispute official affairs, the lawsuit to the three departments, the three departments believe that Qu Wen is right.

古文：拯诉之弘肇，弘肇以谓颍己属州，而温不先白己，乃追温杀之，连坐者数十人。
现代文：何拯向史弘肇申诉，史弘肇认为颖州是自己的属州，而曲温不首先告诉自己，于是追捕曲温杀掉，受到牵连治罪的有数十人。
English: He Zheng appealed to Shi Hongzhao. Shi Hongzhao thought that Yingzhou was his own province, but Qu Wen did not tell him first, so he pursued and killed Qu Wen. Dozens of people were implicated and punished.

古文：周太祖平李守贞，推功群臣，弘肇拜中书令。
现代文：周太祖平定李守贞，推奖各个臣子，史弘肇拜马中书令。
English: Zhou Taizu subdued Li Shouzhen, promoted various courtiers, and Shi Hongzhao worshiped Ma Zhongshu Ling.

古文：隐帝自关西罢兵，渐近小人，与后赞、李业等嬉游无度，而太后亲族颇行干托，弘肇与杨邠稍裁抑之。
现代文：汉隐帝自关西停战以来，渐渐亲近小人，和后赞、李业等人嬉戏游乐没有节制，而太后的亲族热衷干谒托情，史弘肇和杨邰逐渐压制他们。
English: Since the end of the war in Kansai, Emperor Han Yan gradually became close to villains, and played and had fun with Houzan, Li Ye and others without restraint. While the relatives of the empress dowager were keen to indulge in love affairs, Shi Hongzhao and Yang Hui gradually suppressed them.

古文：太后有故人子求补军职，弘肇辄斩之。
现代文：太后有个老朋友的儿子谋求补任军职，史弘肇就把他杀了。
English: Shi Hongzhao killed the son of an old friend of the empress dowager, who was seeking to fill a vacant military post.

古文：帝始听乐，赐教坊使等玉带、锦袍，往谢弘肇，弘肇怒曰： 健兒为国征行者未有偏赐，尔曹何功，敢当此乎！ 
现代文：皇帝刚听音乐时，赐给教坊使等人玉带、锦袍，这些人前去辞谢史弘肇，史弘肇发怒说： 士兵们为国家出征役一点特别赏赐，你们这些人有什么功劳，怎敢接受这些东西！ 
English: When the emperor was just listening to the music, he gave the courtiers and others a jade belt and a brocade robe. These people went to thank Shi Hongzhao. Shi Hongzhao was angry and said: The soldiers were given a special reward for the national conscription. What merit do you people have, how dare you accept these things!

古文：悉取所赐还官。
现代文：全部拿回赏赐的物品归还官府。
English: Take back all the rewards and return them to the government.

古文：周太祖出镇魏州，弘肇议带枢密行，苏逢吉、杨邠以为不可，弘肇恨之。
现代文：周太祖外出镇守魏州，史弘肇拟议带枢密使同行，苏逢吉、杨合认为不行，史弘肇很怨恨他们。
English: Zhou Taizu went out to guard the town of Weizhou, Shi Hongzhao proposed to bring the envoy to accompany him, Su Fengji and Yang He thought it was not possible, Shi Hongzhao resented them very much.

古文：明日，会饮窦贞固第，弘肇厉声举爵属太祖曰： 昨日廷论，何为异同？
现代文：第二天，在窦贞固家中聚会饮酒，史弘肇举起酒杯高声向周太祖敬酒说： 昨天朝廷上争论，为什么有不同意见？
English: The next day, at a drinking party at Dou Zhenggu's home, Shi Hongzhao raised his glass in a loud toast to Zhou Taizu and said: Yesterday, there was an argument in the imperial court, why are there different opinions?

古文：今日与公饮此。 
现代文：今天和你喝下这杯酒。 
English: I'll drink this glass of wine with you today.

古文：逢吉与邠亦举大爵曰： 此国家事也，何必介意乎！ 
现代文：苏逢吉和杨合也举起大酒杯说： 这是国家大事，何必介意呢！ 
English: Su Fengji and Yang He also raised a large glass and said: This is a national event, why should you mind!

古文：遂俱饮爵。
现代文：于是一起干杯。
English: So we drank a toast together.

古文：弘肇曰： 安朝廷，定祸乱，直须长枪大剑，若 毛锥子 安足用哉？ 
现代文：史弘肇说： 安定朝廷，平定祸乱，祇需长大剑兢行了，像 毛锥子 有什么用呢？ 
English: Shi Hongzhao said: To stabilize the imperial court and quell the calamity, it is only necessary to grow up and practice swordsmanship. What is the use of a hairpin?

古文：三司使王章曰： 无 毛锥子 ，军赋何从集乎？ 
现代文：三司使王章说： 如果漫有 毛锥子 ，军队粮饷从哪里征集呢？ 
English: Wang Zhang, the Third Division's envoy, said, "If there are so many woolen cones, where will the army's rations be collected from?"

古文： 毛锥子 ，盖言笔也。
现代文： 毛锥子 ，是说毛笔。
English: Mao锥子, means "hairpin."

古文：弘肇默然。
现代文：史弘肇沉默不语。
English: Shi Hongzhao was silent.

古文：他日，会饮章第，酒酣，为手势令，弘肇不能为，客省使阎晋卿坐次弘肇，屡教之。
现代文：另一天，在王章家中聚会饮酒，酒酣耳熟，猜拳行令，史弘肇不会做，客省使阎晋卿挨着史弘肇坐，多次教他。
English: On another day, there was a party at Wang Zhang's home. They were drinking alcohol. They were familiar with drinking wine. They were also familiar with guessing and boxing. Shi Hongzhao could not do it. The guest provincial envoy Yan Jinqing sat next to Shi Hongzhao and taught him many times.

古文：苏逢吉戏曰： 坐有姓阎人，何忧罚爵！ 
现代文：苏逢吉开玩笑说： 座中有个姓间的人，何必担心罚酒！ 
English: Su Fengji joked, "There is a person with a different surname in the audience, why worry about the liquor fine!

古文：弘肇妻阎氏，酒家倡，以为讥己，大怒，以丑语诟逢吉，逢吉不校。
现代文：史弘肇的妻子阎氏，是酒家歌女，因而认为是在讥讽自己，大怒，用丑话辱骂苏逢吉，苏逢吉不计较。
English: Shi Hongzhao's wife, Yan, was a singer in a pub, so he thought that she was mocking herself, got very angry, and abused Su Fengji with foul language. Su Fengji did not care.

古文：弘肇欲殴之，逢吉先出。
现代文：史弘肇想殴打他，苏逢吉先出去了。
English: Shi Hongzhao wanted to beat him, Su Fengji went out first.

古文：弘肇起索剑欲追之，杨邠泣曰： 苏公，汉宰相，公若杀之，致天子何地乎？ 
现代文：史弘肇起身找剑想追杀苏逢吉，杨合哭泣着说： 苏公，是汉的宰相，你如杀了他，又把天子放在哪里呢？ 
English: Shi Hongzhao got up and looked for a sword to chase Su Fengji, Yang He cried and said: Su Gong, is the prime minister of Han, if you kill him, where will you put the son of heaven?

古文：弘肇驰马去，邠送至第而还。
现代文：史弘肇驰马离去，杨邰送他到家纔返回。
English: Shi Hong Zhaozhi left on his horse, and Yang Hui took him back to his home.

古文：由是将相如水火。
现代文：从此将相之间如水火不兼容。
English: From now on, there will be no compatibility between the two.

古文：隐帝遣王峻置酒公子亭和解之。
现代文：汉隐帝派王峻在公子亭摆酒让他们和解。
English: Emperor Han Ying sent Wang Jun to make peace with them by offering wine at the Prince's Pavilion.

古文：是时，李业、郭允明、后赞、聂文进等用事，不喜执政。
现代文：这时，李业、郭允明、后赞、聂文进等人当权，不喜欢执政大臣。
English: At this time, Li Ye, Guo Yunming, Houzan, Gong Wenjin and others were in power and did not like the ruling minister.

古文：而隐帝春秋渐长，为大臣所制，数有忿言，业等乘间谮之，以谓弘肇威震人主，不除必为乱。
现代文：而漠隐帝渐渐长大，受大臣钳制，多次有怨言，李业等人乘机说坏话，认为史弘肇的威势超过了皇帝，不除掉必定会作乱。
English: However, Emperor Muyin gradually grew up, was controlled by ministers, and complained many times. Li Ye and others took the opportunity to speak ill of him, believing that Shi Hongzhao's power exceeded that of the emperor, and that if he was not removed, there would certainly be unrest.

古文：隐帝颇欲除之。
现代文：汉隐帝很想除掉他。
English: Emperor Han Yin wanted to get rid of him.

古文：夜闻作坊锻甲声，以为兵至，达旦不寐。
现代文：晚上听到作坊中打造镗甲的声音，以为乱兵到了，通宵不能睡着。
English: In the evening, I heard the sound of making armor in the workshop, and thought that the soldiers had arrived. I couldn't fall asleep all night.

古文：由是与业等密谋禁中。
现代文：因此和李业等人在宫禁中密谋除掉史弘肇。
English: Therefore, he conspired with Li Ye and others to get rid of Shi Hongzhao during the palace ban.

古文：乾祐三年冬十月十三日，弘肇与杨邠、王章等入朝，坐广政殿东庑，甲士数十人自内出，擒弘肇、邠、章斩之，并族其三家。
现代文：干佑三年冬十月十三日，史弘肇和杨郇、王章等人进朝，坐在广政殿束面的廊屋中，数十个身披锁甲的士兵从里面冲出，抓住史弘肇、杨合、王章杀掉，并把他们三家灭族。
English: On the 13th day of October in the winter of the 3rd year of the Ganymede, Shi Hongzhao, Yang Hui, Wang Zhang and others entered the imperial court and sat in the corridor facing the Great Hall of the People. Dozens of soldiers clad in armour rushed out, seized Shi Hongzhao, Yang He and Wang Zhang, killed them, and exterminated their three families.

古文：弘肇已死，帝坐崇元殿召君臣，告以弘肇等谋反，君臣莫能对。
现代文：史弘肇死后，皇帝坐在崇元殿召集群臣，声称史弘肇等人谋反，群臣没有人敢回话。
English: After the death of Shihong Zhao, the emperor sat in the Chongyuan Hall and summoned his ministers, claiming that Shihong Zhao and others were plotting a rebellion. None of the ministers dared to speak back.

古文：又召诸军校见于万岁殿，帝曰： 弘肇等专权，使汝曹常忧横死，今日吾得为汝主矣！ 
现代文：又在万岁殿召见各军校，皇帝说： 史弘肇等人独揽大权，让你们常常担心惨遭横祸而死，今天我能为你们作主了！ 
English: In the Hall of Long Life, he summoned all the military schools, and the emperor said: Shi Hongzhao and others monopolize great power, so that you often worry about being killed by misfortune, today I can be the master of you!

古文：军校皆拜。
现代文：军校们都下拜。
English: The cadets all bowed.

古文：周太祖即位，追封弘肇郑王，以礼归葬。
现代文：周太祖登位，追封史弘肇为郑王，按照礼节送归家乡安葬。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, followed by Shi Hongzhao as King Zheng, and was sent back to his hometown for burial in accordance with etiquette.

古文：○杨邠杨邠，魏州冠氏人也。
现代文：杨合，魏州冠氏人。
English: Yang He, a member of the Guan family from Weizhou.

古文：少为州掌籍吏，租庸使孔谦领度支，补邠勾押官，历孟、华、郓三州粮料院使。
现代文：年轻时任州府掌籍吏，租庸使孔谦领度支，补杨合为勾押官，历任孟、华、郫三州粮料院使。
English: When he was young, he served as the chief registrar of the state government, the rent yong made Kong Qian lead the branch, the supplement Yang He was the detention officer, and successively served as the envoy of the Meng, Hua, and Zou three state grain institutes.

古文：事汉高祖为右都押衙，高祖即位，拜枢密使。
现代文：跟随漠高祖任右都押衙，汉高祖即位，拜为枢密使。
English: Following the enthronement of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne and became a privy councillor.

古文：邠出于小吏，不喜文士，与苏逢吉等内相排忌。
现代文：杨郇出身小官吏，不喜欢文人，和苏逢吉等人心中互相排挤忌恨。
English: Yang Hui was a minor official, and disliked the literati. He and Su Fengji hated each other in their hearts.

古文：逢吉讽李涛上疏罢邠与周太祖枢密使，邠泣诉李太后前，太后怒，罢涛相，加邠中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：苏逢吉劝说李涛上疏罢免杨合和周太祖的枢密使职务，杨合哭泣着在李太后面前诉说，太后发怒，罢免李涛的宰相，加杨郇中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
English: Su Fengji persuaded Li Tao Shangso to remove Yang He and Zhou Taizu from their positions as imperial envoys. Yang He cried in front of Empress Dowager Li and told her that the Empress Dowager was angry and removed Li Tao's prime minister, as well as Yang Hui's junior secretary and clerk Shang Shu and Tong Ping Zhang.

古文：是时，逢吉、禹珪颇以私贿除吏，多缪。
现代文：这时，苏逢吉、苏禹珪往往根据私下贿赂任官授职，出现很乡错误。
English: At this time, Su Fengji and Su Yuwen often appointed officials according to private bribery, and there were many mistakes.

古文：邠为相，事无大小，必先示邠，邠以为可，乃入白，而深革逢吉所为，凡门廕出身，诸司补吏者，一切罢之。
现代文：杨郇任宰相后，事情无论大小，必定首先请示杨合，杨合认为可以，纔进宫上报，而大力改变苏逢吉的所作所为，凡是因门第做官的，各司补选的官吏，都一概罢免。
English: After Yang Hui was appointed prime minister, no matter how big or small the matter was, he must first ask Yang He for instructions. Yang He thought it was possible to go to the palace to report, and vigorously change Su Fengji's behavior. All the officials who were appointed because of their lineage, and the officials of all departments who were elected by-election, were all dismissed.

古文：邠虽长于吏事，而不知大体，以谓为国家者，帑廪实、甲兵完而已，礼乐文物皆虚器也。
现代文：杨郇虽然擅长做官的事，但不懂得有关大局的道理，认为治理国家，不过是钱库充实，武器完备罢了，礼乐文物都是虚华不实的东西。
English: Although Yang Hui is good at being an official, he does not understand the truth about the overall situation. He believes that the governance of the country is nothing more than a full treasury, complete weapons, and ceremonial music and cultural relics are all unreal things.

古文：以故秉大政而务苛细，凡前资官不得居外，而天下行旅，皆给过所然后得行。
现代文：因此执掌国家大政而务求苛刻繁细，凡是前资官不能留在京师之外，而天下出行的人，都要给凭证纔能出行。
English: Therefore, those who are in charge of the country's major policies must be strict and meticulous. All former senior officials cannot stay outside the Beijing division, and those who travel around the world must give a certificate to travel.

古文：旬日之间，人情大扰，邠度不可行而止。
现代文：十天之内，人心扰乱，杨郇估计不能实行而作罢。
English: Within ten days, people's minds were disturbed, and Yang Xuan estimated that it could not be implemented and abandoned it.

古文：邠常与王章论事帝前，帝曰： 事行之后，勿使有言也！ 
现代文：杨郇常和王章在皇帝面前议论政事，皇帝说： 事情实行之后，不要让人说闲话！ 
English: Yang Xizhong and Wang Zhang often discussed political affairs in front of the emperor. The emperor said: After the matter is implemented, don't let people gossip!

古文：邠遽曰： 陛下但禁声，有臣在。 
现代文：杨合于是说： 陛下只管不说话，有我在。 
English: Yang He then said, "Your Majesty, just don't speak, I'm here."

古文：闻者为之战忄栗。
现代文：听到这话的人为他发抖。
English: All who heard him were shaken.

古文：李太后弟业求为宣徽使，帝与太后私以问邠，邠止以为不可。
现代文：李太后的弟弟李业请求任宣徽使，皇帝和太后私下询问杨郇，杨合劝阻认为不行。
English: Li Ye, the younger brother of Empress Dowager Li, requested to be appointed as the envoy for the proclamation of the imperial emblem. The emperor and the empress dowager privately inquired about Yang Hui, but Yang He did not think it was possible to dissuade him.

古文：帝欲立所爱耿夫人为后，邠又以为不可；夫人死，将以后礼葬之，邠又以为不可。
现代文：皇帝想立宠爱的耿夫人为皇后，杨合又认为不行；夫人死后，准备按照皇后的礼仪安葬，杨合又认为不行。
English: The emperor wanted to make his favorite wife, Mrs. Geng, the empress, but Yang He didn't think it was possible. After her death, he planned to bury her according to the queen's etiquette, but Yang He didn't think it was possible.

古文：由是隐帝大怒，而左右乘间构之，与史弘肇等同日见杀。
现代文：因此漠隐帝大怒，而手下人乘机陷害他，和史弘肇等人同一天被杀。
English: Therefore, Emperor Mokuin was furious, and his subordinates took the opportunity to frame him, and Shihong Zhao and others were killed on the same day.

古文：邠为人颇俭静，四方之赂虽不却，然往往以献于帝。
现代文：杨合为人十分俭朴恬静，虽不拒收各地贿赂的财物，但往往拿来献给皇帝。
English: Yang He was a very frugal, simple and quiet person. Although he did not refuse to accept bribes from all over the country, he often presented them to the emperor.

古文：居家谢绝宾客，晚节稍通缙绅，延客门下。
现代文：居家时谢绝宾客，晚年纔稍稍和士大夫交往，招纳宾客在门下。
English: When he was at home, he refused to have guests. In his later years, he had a brief relationship with a scholar-doctor and invited guests to his home.

古文：知史传有用，乃课吏传写。
现代文：懂得历史传记文章有用，于是责求官吏抄写。
English: Knowing the usefulness of historical biographical articles, he asked officials to copy them.

古文：未几，及于祸。
现代文：不久，碰上灾祸。
English: Soon, disaster struck.

古文：周太祖即位，追封弘农王。
现代文：周太祖登位，追封为弘农王。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended the throne and was posthumously named the King of Hongnong.

古文：○王章王章，魏州南乐人也。
现代文：王章，魏州南乐人。任州孔目官。
English: Wang Zhang, a Southern Wei Musician, was appointed as the State Confucianism Inspector.

古文：为州孔目官，张令昭逐节度使刘延皓，章事令昭。
现代文：张令昭驱逐节度使刘延皓，王章追随张令昭。
English: Zhang Lingzhao's expulsion from the festival made Liu Yanxuan and Wang Zhang follow Zhang Lingzhao.

古文：令昭败，章妇翁白文珂与副招讨李周善，乃以章托周。
现代文：张令昭失败，王章的岳父白文珂和副招讨李周关系裉好，于是把王章托付给李周。
English: Zhang Ling Zhao failed, Wang Zhang's father-in-law Bai Wen Ke and deputy solicitor Li Zhou had a good relationship, so he entrusted Wang Zhang to Li Zhou.

古文：周匿章褚中，以橐驼负之洛阳，藏周第。
现代文：李周把王章藏在袋中，用骆驼驮到洛阳，藏在李周家中。
English: Li Zhou hid Wang Zhang in a bag and rode a camel to Luoyang, where he hid it in Li Zhou's home.

古文：唐灭，章乃出，为河阳粮料使。
现代文：唐灭亡，王章纔出来，任河阳粮料使。
English: After the fall of Tang Dynasty, Wang Zhangxuan came out and was appointed as the Heyang Grain Envoy.

古文：汉高祖典禁兵，补章孔目官，从之太原。
现代文：漠高祖统率禁军，补王章为孔目官，随汉高祖到太原。
English: Mogao Zu led the imperial army, and Fu Wangzhang was the Confucius official. He followed Han Gao Zu to Taiyuan.

古文：高祖即位，拜三司使、检校太尉。
现代文：汉高祖登位，拜为三司使、检校太尉。
English: Han Gaozu ascended to the throne, and was given the titles of Third Divisional Envoy and Inspector of Schools.

古文：高祖崩，隐帝即位，加太尉、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：漠高祖死，汉隐帝登位，加太尉、同中书门下平章事。
English: After the death of Mogao Zu, Emperor Han Ying ascended to the throne, and Ga Tai Li and Tong Zhong Shumen were promoted to the rank of He Ping.

古文：是时，汉方新造，承契丹之后，京师空乏，而关西三叛作，周太祖用兵西方，章供馈军旅，未尝乏绝。
现代文：这时，汉刚刚建立，在契丹掠夺之后，京师财库空虚，而关西三叛并起，周太祖在西方打仗，王章供应军粮，不曾匮乏断绝。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty had just been established, after the Khitan plunder, Beijing's treasury was empty, and the three rebellions in Kansai had begun at the same time. Zhou Taizu was fighting in the West, and Wang Zhang was supplying military grain. There was never a shortage.

古文：然征利剥下，民甚苦之。
现代文：但征收财利搜刮百姓，百姓深受其害。
English: However, the people have been robbed by the levying of money and interest, and the people have been deeply harmed.

古文：往时民租一石输二升为 雀鼠耗 ，章乃增一石输二斗为 省耗 ；缗钱出入，皆以八十为陌，章减其出者陌三；州县民诉田者，必全州县覆之，以括其隐田。
现代文：过去老百姓一石税粮加送雨升作为 雀鼠耗 ，王章于是增加为租税一石加送两斗作为 省耗 ；缙钱出纳，都以八十为一百文，王章又减少三文放出去；州县百姓上诉田产，必定全州全县复核，以便搜括喑藏的田地。
English: In the past, the common people used to tax one stone of grain plus send rain to raise the consumption of the sparrow and mouse, so Wang Zhang increased the tax to tax one stone plus send two buckets as a cost-saving measure; the coffer money cashier, all with eighty to one hundred coins, Wang Zhang also reduced the three coins to be released; the people of the state and county appealed the field production, and the whole state and county must review it in order to search for the hidden fields.

古文：天下由此重困。
现代文：天下因此深受困害。
English: As a result, the world is in deep trouble.

古文：然尤不喜文士，尝语人曰： 此辈与一把算子，未知颠倒，何益于国邪！ 
现代文：他特别不喜欢文士，曾对人说： 给这些人一把算盘，不知道颠倒，对国家有什么好处呢！ 
English: He particularly disliked scribes, and once said to someone: Give these people an abacus, I don't know what's good for the country!

古文：百官俸廪，皆取供军之余不堪者，命有司高估其价，估定又增，谓之 抬估 ，章犹意不能满，往往复增之。
现代文：百官的俸禄都取自供应军队剩下的没有用的东西，命令官吏往高处估算它们的价值，估算定了又增加，叫做 撞估 ，王章还不满意，往往再增加。
English: The salaries of the centurions were all taken from the useless things left over from supplying the army, and the officials were ordered to estimate their value at a high level. The estimate was fixed and then increased, which is called "impact assessment." Wang Zhang was still not satisfied and often increased it again.

古文：民有犯盐、矾、酒曲者，无多少皆抵死，吏缘为奸，民莫堪命。
现代文：老百姓触犯盐、矾、酒曲法的，无论多少都抵罪处死，官吏假公济私做坏事，老百姓不能忍受。
English: No matter how much the common people violate the salt, lees, and wine laws, they will be punished with death. The common people can't stand it when government officials do bad things while pretending to be public servants.

古文：已而与史弘肇等同日见杀。
现代文：不久和史弘肇等人同一天被杀。
English: Soon after, he was killed on the same day as Shi Hongzhao and others.

古文：○刘铢
现代文：刘铢，陕州人。
English: Liu Wei, from Shaanxi Province.

古文：刘铢，陕州人也。少为梁邵王牙将，与汉高祖有旧，高祖镇太原，以为左都押衙。
现代文：年轻时任梁邵王的牙将，和汉高祖有旧交，汉高祖镇守太原，任他为左都押衙。
English: When he was young, he was the dental officer of Liang Shao Wang, and he had an old friendship with Han Gao Zu. Han Gao Zu was the town guard of Taiyuan, and he was assigned to guard the left side of the capital.

古文：铢为人惨酷好杀戮，高祖以为勇断类己，特信用之。
现代文：刘铢为人刻毒残酷，喜好杀人，汉高祖认为他的勇猛果断像自己，特别信任重用他。
English: Liu Xuan was a vicious and cruel man, with a penchant for killing. Emperor Gaozhu believed that Liu Xuan's bravery and determination were similar to his own, and he especially trusted and reused him.

古文：高祖即位，拜永兴军节度使，徙镇平卢，加检校太师、同平章事，又加侍中。
现代文：漠高祖即位，拜为永兴军节度使，调任镇守平卢，加检校太师、同平章事，又加侍中。
English: Mogao Zu ascended the throne, and was appointed as the Yongxing Army's ceremonial envoy, transferred to the town of Pinglu, promoted to the rank of inspector, to the rank of official, and to the rank of attendant.

古文：是时，江淮不通，吴越钱镠使者常泛海以至中国。
现代文：这时，江淮道路不通，昊越钱铿的使臣常常渡海到中原。
English: At this time, the roads of the Jianghuai River were impassable, and the envoys of the Haoyue Qianlong often crossed the sea to the Central Plains.

古文：而滨海诸州皆置博易务，与民贸易。
现代文：而沿海各州都设置博易务，和老百姓做生意。
English: Meanwhile, all coastal states have set up e-commerce services to do business with the common people.

古文：民负失期者，务吏擅自摄治，置刑狱，不关州县。
现代文：老百姓负债过期的，博易务的官吏擅自抓捕治罪，设置刑狱，不报告州县。
English: When the debts of the common people are overdue, the officials of the Bo Yi affairs arbitrarily arrest and punish, set up a prison, and do not report to the state and county.

古文：而前为吏者，纳其厚赂，纵之不问。
现代文：而对以前做过官吏的人，收受重金贿赂，放纵他们不过问。
English: On the other hand, no questions were asked about those who had previously been government officials and had accepted heavy bribes.

古文：民颇为苦，铢乃一切禁之。
现代文：老百姓深受其害，刘铢于是一概禁止。
English: The common people suffered a lot from it, so Liu Bei banned it altogether.

古文：然铢用法，亦自为刻深。
现代文：但刘铢执法，也很苛刻严峻。
English: But Liu Wei's enforcement of the law is also very harsh and severe.

古文：民有过者，问其年几何，对曰若干，即随其数杖之，谓之 随年杖 。
现代文：老百姓有罪的，问他年龄大小，回答说多少岁，就按照岁数棒打多少次，叫做 随年杖 。
English: If a commoner is found guilty, he will be asked his age, and if he answers how old he is, he will be beaten according to the number of years he has been alive. This is called the "yearly cane."

古文：每杖一人，必两杖俱下，谓之 合欢杖 。
现代文：每次棒打一人，必定用两根棍子同时打，叫做 合欢杖 。
English: Every time a stick is used to beat a person, two sticks must be used at the same time, which is called a matchstick.

古文：又请增民租，亩出钱三十以为公用，民不堪之。
现代文：又请求增加老百姓的租赋，每亩出钱三十作为公用，老百姓不堪其苦。
English: He also requested that the rent of the common people be increased, and that 30 yuan per mu be paid for public use. The common people were unable to bear the hardship.

古文：隐帝患铢刚暴，召之，惧不至。
现代文：漠隐帝担忧刘铢刚烈暴躁，召他回京，刘铢害怕没去。
English: The Emperor was worried about Liu Bei's violent temper and called him back to Beijing, but Liu Bei was afraid and did not go.

古文：是时，沂州郭淮攻南唐还，以兵驻青州，隐帝乃遣符彦卿往代铢。
现代文：这时，沂州郭淮进攻南唐返回，率兵驻扎青州，汉隐帝于是派符彦卿去伐替刘铢。
English: At this time, Guo Huai of Bozhou attacked Southern Tang and returned, and stationed his troops in Qingzhou. Emperor Han Yan then sent Fu Yanqing to replace Liu Bei.

古文：铢顾禁兵在，莫敢有异意，乃受代还京师。
现代文：刘铢见禁兵在一旁，不敢有别的考虑，于是接受代换回到京师。
English: Seeing the forbidden soldiers by his side, Liu Bei dared not think about anything else, so he accepted the substitution and returned to the Beijing Division.

古文：铢尝切齿于史弘肇、杨邠等，已而弘肇等死，铢谓李业等曰： 诸君可谓偻儸兒矣。 
现代文：刘铢常切齿痛恨史弘肇、杨郐等人，不久史弘肇等人死，刘铢对李业等人说： 各位可算是傻雠儿了。 
English: Liu Ye used to hate Shi Hongzhao, Yang Ye and others. Soon after Shi Hongzhao and others died, Liu Ye said to Li Ye and others: You are all fools.

古文：权知开封府，周太祖兵犯京师，铢悉诛太祖与王峻等家属。
现代文：权知开封府，周太祖的军队进犯京城，刘铢把周太祖和王峻等的家属全部杀掉。
English: Guanzhi opened the imperial palace, Zhou Taizu's army invaded the capital, and Liu Bei killed all of Zhou Taizu's family members, including Wang Jun.

古文：太祖入京师，铢妻裸露以席自蔽，与铢俱见执。
现代文：周太祖进入京城，刘铢的妻子赤身露体用席子遮盖自己，和刘铢一起都被抓获。
English: When Zhou Taizu entered Beijing, Liu Yao's wife was naked and covered herself with a mat. Both she and Liu Yao were arrested.

古文：铢谓其妻曰： 我则死矣，汝应与人为婢。 
现代文：刘铢对他的妻子说： 我就要死了，你应作别人的婢女。 
English: Liu Yao said to his wife: "I am about to die. You should be someone else's maid."

古文：太祖使人责铢曰： 与公共事先帝，独无故人之情乎？
现代文：周太祖派人斥责刘铢说： 我和你一同跟随先帝，偏偏没有老朋友的交情吗？
English: Zhou Taizu sent someone to reprimand Liu Bei, saying, "I follow the former emperor with you, but don't we have the friendship of old friends?

古文：吾家屠灭，虽有君命，加之酷毒，一何忍也。
现代文：我家被你屠杀减族，即使有君主的命令，做得那样残酷狠毒，怎么忍心。
English: My family was slaughtered and reduced in number by you. Even if there was an order from the monarch, to do it in such a cruel and vicious way, how could I bear it.

古文：今公亦有妻子，独念之乎？ 
现代文：如今你也有妻子儿女，想他们吗？ 
English: Now you have a wife and children, do you miss them?

古文：铢曰： 为汉诛叛臣尔，岂知其佗。 
现代文：刘铢说： 我只是为漠诛杀叛臣罢了，哪管别的。 
English: Liu Ye said, "I just killed a traitor for the sake of the country. Who cares about anything else?"

古文：是时，太祖方欲归人心，乃与群臣议曰： 刘侍中坠马伤甚，而军士逼辱，迨有微生，吾欲奏太后，贷其家属，何如？ 
现代文：这时，周太祖正想收揽人心，于是和群臣商议说： 刘侍中从马上摔下伤势很重，而士兵逼迫羞辱他，趁他一息尚存，我想上奏太后，宽免他的家属，怎么样？ 
English: At this time, Zhou Taizu was trying to win the hearts and minds of the people, so he consulted with the ministers and said: Liu Shizhong fell from his horse and was seriously injured, and the soldiers forced and humiliated him. While he was still alive, I would like to appeal to the Empress Dowager to pardon his family members, how about it?

古文：群臣皆以为善。
现代文：群臣都认为好。
English: The ministers all thought it was a good idea.

古文：乃止杀铢，与李业等枭首于市，赦其妻子。
现代文：于是只杀掉刘铢，和李业等人一起斩首示众，赦免了他的妻子儿女。
English: As a result, he only killed Liu Wei, beheaded him along with Li Ye and others, and pardoned his wife and children.

古文：太祖即位，赐陕州庄宅各一区。
现代文：周太祖登位，赐给陕州的庄园住宅各一处。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne and bestowed one manor house each on Shaanxi.

古文：○李业李业，高祖皇后之弟也。
现代文：李业，汉高祖皇后的弟弟。
English: Li Ye, the younger brother of Empress Han Gao Zu.

古文：后昆弟七人，业最幼，故尤怜之。
现代文：皇后有兄弟七人，李业最小，因此特别怜爱他。
English: The empress had seven brothers, and Li Ye was the youngest, so she was especially fond of him.

古文：高祖时，以为武德使。
现代文：汉高祖时，任为武德使。
English: When he was the founder of the Han Dynasty, he was appointed as a military attaché.

古文：隐帝即位，业以皇太后故，益用事，无顾惮。
现代文：汉隐帝登位，李业由于皇太后的缘故，更加专权，肆无忌惮。
English: When Emperor Han Yin ascended the throne, Li Ye became more authoritarian and unscrupulous because of the Empress Dowager.

古文：时天下旱、蝗，黄河决溢，京师大风拔木，坏城门，宫中数见怪物投瓦石、撼门扉。
现代文：当时天下旱灾、蝗灾并起，黄河决口泛滥，京师大风拔起树木，毁坏城门，皇宫中多次看见怪物投来瓦石、摇动宫门。
English: At that time, droughts and locust plagues occurred all over the world, the mouth of the Yellow River was flooded, the winds of the Beijing earthquake uprooted trees and destroyed the city gate, and monsters were repeatedly seen in the imperial palace throwing stones and shaking the palace gate.

古文：隐帝召司天赵延乂问禳除之法，延乂对曰： 臣职天象日时，察其变动，以考顺逆吉凶而已，禳除之事，非臣所知也。
现代文：汉隐帝召司天赵延火询问求福消炎的办法，趟延又回答说： 我负责天象日时，观察它们的变化，以便考知顺逆吉凶罢了，求福消炎的事，不是我能懂得的。
English: Emperor Han Yan summoned the celestial magistrate Zhao Yan to inquire about the method of seeking blessings to eliminate the inflammation. Watanabe also replied: I am responsible for the celestial time and observe their changes in order to know the ups and downs, the good and the bad. The matter of seeking blessings to eliminate the inflammation is not something I can understand.

古文：然臣所闻，殆山魈也。 
现代文：但据我所知，恐怕是山魈作怪。 
English: But as far as I know, I'm afraid it was the hawks that did it.

古文：皇太后乃召尼诵佛书以禳之，一尼如厕，既还，悲泣不知人者数日，及醒讯之，莫知其然。
现代文：皇太后于是召尼姑诵读佛书求福消灾，一个尼姑去厕所，回来后，悲号典泣几天不省人事，等到苏醒后讯问她，也不知道是怎么回事。
English: The empress dowager then called on nuns to chant and read Buddhist scriptures to pray for good fortune to eliminate the disaster. One nun went to the toilet, and after returning, she cried inconsolably for several days. When she woke up, she was interrogated, and she didn't know what was going on.

古文：而帝方与业及聂文进、后赞、郭允明等狎昵，多为廋语相诮戏，放纸鸢于宫中。
现代文：而皇帝正和李业以及聂文进、后赞、郭允明等人亲近，常猜谜语相互逗乐，在宫中放风筝。
English: However, the emperor was getting close to Li Ye, Nie Wenjin, Hou Zan, Guo Yunming and others. They often guessed riddles to amuse each other and flew kites in the palace.

古文：太后数以灾异戒帝，不听。
现代文：太后多次拿灾异警告皇帝，皇帝不听。
English: The empress dowager repeatedly warned the emperor about the calamity, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：时宣徽使阙，业欲得之，太后亦遣人讽大臣。
现代文：当时宣徽使无人担任，李业想得到这个职位，太后也派人暗示大臣们同意。
English: At that time, there was no one to hold the position of Xuanhuizi, Li Ye wanted to get this position, and the Empress Dowager also sent someone to suggest that the ministers agree.

古文：大臣杨邠、史弘肇等皆以为不可。业由此怨望，谋杀邠等。
现代文：大臣杨合、史弘肇等人都认为不行李业因此怨恨不满，策谋杀掉杨郇等人。
English: Ministers Yang He, Shi Hongzhao and others all believed that the baggage industry was resentful and dissatisfied as a result, and plotted to murder Yang Hui and others.

古文：邠等已死。又遣供奉官孟业以诏书杀郭威于魏州。
现代文：杨合等人死后，又派供奉官孟业持诏书到魏州杀郭威。
English: After the death of Yang He and others, Meng Ye, the offering official, was sent to Weizhou to kill Guo Wei with an imperial edict.

古文：威举兵反，隐帝遣左神武统军袁泬、侍卫马军都指挥使阎晋卿等率兵拒威于澶渊。
现代文：郭威起兵反叛，漠隐帝派左神武统军袁峩、侍卫马军都指挥使间晋卿等人率兵在澶渊抵抗郭威。
English: Guo Wei raised an army to rebel, and the vague emperor sent the Left Shenwu United Army, Yuan Shun, and the Horse Guards Army to command the envoys, and Jin Ching and others led the army to resist Guo Wei in Suiyuan.

古文：兵未出，威已至滑州，帝大惧，谓大臣曰： 昨太草草耳。 业请出府库以赉军，宰相苏禹珪以为未可，业拜禹珪于帝前曰： 相公且为官家勿惜府库。 
现代文：还未出兵，郭威已到滑州，皇帝十分恐惧，对大臣说： 过去太草率了 李业请求拿出府库中的钱财赏赐军队，宰相苏禹珪认为不行，李业在皇帝面前问苏禹珪下拜说： 相公应为皇帝着想不要吝惜府库钱财。 
English: Before the dispatch of troops, Guo Wei had already arrived in Slanting. The emperor was very frightened and said to the minister: It was too hasty in the past. Liye asked to take out the money in the treasury to reward the army. Prime Minister Su Yuchen thought it was not possible. Liye asked Su Yuchen in front of the emperor and said: The emperor should not be stingy with the treasury for the sake of the emperor.

古文：乃诏赐京师兵及魏兵从威南者钱人十千，督其子弟作书，以告北兵之来者。
现代文：于是下诏赏赐京师士兵和随郭威向南的魏州士兵每人钱十干，督促他们的子弟写信，以便告知从北面来的军队。
English: Therefore, the emperor rewarded the soldiers of the Beijing Division and the soldiers of Weizhou who followed Guo Wei to the south with ten pieces of money each, and urged their sons to write letters in order to inform the army coming from the north.

古文：及汉兵败于北郊，业取内库金宝，怀之以奔其兄保义军节度使洪信，洪信拒而不纳。
现代文：到汉兵在北郊被打败时，李业拿走国库的金银珠宝，带着它们投奔他的哥哥保义军节度使李洪信，李洪信拒不接受。
English: When the Han soldiers were defeated in the northern suburbs, Li Ye took the gold, silver and jewels of the national treasury and took them with him to join his brother to protect the rebel army.

古文：业走至绛州，为人所杀。
现代文：李业逃到绛州，被人杀死。
English: Li Ye fled to Ganzhou and was killed.

古文：○聂文进
现代文：亟文进，并州人。
English: He is a member of the Communist Party of China.

古文：聂文进，并州人也。少为军卒，善书算，给事汉高祖帐中。
现代文：年轻时当兵，擅长写字算术，在汉高祖手下做事汉高祖镇守太原，任为押司官。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier, good at writing and arithmetic, and worked under Hango Zu. Hango Zu guarded Taiyuan and was appointed as an officer.

古文：高祖镇太原，以为押司官。高祖即位，历拜领军屯卫将军、枢密院承旨。
现代文：汉高祖即位，历拜为领军屯卫将军、枢密院承旨。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, and Li Bai became the leader of the army, the general of the garrison, and the successor to the Privy Council.

古文：周太祖为枢密使，颇亲信之，文进稍横恣。
现代文：周太祖任枢密使，十分亲近信任他，聂文进逐渐专横放肆。
English: Zhou Taizu was a privy councillor, and trusted him very closely. Zou Wenjin gradually became more and more arrogant.

古文：迁右领军大将军，入谢，召诸将军设食朝堂，仪鸾、翰林、御厨供帐饮食，文进自如，有司不敢劾。
现代文：升任右领军大将军，进宫辞谢，召各将军在朝堂设宴，仪鸾、翰林、御厨供给饮食，聂文进神态自如，官府不敢弹劾他。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand leader of the army, entered the palace to offer his resignation, summoned the generals to hold a banquet in the imperial hall, and provided food and drink at the ceremonial table, the hall of fame, and the imperial kitchen. He was so relaxed that the government did not dare to impeach him.

古文：周太祖镇鄴，文进等用事居中，及谋杀杨邠等，文进夜作诏书，制置中外。
现代文：周太祖镇守邺都，聂文进等人在朝廷专权，到谋杀杨郇等人时，聂文进晚上写诏书，向中外发布。
English: Zhou Taizu's town guarded the capital of Shandong Province, and Nie Wenjin and others had exclusive power in the imperial court. When it came to the murder of Yang Hui and others, Nie Wenjin wrote an edict in the evening and issued it to China and abroad.

古文：邠等已死，文进点阅兵籍，指麾杀戮，以为己任。
现代文：杨邰等人死后，聂文进点阅军队名册，指挥杀人，以此焉自己的职责。
English: After the death of Yang Hui and others, Yan Wen read the army roster and commanded the killing, thus fulfilling his duties.

古文：周太祖在鄴闻邠等遇害，初以为文进不与，及发诏书，皆文进手迹，乃大诟之。
现代文：周太祖在邺都听说杨合等人被杀，最初以为聂文进没有参与，到打开诏书时，看到都是聂文进的笔迹，于是大骂他。
English: Zhou Taizu heard that Yang He and others were killed in Shudu. At first, he thought that Zou Wenzhin was not involved. When he opened the edict, he saw that it was all in Zou Wenzhin's handwriting, so he scolded him.

古文：周兵至京师，隐帝败于北郊，太后惧，使谓文进善卫帝，对曰： 臣在此，百郭威何害！ 
现代文：周兵到达京师，汉隐帝在北郊被打败，太后恐惧，派人叫聂文进好好保护皇帝，回答说： 我在这里，一百个郭威又有什么妨害！ 
English: Zhou soldiers arrived at the Beijing Division, Emperor Han was defeated in the northern suburbs, and the Empress Dowager was afraid. She sent someone to ask Gong Wenjin to protect the emperor well, and replied: I am here, what is the hindrance of a hundred Guo Wei!

古文：慕容彦超败走，帝宿于七里，文进夜与其徒饮酒，歌呼自若。
现代文：慕容彦超败逃，皇帝住在七里，聂文进晚上和朋友饮酒，若无其事地唱歌喊叫。
English: Murongyan was defeated and fled, the emperor lived in Qili, Zou Wenzhong drank alcohol with his friends in the evening, and sang and shouted as if nothing had happened.

古文：明旦，隐帝遇弑，文进亦自杀。
现代文：第二天早晨，汉隐帝被杀，聂文进也自杀了。
English: The next morning, Emperor Han Yin was killed, and Gong Wenjin also committed suicide.

古文：○后赞后赞，兗州瑕丘人。
现代文：后赞，兖州瑕丘人。
English: After praise, Zhangzhou Keqiu people.

古文：其母，倡也。
现代文：他的母亲是歌妓。
English: His mother was a geisha.

古文：赞幼善讴，事张延朗。
现代文：后赞从小擅长唱歌，跟随张延朗。
English: Houzan has been good at singing since childhood, following Zhang Yanlang.

古文：延朗死，赞更事汉高祖，高祖爱之，以为牙将。
现代文：张延朗死后，后赞又跟随漠高祖，漠高祖喜欢他，任为牙将。
English: After Zhang Yanlang's death, Houzan followed Mogao Zu again. Mogao Zu liked him and appointed him as commander.

古文：高祖即位，拜飞龙使，隐帝尤爱幸之。
现代文：漠高祖即位，拜为飞龙使，漠隐帝特别喜欢宠爱他。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended the throne, he was worshipped as the flying dragon envoy. Emperor Qianlong especially liked and favored him.

古文：杨邠等执政，赞久不得迁，乃共谋杀邠等。
现代文：杨合等人执政，后赞很久得不到升任，于是合谋杀掉杨郇等人。
English: Yang He and others were in power, but Hou Zan did not get promoted for a long time, so they conspired to murder Yang Xi and others.

古文：邠等死，隐帝悔之，赞与允明等番休侍帝，不欲左右言已短。
现代文：杨邰等人死棱，漠隐帝后悔，后赞和郭允明等人轮流休息侍奉皇帝，不愿手下人说自己的坏话。
English: Yang Xuan and others were on the brink of death, the vague emperor regretted, Houzan and Guo Yunming and others took turns to rest and serve the emperor, not wanting their subordinates to speak ill of themselves.

古文：隐帝兵败北郊，赞奔兗州，慕容彦超执送京师，枭首于市。
现代文：汉隐帝在北郊被打败，后赞逃奔兖州，慕容彦超抓到他送回京师，斩首示众。
English: Emperor Han Yin was defeated in the northern suburbs, after which Zhang fled to Ganzhou. Murong Yanchao caught him and sent him back to Beijing, where he beheaded him in front of the public.

古文：○郭允明郭允明，少为汉高祖厮养，高祖爱之，以为翰林茶酒使。
现代文：郭允明，少年时为汉高祖的侍儿，汉高祖喜欢他，任马翰林茶酒使。
English: Guo Yunming, when he was a boy, was the waiter of Han Gao Zu. Han Gao Zu liked him and appointed him as Ma Hanlin's tea and wine steward.

古文：隐帝尤狎爱之，允明益骄横无顾避，大臣不能禁。
现代文：汉隐帝特别亲近怜爱他，郭允明更加骄横无所顾忌，大臣们也不能制止。
English: Emperor Han Yin was particularly close to him and loved him, Guo Yunming was even more arrogant and reckless, and the ministers could not stop him.

古文：允明使荆南高保融，车服导从如节度使，保融待之甚厚。
现代文：郭允明出使剂南高保融，车马服饰，随从向导和节度使一样，高保融待他很好。
English: Guo Yunming sent the envoy Nan Gao Bao Rong, car and horse costumes, the attendant guide and the governor were the same, Gao Bao Rong treated him very well.

古文：允明乃阴使人步测其城池高下，若为攻取之计者以动之。
现代文：郭允明于是暗中派人用脚步测量城池高低，好像是在做攻取城池的打算，以便惊动他们。
English: Guo Yunming then secretly sent people to measure the height of the city with their feet, as if they were planning to capture the city, in order to alarm them.

古文：荆人皆恐，保融厚赂以遗之。
现代文：剂南人都恐慌了，高保融用重金贿赂他让他离去。
English: Everyone in Jiangnan panicked. Gao Baorong bribed him with a large sum of money to let him leave.

古文：迁飞龙使。
现代文：升任飞龙使。
English: Promoted to Flying Dragon Envoy.

古文：已而李业与允明谋杀杨邠等，是日无云而昏，雾雨如泣，日中，载邠等十余尸暴之市中。
现代文：不久李业和郭允明谋杀杨郇等人，这天没有云，天色昏暗，蒙蒙雾雨像在哭泣，中午，载着杨郇等人十多具尸体暴露在街上。
English: Soon after, Li Ye and Guo Yunming murdered Yang Hui and others. On this day, there was no cloud, the sky was dark, and the mist and rain seemed to be crying. At noon, more than ten bodies carrying Yang Hui and others were exposed on the street.

古文：允明手杀邠等诸子于朝堂西庑，王章婿张贻肃血流逆注。
现代文：郭允明在朝堂西面廊屋亲手杀死杨郇等人的子女，王章的女婿张贻肃血流如注。
English: Guo Yunming killed the children of Yang Qi and others with his own hands in the gallery on the west side of the imperial hall, and Wang Zhang's son-in-law, Zhang Yuzhuang, bled to death.

古文：隐帝败于北郊，还至封丘门，不得入，帝走赵村，允明从后追之，弑帝于民舍，乃自杀。
现代文：漠隐帝在北郊被打败，回到封丘门，不能进去，逃到赵村，郭允明从后追上，在百姓家中杀死漠隐帝，于是自杀。
English: Mute Emperor was defeated in the northern suburbs, returned to Fengqiu Gate, could not enter, fled to Zhao Village, Guo Yunming caught up with him, killed Mute Emperor in the people's home, and then committed suicide.

