古文：王太尉问眉子： 汝叔名士，何以不相推重？ 
现代文：太尉王衍问儿子王玄： 你叔叔可是个大名士，你为什么不推崇他呢？ 
English: Captain Wang Yan asked his son Wang Xuan: Your uncle is a great celebrity, why don't you praise him?

古文：眉子曰： 何有名士终日妄语？ 
现代文：王玄回答说： 哪有名士整天胡言乱语的！ 
English: Wang Xuan replied: What famous person talks nonsense all day long!

古文：庾元规语周伯仁： 诸人皆以君方乐。 
现代文：庾元规告诉周伯仁说： 大家都拿你和乐氏并列。 
English: "Everyone puts you and Mr. Le on the same level," Yu told Zhou.

古文：周曰： 何乐？
现代文：周伯仁问道： 是哪个乐氏？
English: Zhou Boren asked: Which Le?

古文：谓乐毅邪？ 
现代文：是指的乐毅吗？ 
English: Does it refer to Le Yi?

古文：庾曰： 不尔。乐令耳！ 
现代文：庾元规说： 不是这样，是乐令啊。 
English: Yuanyuan said, "It's not that, it's the music."

古文：周曰： 何乃刻画无盐，以唐突西子也。 
现代文：周伯仁说： 怎么竟美化无盐来亵渎西施呢？ 
English: Zhou Boren said: How is it possible to beautify the salt-free to desecrate the salt?

古文：深公云： 人谓庾元规名士，胸中柴棘三斗许。 
现代文：竺法深说： 有人评论庾元规是名士，可是他心里隐藏的柴棘，恐怕有三斗之多！ 
English: Gong Faxian said: Some people have commented that Gong Yuanbai is a celebrity, but the thorns hidden in his heart are probably as many as three dozen!

古文：庾公权重，足倾王公。
现代文：庾元规权势非常大，足以超过王导。
English: Xuan Gui's power is very large, enough to surpass Wang Du.

古文：庾在石头，王在冶城坐。
现代文：庾元规在石头城，王导则在冶城坐镇。
English: Yu Yuanjie is in Stone Town, while Wang Duan is in Metal Town.

古文：大风扬尘，王以扇拂尘曰： 元规尘污人！ 
现代文：一次，大风扬起了尘土，王导用扇子扇掉尘土说： 从庾亮那吹来的尘沙太玷污人啦。 
English: Once, a strong wind kicked up dust. Wang Du used a fan to blow away the dust and said, "The dust and sand blowing from the sun is too polluting.

古文：王右军少时甚涩讷，在大将军许，王、庾二公后来，右军便起欲去。
现代文：右军将军王菱之少年时很不善于说话。他在大将军王敦府上，王导和庾元规两人后到，王羲之便站起来要走。
English: When he was a boy, Wang Lingshi, the general of the Right Army, was not very good at speaking. When he arrived at the headquarters of the great general Wang Dunfu, he was followed by two people, Wang Du and Xuan Yuanbi. Wang Lingshi then stood up to leave.

古文：大将军留之曰： 尔家司空、元规，复可所难？ 
现代文：王敦挽留他，说： 是你家的司空和元规两人，又为难什么呢！ 
English: Wang Dun held him back and said, "It's the two of you, Sifu and Yuan Gui, what's the problem?

古文：王丞相轻蔡公，曰： 我与安期、千里共游洛水边，何处闻有蔡充儿？ 
现代文：丞相王导很看不起蔡谟，说： 我和安期、千里一道在洛水之滨游览时，哪里听说有蔡充的儿子呢！ 
English: The chancellor Wang Du looked down on Cai Mu, saying: "When I and An Zi traveled thousands of miles together to visit the Luoshui coast, where did I hear that there was a son of Cai Chong?

古文：褚太傅初渡江，尝入东，至金昌亭。
现代文：太傅褚季野刚到江南时，曾经去到吴郡，到了金昌亭。
English: When Taifu Qian Qino first came to the south of the Yangtze River, he went to Wuxian County and came to Jinchang Pavilion.

古文：吴中豪右，燕集亭中。
现代文：吴地的豪门大族，正在亭中聚会宴饮。
English: The great families of Wu are having a banquet in a pavilion.

古文：褚公虽素有重名，于时造次不相识别。
现代文：褚季野虽然一向有很高的名声，但当时匆忙之间，那些人并不认识他。
English: Although Sakino has always had a high reputation, those people did not know him at that time in a hurry.

古文：敕左右多与茗汁，少箸粽，汁尽辄益，使终不得食。
现代文：就另外吩咐手下人多给他茶水，少放蜜饯，茶喝完了就添上，让他始终也吃不上碗底的食物。
English: In addition, he ordered his subordinates to give him more tea, less honey, and to add it after drinking tea, so that he could not eat the food at the bottom of the bowl.

古文：褚公饮讫，徐举手共语云： 褚季野！ 
现代文：褚季野喝完茶，慢慢和大家作揖、谈话，说： 我是褚季野。 
English: After drinking tea, Sakino slowly made small talk with everyone and said, "I'm Sakino.

古文：于是四座惊散，无不狼狈。
现代文：于是满座的人惊慌地散开，个个进退两难。
English: As a result, everyone in the auditorium panicked and scattered, leaving everyone in a dilemma.

古文：王右军在南，丞相与书，每叹子侄不令。云： 虎、虎犊，还其所如。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之在南方，丞相王导给他写信，常常慨叹子侄辈才质平庸，说： 虎豚、虎犊，正像他们的名字一样。 
English: Wang Xizhi, general of the Right Army, was in the south, and the prime minister Wang Yuandao wrote to him, often lamenting the mediocre talent of his nephews and nieces, saying: "Tiger pig, tiger pig, just like their names.

古文：褚太傅南下，孙长乐于船中视之。
现代文：褚裒南下时，长乐侯孙绰到船上去看望他。
English: When he was sailing south, Chao Le Hou Son Chuang went to the ship to visit him.

古文：言次，及刘真长死，孙流涕，因讽咏曰： 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。 
现代文：言谈中提及刘惔之死，孙绰流着眼泪吟诵 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁 的诗句。
English: In the conversation, the death of Liu Ye was mentioned, and Sun Cao, with tears streaming down his face, recited the poem "The Cloud of People's Death" by Bang Guoxuan.

古文：褚大怒曰： 真长平生，何尝相比数，而卿今日作此面向人！ 
现代文：褚裒大怒，说： 刘惔平生何尝看得起你，而你今天装出这副面孔对大家！ 
English: Zou was furious and said, "Liu Ye has never been able to look up to you in his life, but today you put on this face for everyone!

古文：孙回泣向褚曰： 卿当念我！ 
现代文：孙绰收住泪对褚裒说： 你应该顾惜我的感情！ 
English: Sun Zuo held back his tears and said to Zou: You should be considerate of my feelings!

古文：时咸笑其才而性鄙。
现代文：当时的人都笑话他虽有才学却禀性鄙陋。
English: People at the time joked that although he was talented, he had a mean streak.

古文：谢镇西书与殷扬州，为真长求会稽。殷答曰： 真长标同伐异，侠之大者。
现代文：镇西将军谢尚写信给扬州刺史殷浩，推荐刘真长主管会稽郡，殷浩回信说： 真长是个党同伐异、意气用事的人。
English: Zhenxi General Xie Shang wrote a letter to Yangzhou leader Shi Yinhao, recommending Liu Zhenlong as the head of the county audit committee. Yinhao replied in a letter: "Zhenlong is a party member, a dissident, and a person with a strong will.

古文：常谓使君降阶为甚，乃复为之驱驰邪？ 
现代文：我常觉得您降低身份与他交往已经很过分了，可竟然还要为他奔走求官吗？ 
English: I often think that it's too much for you to lower your status to socialize with him, but do you still have to run for him?

古文：桓公入洛，过淮、泗，践北境，与诸僚属登平乘楼，眺瞩中原，慨然曰： 遂使神州陆沈，百年丘墟，王夷甫诸人，不得不任其责！ 
现代文：桓温进军洛阳，经过淮水、泗水，踏上北方地区，和下属们登上船楼，遥望中原，感慨地说道： 竟使神州国土沉沦，百年之间到处废墟，王夷甫这些人不能免于责任啊！ 
English: Kuan Wen marched into Luoyang, passed through Huai Shui and Surabaya, set foot on the northern region, and boarded the ship tower with his subordinates, looked at the Central Plains from a distance, and said with emotion, "Wang Yifu, these people cannot be exempt from responsibility for causing the decline of the land of Shenzhou, with ruins everywhere for a hundred years!"

古文：袁虎率而对曰： 运自有废兴，岂必诸人之过？ 
现代文：袁虎轻率地回答说： 国家的命运本来有兴有衰，难道一定是这些人的过错吗？ 
English: Yuan Hu replied flippantly, "The fate of a country has its ups and downs. Is it necessarily the fault of these people?

古文：桓公懔然作色，顾谓四坐曰： 诸君颇闻刘景升不？
现代文：桓温神色严肃，面露怒容，环顾满座的人说： 诸位多少都听说过刘景升的故事吧？
English: Looking serious and angry, Kuan Wen looked around at the audience and said: Have you all heard the story of Liu Jingsheng?

古文：有大牛重千斤，啖刍豆十倍于常牛，负重致远，曾不若一羸牸。
现代文：他有一头千斤重的大牛，吃的草料，比普通牛多十倍，可是令它驮着重物走远路，还比不上一头羸弱的母牛。
English: He has a big cow that weighs a thousand pounds and eats ten times more grass than an ordinary cow, but it can't carry heavy loads for long distances like a weak cow.

古文：魏武入荆州，烹以飨士卒，于时莫不称快。 
现代文：魏武帝进入荆州后，把大牛杀了来慰劳士兵，当时没有人不拍手称好的。 
English: After Emperor Weiwu entered Jingzhou, he killed a bull to comfort the soldiers. At that time, no one did not clap their hands to congratulate him.

古文：意以况袁。
现代文：桓温本意是用大牛来比拟袁虎。
English: Kuan Wen's intention was to compare Yuan Hu to a cow.

古文：四坐既骇，袁亦失色。
现代文：满座的人都震惊了，而袁宏也大惊失色。
English: Everyone in the auditorium was shocked, and Yuan Hong was also shocked.

古文：袁虎、伏滔同在桓公府。
现代文：袁虎和伏滔一同在桓温的大司马府中任职。
English: Yuan Hu and Futao both served in the Taiji Horse Office in Kuanwen.

古文：桓公每游燕，辄命袁、伏，袁甚耻之，恒叹曰： 公之厚意，未足以荣国士！与伏滔比肩，亦何辱如之？ 
现代文：桓温每逢游乐宴饮，就叫袁虎和伏滔陪同。袁虎对此感到非常羞愧，常常对桓温叹息说： 您的深厚情意，不足以使国士感到光荣；把我和伏滔同等看待，还有什么耻辱比得上这个呢！ 
English: Whenever Kuan Wen had a banquet, he would invite Yuan Hu and Futao to accompany him. Yuan Hu was very ashamed of this, and often sighed to Kuan Wen, "Your deep feelings are not enough to make a statesman feel honored; if you treat me and Futao as equals, what disgrace can compare to this!"

古文：高柔在东，甚为谢仁祖所重。
现代文：高柔在东边，深为谢仁祖所敬重。
English: Goju, in the east, is deeply revered by Emperor Xie.

古文：既出，不为王、刘所知。
现代文：到京都以后，不被王濛、刘真长所赏识。
English: After arriving in Kyoto, he was not appreciated by Wang Xi and Liu Zhenang.

古文：仁祖曰： 近见高柔，大自敷奏，然未有所得。 
现代文：仁祖说： 近来看见高柔大力地呈上奏章，然而没有什么效果。 
English: Nizu said: "Recently, we have seen Goju vigorously present the movement, but there is no effect.

古文：真长云： 故不可在偏地居，轻在角中，为人作议论。 
现代文：刘真长说： 本来就不能在偏僻的地方居住，随便地住在一个角落，不过是被人当作议论的对象。 
English: Liu Zhenchang said: Originally, it was not possible to live in a remote place, just living in a corner, but being treated as an object of discussion.

古文：高柔闻之，云： 我就伊无所求。 
现代文：高柔听到这句话，说： 我和他交往并不图什么。 
English: When Gao Ru heard this, she said, "I have no intention of getting involved with him.

古文：人有向真长学此言者，真长曰： 我寔亦无可与伊者。 
现代文：有人拿这句话向刘真长学舌，刘真长说： 我实在也没有什么东西可给他。 
English: Someone took this sentence to Liu Zhenlong to learn the language, Liu Zhenlong said: I really have nothing to give him.

古文：然游燕犹与诸人书： 可要安固？ 
现代文：然而游乐宴饮时还是给各位写信说： 可以邀请安固。 
English: However, he still wrote to everyone during the banquet and said, "You can invite Anggu."

古文：安固者，高柔也。
现代文：安固，就是高柔。
English: To be secure is to be flexible.

古文：刘尹、江虨、王叔虎、孙兴公同坐，江、王有相轻色。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔、江虨、王叔虎、孙兴公坐在一起，江虨和王叔虎露出互相轻视的神色。
English: Danyang Yin Liuqi, Jiang Chen, Wang Shuguo and Sun Xinggong sat together. Jiang Chen and Wang Shuguo showed their contempt for each other.

古文：虨以手歙叔虎云： 酷吏！ 
现代文：江虨用手捅一下王叔虎说： 残暴的官吏！ 
English: Jiang Chen slapped Wang Shuhe with his hand and said: "Cruel officials!

古文：词色甚强。
现代文：辞色很强硬。
English: The language is very strong.

古文：刘尹顾谓： 此是瞋邪？
现代文：刘惔看着他说： 这是生气吗？
English: Liu Ye looked at him and said, "Is this anger?"

古文：非特是丑言声，拙视瞻。 
现代文：不只是说话难听，眼神拙劣吧！ 
English: It's not just the speech that's bad, it's the eyes!

古文：孙绰作列仙商丘子赞曰： 所牧何物？
现代文：孙绰作《列仙传·商丘子赞》，其中写道： 所放牧的是什么？
English: Sun Zhuo wrote "Record of Immortals, Praise of Merchants," in which he wrote: What is grazing?

古文：殆非真猪。
现代文：恐怕不是真正的猪。
English: Not a real pig, I'm afraid.

古文：傥遇风云，为我龙摅。 
现代文：有朝一日遇到风云变化，会载着我像龙一样飞腾而去。 
English: One day, when I encounter a change in the wind and clouds, it will carry me away like a dragon.

古文：时人多以为能。
现代文：当时的人大都认为他有才能。
English: Most people at the time thought he had talent.

古文：王蓝田语人云： 近见孙家儿作文，道何物、真猪也。 
现代文：蓝田侯王述告诉别人说： 近来看见孙家那小子写文章，说什么何物。真猪呢。 
English: Lantian Hou Wang told others: Recently, I came to see that boy from the Sun family writing an article, what did he say? What about the real pig?

古文：桓公欲迁都，以张拓定之业。
现代文：桓温想迁都洛阳，以开拓功业，统领疆土。
English: Kuan Wen wanted to move the capital to Luoyang in order to develop his career and rule the territory.

古文：孙长乐上表，谏此议甚有理。
现代文：但孙绰上表进谏，反对这个建议，言辞很有道理。
English: However, Sun Cuo went on the record to oppose this suggestion, and his words were very reasonable.

古文：桓见表心服，而忿其为异，令人致意孙云： 君何不寻遂初赋，而强知人家国事？ 
现代文：桓温见了，心中暗暗佩服，但不满他和自己作对，于是令人传话给他说： 你为什么不去复习《遂初赋》，却偏要过问我的国家大事！ 
English: Kan-Wen saw it and secretly admired it in his heart, but he was not happy that he was working against himself, so he sent a message to him: Why don't you go to review "So-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so-so

古文：孙长乐兄弟就谢公宿，言至款杂。
现代文：长乐侯孙绰兄弟到谢安家住宿，言谈非常空洞、杂乱。
English: When the Chungle brothers, the Hou Sunchuo brothers, came to stay at Xie An's house, their talk was very empty and disorderly.

古文：刘夫人在壁后听之，具闻其语。
现代文：谢安妻子刘夫人在隔壁听，全都听到了他们的谈话。
English: Xie An's wife, Mrs. Liu, was listening next door, and they all heard their conversation.

古文：谢公明日还，问： 昨客何似？ 刘对曰： 亡兄门，未有如此宾客！ 
现代文：谢安第二天回到内室，问刘夫人昨晚的客人怎么样，刘夫人回答说： 亡兄家里从来没有过这样的宾客。 
English: Xie An returned to the inner room the next day and asked Mrs. Liu how last night's guest was. Mrs. Liu replied: My late brother's family has never had such a guest.

古文：谢深有愧色。
现代文：谢安脸色很羞愧。
English: Xie An looked very ashamed.

古文：简文与许玄度共语，许云： 举君、亲以为难。 
现代文：简文帝和许玄度在一起谈话，许玄度说： 我认为选拔忠孝两全的人是困难的。 
English: Emperor Jianwen and Xu Xundu were talking together, and Xu Xundu said: I think it is difficult to select a person who is both loyal and filial.

古文：简文便不复答。许去后而言曰： 玄度故可不至于此！ 
现代文：简文帝便不再回答，许玄度离开以后才说： 玄度本来可以不说这种话。 
English: Emperor Jianwen no longer answered, and only said after Xu Xundu left: Xundu could have avoided saying such a thing.

古文：谢万寿春败后，还，书与王右军云： 惭负宿顾。 
现代文：谢万在寿春失败后，回来，给右军将军王羲之写信说： 我很惭愧，辜负了你一向对我的关怀照顾。 
English: After Xie Wan's defeat in Shuchun, he came back and wrote a letter to Wang Xizhi, the right-wing general, saying, "I am ashamed that I have failed to live up to the care and concern you have always shown me.

古文：右军推书曰： 此禹、汤之戒。 
现代文：王羲之推开信说： 这是夏禹、商汤那种警诫自己的话。 
English: Wang Xizhi opened the letter and said: This is the kind of words of caution that Xia Yu and Shang Tang use.

古文：蔡伯喈睹睐笛椽，孙兴公听妓，振且摆折。
现代文：蔡伯喈观察竹椽子而做成竹笛，孙兴公听伎乐时用来打拍子，抖动摇晃，折断了。
English: Cai Boqin observed the bamboo dice and made a bamboo flute. Sun Xinggong used to beat the dice when listening to music. The dice shook and broke.

古文：王右军闻，大嗔曰： 三祖寿乐器，虺瓦吊，孙家儿打折。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之听说，非常生气地说： 祖上三代保存的乐器，没有心肝的东西！竟被孙家那小子打断了。 
English: Upon hearing of this, Wang Xizhi, the right-wing general, became very angry and said, "A musical instrument that has been preserved for three generations is nothing to be cherished! It was actually interrupted by the young man from the Sun family.

古文：王中郎与林公绝不相得。
现代文：北中郎将王坦之和支道林非常合不来。
English: Kitanakura couldn't quite make the connection between Wang Tanzhi and the branch forest.

古文：王谓林公诡辩，林公道王云： 箸腻颜帢，布单衣，挟左传，逐郑康成车后，问是何物尘垢囊！ 
现代文：王坦之认为支道林只会诡辩，支道林批评王坦之说： 戴着油腻的古帽，穿着布制单衣，夹着《左传》，跟在郑康成的车子后面跑。试问这是什么尘垢口袋！ 
English: Wang Tanzhi thought that Shih Dorlin would only use sophistry, but Shih Dorlin criticized Wang Tanzhi saying: Wearing a greasy old cap, wearing a cloth singlet, holding "Zhuo Chuan," running behind Zheng Kangcheng's car. Ask what kind of dirt bag this is!

古文：孙长乐作王长史诔云： 余与夫子，交非势利，心犹澄水，同此玄味。 
现代文：长乐侯孙绰给司徒左长史王濛写诔文，说： 余与夫子，交非势利；心犹澄水，同此玄味。 
English: Sun Cao, a vassal of Changle, wrote an encomium to the left-wing prefect of Szechuan, Shi Wangtao, saying: I am not a snob with my husband; my heart is still clear water, with this dark taste.

古文：王孝伯见曰： 才士不逊，亡祖何至与此人周旋！ 
现代文：王孝伯看后说： 文人不谦虚，亡祖何至于跟这种人交往！ 
English: After reading it, Wang Xiao Bo said: The literati are not modest, how could the late ancestor associate with such people!

古文：谢太傅谓子侄曰： 中郎始是独有千载！ 
现代文：太傅谢安对子侄们说： 谢万才是千百年来独一无二的。 
English: Father Xie An said to his nephews: Xie Wan is unique in thousands of years.

古文：车骑曰： 中郎衿抱未虚，复那得独有？ 
现代文：车骑将军谢玄说： 中郎胸怀不够开阔，又怎么能独有声名！ 
English: The cavalry general Xie Xuan said: Zhong Lang is not broad-minded enough, how can he have a unique reputation!

古文：庾道季诧谢公曰： 裴郎云： 谢安谓裴郎乃可不恶，何得为复饮酒？ 
现代文：庾道季告诉谢安说： 裴郎说 谢安认为裴郎却是不错，怎么会又喝酒！ 
English: Gong Doji told Xie An: Pei Lang said that Xie An thought that Pei Lang was good, how could he drink again!

古文：裴郎又云： 谢安目支道林，如九方皋之相马，略其玄黄，取其俊逸。  
现代文：裴郎又说： 谢安评论支道林如同九方皋相马一样，不去看马的毛色，只注意马的非凡善跑。 
English: Pei Lang also said: Xie An commented that the branch road forest is like the horse of the horse, without looking at the horse's hair color, only paying attention to the horse's extraordinary good running.

古文：谢公云： 都无此二语，裴自为此辞耳！ 
现代文：谢安说： 根本没有说过这两句话，是裴启自己编造的呀。 
English: Xie An said, "I never said these two sentences, it was made up by Pei Qi himself."

古文：庾意甚不以为好，因陈东亭经酒垆下赋。
现代文：庾道季心里很不以为然，便读出东亭侯王珣《经酒垆下赋》。
English: Unimpressed, Gong Doji read out Dongting Hou Wangyao's "After Drinking."

古文：读毕，都不下赏裁，直云： 君乃复作裴氏学！ 
现代文：朗读完了，谢安一点也不评论好坏，只是说： 你竟然做起裴氏的学问！ 
English: After reading aloud, Xie An did not comment on the good or bad at all, but only said: You actually started learning from Pei!

古文：于此语林遂废。
现代文：从此《语林》便不再流传了。
English: Since then, "Language Forest" is no longer in circulation.

古文：今时有者，皆是先写，无复谢语。
现代文：现在流传下来的，都是先前的抄本，再也没有谢安的话。
English: What has been passed down to us now are all earlier transcripts, and there are no more words of thanks.

古文：王北中郎不为林公所知，乃箸论沙门不得为高士论。
现代文：北中郎将王但之不被支道林所赏识，便著述《沙门不得为高士论》。
English: Kitanakuchiro wrote "Shaman must not be a high-ranking official" after King Danzhi was not appreciated by the tributary forests.

古文：大略云： 高士必在于纵心调畅，沙门虽云俗外，反更束于教，非情性自得之谓也。 
现代文：大致说： 隐士一定处在随心所欲、心境谐调舒畅的境界。和尚虽然是置身世外，反而更加受到宗教的束缚，说明他们的本性并非悠闲自得。 
English: Roughly speaking: hermits must be in the realm of free will and a harmonious and comfortable state of mind. Monks, although they are outside the world, are more bound by religion, indicating that their nature is not leisurely.

古文：人问顾长康： 何以不作洛生咏？ 
现代文：有人问顾长康： 为什么不模仿洛阳书生读书的声音来咏诗呢？ 
English: Someone asked Gu Changkang: Why not imitate Luoyang students' reading voices to recite poetry?

古文：答曰： 何至作老婢声！ 
现代文：顾长康回答说： 何至于模仿老女仆的声音！ 
English: Gu Changkang replied, "What about imitating the old maid's voice!

古文：殷顗、庾恒并是谢镇西外孙。
现代文：殷、庾恒都是镇西将军谢尚的外孙。
English: Both Yin and Yu Heng are the grandchildren of Zhenxi General Xie Shang.

古文：殷少而率悟，庾每不推。
现代文：殷年少时就聪明直率，有悟性，庾恒却不这样认为。
English: When Yin was young, he was smart, straightforward, and insightful, but he did not think so.

古文：尝俱诣谢公，谢公熟视殷曰： 阿巢故似镇西。 
现代文：有一次他们都去拜访谢安，谢安仔细看着殷说： 阿巢原来像镇西。 
English: Once they all went to visit Xie An. Xie An looked at Yin carefully and said: Ah Xie used to look like Zhen Xi.

古文：于是庾下声语曰： 定何似？ 
现代文：于是，庾恒低声问道： 到底哪里像？ 
English: As a result, Zou Heng asked in a low voice: Where exactly is the resemblance?

古文：谢公续复云： 巢颊似镇西。 
现代文：谢安接着又说： 殷觊的脸颊长得像谢尚。 
English: Xie An went on to say, "Xie An's cheeks look like Xie Shang's.

古文：庾复云： 颊似，足作健不？ 
现代文：庾恒又问： 只是脸颊像，就能成为强者吗？ 
English: Pu Heng also asked: Can you become a strong person just by looking like someone?

古文：旧目韩康伯：将肘无风骨。
现代文：过去人们评论韩康伯是：即使用力捏着他的胳膊肘儿，也摸不到他的骨头在哪里。
English: In the past, people commented on Han Kangbo that even if they squeezed his elbow with force, they could not feel where his bones were.

古文：符宏叛来归国。
现代文：苻宏逃到东晋，谢安很赏识他，常引为座上宾。
English: Yan Hong fled to East Jin. Xie An appreciated him very much and often invited him as a guest.

古文：谢太傅每加接引，宏自以有才，多好上人，坐上无折之者。
现代文：苻宏自以为很有才气，喜欢凌驾于别人之上，座上没有人能折服他。
English: Hao Hong thinks he is very talented and likes to be above others. No one in the audience can beat him.

古文：适王子猷来，太傅使共语。
现代文：正好王徽之来，谢安让他们俩聊聊。
English: Just as Wang Hui arrived, Xie An let the two of them chat.

古文：子猷直孰视良久，回语太傅云： 亦复竟不异人！ 
现代文：王徽之只是盯着苻宏瞧了很久，回身对谢安说： 竟然也和常人没什么区别啊。 
English: Wang Huizhi just stared at Zou Hong for a long time, turned to Xie An and said, "It's no different from ordinary people."

古文：宏大惭而退。
现代文：苻宏非常羞愧地告退了。
English: Yan Hong retreated in shame.

古文：支道林入东，见王子猷兄弟。
现代文：支道林到会稽去，见到了王子猷兄弟。
English: Shidolin went to the auditorium and saw the princes and brothers.

古文：还，人问： 见诸王何如？ 
现代文：等到他回到京都，有人问： 你觉得王氏兄弟怎么样？ 
English: When he returned to Kyoto, someone asked: What do you think of the Wang brothers?

古文：答曰： 见一群白颈乌，但闻唤哑哑声。 
现代文：支道林回答说： 看见一群白脖子乌鸦，只听到哑哑叫。 
English: The branch forest replied: I saw a group of white-necked crows, but only heard muffled calls.

古文：王中郎举许玄度为吏部郎。郗重熙曰： 相王好事，不可使阿讷在坐。 
现代文：从事中郎王坦之推荐许玄度任吏部郎，郗重熙说： 相王喜欢管事，不可让阿讷在座。 
English: Engaged in the recommendation of the middle son, Wang Tan, to appoint Xu Xuandu as the secretary, Zou Chongxi said: The king likes to be in charge, and cannot let An'e be present.

古文：王兴道谓：谢望蔡霍霍如失鹰师。
现代文：王兴道评论望蔡公谢琰说： 来去匆匆像个丢了鹰的鹰师。 
English: Wang Xingdao said of Wang Cai Gong Xiejun, "He comes and goes like a falconer who has lost his eagle.

古文：桓南郡每见人不快，辄嗔云： 君得哀家梨，当复不烝食不？ 
现代文：南郡公桓玄每当看见的笨拙，就很生气的说： 您得到我家的梨，该不会蒸着吃吧？ 
English: Whenever he saw the clumsiness of Nan County's Prince Huan Xuan, he would angrily say: You got my pear, shouldn't you eat it steamed?

