古文：秦武王谓甘茂曰： 寡人欲车通三川，以窥周室，而寡人死不朽乎? 
现代文：秦王对甘茂说： 我想出兵向东进攻三川，取代周室，这样的话，寡人死了也会流芳百世。 
English: Qin Wang said to Gan Mao: I want to send troops to the east to attack Mikawa and replace Zhou Shuxu. In this case, even if many people die, they will be remembered for a hundred generations.

古文：甘茂对曰： 请之魏，约伐韩。 
现代文：甘茂说： 我要求去魏国与他们联合，共同攻打韩国。 
English: Gammao said, "I demand to go to Wei to unite with them and jointly attack Korea."

古文：王令向寿辅行。
现代文：于是，武王派亲信向寿做甘茂的副使出使魏国。
English: As a result, King Wu sent a close confidant to Shou to be the deputy envoy of Ganmao to Wei.

古文：甘茂至魏，谓向寿： 子归，告王曰： 魏听臣矣，然愿王勿攻也。 
现代文：甘茂来到魏国，对向寿说： 您回去告诉武王说： 魏王已同意我的约定。
English: When Ganmao came to Wei, he said to Xiangshou, "You should go back and tell King Wu, 'The King of Wei has agreed to my terms.

古文：事成，尽以为子功。 
现代文：但希望大王不要进攻韩国。 当大事成功之后，所有功劳全部归于您。 
English: When it's all over, you'll get all the credit.

古文：向寿归以告王，王迎甘茂于息壤。
现代文：向寿回到秦国，把这话告诉了武王，武王便到息壤这个地方迎接甘茂。
English: When Xiang Shou returned to Qin, he told this to King Wu, who then went to this place to meet Gan Mao.

古文：甘茂至，王问其故。
现代文：甘茂到了息壤，武王问他为什么不进攻韩国？
English: When Gammao arrived at his resting place, King Wu asked him why he did not attack Korea first.

古文：对曰： 宜阳，大县也，上党、南阳积之久矣，名为县，其实郡也。
现代文：甘茂回答说： 要进兵三川，必须先攻下宜阳，宜阳是韩国的大城邑，是上党和南阳两郡间的交通要道，长期以来，在宜阳积聚了两地的人力和财物，它名义是县，实际上相当一个郡。
English: Gammao replied, "In order to invade the Three Rivers, we must first capture Yiyang. Yiyang is a large city in South Korea, and it is an important transportation route between Shangdang and Nanyang counties. For a long time, the manpower and property of the two places have been accumulated in Yiyang. It is nominally a county, but it is actually quite a county.

古文：今王倍数险，行千里而攻之，难矣。
现代文：现在大王的军队要经过重重险阻，跋涉千里去攻打宜阳，实在太难了啊！
English: Now the great king's army has to go through many dangerous obstacles and travel thousands of miles to attack Yiyang. It's really too difficult!

古文：臣闻张仪西并巴、蜀之地，北取西河之外，南取上庸，天下不以为多张仪而贤先王。
现代文：我听说，张仪西并巴、蜀，北取河西，南占上庸，诸侯并不因此就称赞张仪的能力，却称颂先王的贤明。
English: I have heard that Zhang Yi annexed Ba, Shu in the west, Hexi in the north, and Shangyong in the south. The princes did not praise Zhang Yi's ability for this, but praised the wisdom of the former king.

古文：魏文侯令乐羊将，攻中山，三年而拔之，乐羊反而语功，文侯示之谤书一箧，乐羊再拜稽首曰： 此非臣之功，主君之力也。 
现代文：魏文侯派乐羊为将，进攻中山，三年就灭掉了中山。乐羊返回魏国，称道自己的战功。魏文侯拿出整整一箱群臣诽谤指责他的书信给他看，乐羊赶紧接受了文侯的批评，心悦诚服地说： 这不是我的功劳，全是主君的功劳！ 
English: Wei Wenhou sent Le Yang as a general to attack Zhongshan and wiped out Zhongshan in three years. Le Yang returned to Wei and praised his war exploits. Wei Wenhou took out a whole box of letters from courtiers slandering and accusing him. Le Yang quickly accepted the criticism of Wenhou and said sincerely: This is not my merit, it is all the merit of the master!

古文：今臣羁旅之臣也，樗里疾、公孙衍二人者，挟韩而议，王必听之，是王欺魏，而臣受公仲侈之怨也。
现代文：我现在只不过是寄居在秦国的人，而秦国权臣樗里疾、公孙衍倚仗和韩国的关系，将来如果在攻打宜阳时对我进行非议，从中作梗，大王必会听从。如果这样，大王就欺骗了盟国魏国，而我又会白白招致韩国相国公仲侈的怨恨。
English: I am just a sojourner in Qin right now, but the relations between the Qin sovereign and Korea are strained. If, in the future, when attacking Yiyang, he criticizes me and obstructs me, the Great King will surely listen. If so, the Great King will have deceived the allied state of Wei, and I will have incurred the resentment of my Korean compatriots.

古文：昔者曾子处费，费人有与曾子同名族者而杀人，人告曾子母曰： 曾参杀人。 
现代文：过去曾参住在费地，费地有个与曾参同姓同名的人杀了人。有人告诉曾参的母亲，说： 曾参杀人了。 
English: In the past, Zeng Zhan lived in Feidi. In Feidi, a person with the same surname as Zeng Zhan killed someone. Someone told Zeng Zhan's mother, saying: Zeng Zhan killed someone.

古文：曾子之母曰： 吾子不杀人。 
现代文：曾参的母亲说： 我的儿子是不会杀人的。 
English: Mr Zeng's mother said: "My son would never kill anyone.

古文：织自若。
现代文：她依旧织自己的布。
English: She still knits her own clothes.

古文：有顷焉，人又曰： 曾参杀人。 
现代文：过了一会儿，一个人跑来说： 曾参杀人了。 
English: After a while, a man ran up and said: "I was involved in a murder."

古文：其母尚织自若也。顷之，一人又告之曰： 曾参杀人。 
现代文：曾参的母亲仍然织布。又过了一会，又有人来说： 曾参杀人了。 
English: Zeng Zang's mother was still weaving. After a while, someone else said, "Zeng Zang has committed murder."

古文：其母惧，投杼逾墙而走。
现代文：曾参的母亲便惊恐万状，扔掉梭子，翻过垣墙，逃跑了。
English: Zengsang's mother was so terrified that she threw away the shuttle, climbed over the wall and ran away.

古文：夫以曾参之贤，与母之信也，而三人疑之，则慈母不能信也。
现代文：就连曾参这样贤德的人，他的母亲也会产生疑惑和不信任他。
English: Even for a man of such virtue, his mother would doubt and distrust him.

古文：今臣之贤不及曾子，而王之信臣，又未若曾子之母也，疑臣者不适三人，臣恐王为臣之投杼也。 
现代文：现在我不如曾参贤能，大王相信我又不如曾参的母亲相信曾参，非议我的更是不止三人，我担心大王恐怕会因为我的原因而扔掉梭子啊！ 
English: Now I'm not as good as Zeng Sanzhen, the king believes I'm not as good as Zeng Sanzhen's mother believes Zeng Sanzhen, there are more than three people who criticize me, I'm afraid the king will throw away the shuttle because of me!

古文：王曰： 寡人不听也，请与子盟。 
现代文：武王坚定地说： 我不会信别人的言论，让我们订立盟约吧！ 
English: King Wu said, "I will not listen to them, please let me swear with you."

古文：于是与之盟于息壤。
现代文：于是秦武王和甘茂在息壤订立盟约。
English: As a result, King Qinwu and Ganmao signed a treaty in Sijiao.

古文：果攻宜阳，五月而不能拔也。樗里疾、公孙衍二人在，争之王，王将听之，召甘茂而告之。
现代文：后来甘茂攻打宜阳，五个月还不能攻下，于是樗里疾和公孙衍二人在武王面前进甘茂的谗言，武王几乎都要听信了，因而召回甘茂。
English: Later, Kamo attacked Yiyang, but was unable to take the city for five months. Therefore, Balizhi and Gongsunyan both criticized Kamo in front of King Wu. King Wu was almost convinced and recalled Kamo.

古文：甘茂对曰： 息壤在彼。 
现代文：甘茂到后对武王说： 息壤就在那里！ 
English: When Kamo arrived, he said to King Wu, "There is a resting place right there!"

古文：王曰： 有之。 
现代文：武王不得不说： 很好 。
English: King Wu had to say: Very good.

古文：因悉起兵，复使甘茂攻之，遂拔宜阳。
现代文：这时武王才又坚定信心，动用了全部兵力，继续让甘茂指挥作战，最后终于攻克了宜阳。
English: At this time, King Wu again strengthened his confidence, mobilized all his forces, continued to let Ganmao command the battle, and finally conquered Yiyang.

