古文：曹变蛟，文诏从子也，幼从文诏积军功至游击。
现代文：曹变蛟是曹文诏的侄子，年轻时候随从文诏出兵作战，积累军功做到游击军将。
English: Cao Zhengyu was the nephew of Cao Wenzhao. When he was young, he followed Wenzhao to fight in the war and accumulated military merits to become a guerrilla general.

古文：崇祯四年从复河曲。
现代文：崇祯四年，从军恢复河曲。
English: After serving in the army for four years, he resumed playing the koto.

古文：明年连破贼红军友等于张麻村、陇安、水落城、唐毛山，又破刘道江等于铜川桥，勇冠诸军。
现代文：第二年在张麻村、陇安、水落城、唐毛山连续打败贼兵，又在铜川桥打败刘道江等贼将的队伍，勇冠三军。
English: The next year, in Zhangma Village, Yan'an, Shuilu Town, and Tangmaoshan, they continuously defeated the bandits, and in Tongchuan Bridge, they defeated Liu Daojiang and other bandits, winning the top three.

古文：以御史吴甡荐，进参将。
现代文：因为御史吴生生的推荐，被提升为参将。
English: Because of the recommendation of Mishi Wu Sheng Sheng, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：文诏移山西，变蛟从战辄胜。
现代文：文诏移军驻守山西，变蛟随从他每战必胜。
English: Wen Zhao moved his army to garrison Shanxi, and Zeng Yao followed him to win every battle.

古文：及文诏改镇大同，山西巡抚许鼎臣言： 晋贼紫金梁虽死，老回回、过天星、大天王、蝎子块、闯塌天诸渠未灭。
现代文：等文诏被改派镇守山西大同时，山西巡抚许鼎臣上书说： 山西的贼将紫金梁虽死，但老回回、过天星、大天王、蝎子块、闯塌天等首领还没有消灭。
English: At the same time that Wen Zhao was reassigned to guard Shanxi University, the Shanxi governor Xu Dingchen wrote: Although Shanxi's thief Zijin Liang is dead, the leaders such as Lao Hui, Xing Tian Xing, Da Tian Wang, Scorpion Block, and Xing Xia Tian have not been eliminated.

古文：变蛟骁勇绝人，麾下健儿千百，才乃文诏亚，乞留之晋中。 
现代文：变蛟勇武过人，部下健将千百人，才能仅次于文诏，请把他留在山西吧！ 
English: If you want to be the bravest, the most courageous, and the second only to Wen Zhao, you should leave him in Shanxi!

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七年，群贼入湖广，命变蛟南征。
现代文：七年，贼军进入湖广，朝廷命令变蛟南下征剿。
English: In the seventh year, the bandit army entered Hukang, and the imperial court ordered them to go south to recruit soldiers.

古文：文诏困于大同，又命北援。
现代文：文诏被围困在大同，又命令他北上援救。
English: Wen Zhao was besieged in Datong and ordered him to go north to help.

古文：七月遇大清兵广武，有战功。
现代文：七月在广武与大清兵相遇，立了战功。
English: In July, he met with the Great Qing soldiers in Guangwu and made a great contribution to the war.

古文：其冬，文诏失事论戍，变蛟亦以疾归。
现代文：那年冬天，文诏出了事，被发配充军，变蛟也因病回家去了。
English: That winter, something happened to Wen Zhao, he was assigned to the army, and he also went home due to illness.

古文：明年，文诏起讨陕西贼，变蛟以故官从。
现代文：第二年，文诏被起用，外出征讨山西的贼兵，变蛟以原职随从作战。
English: In the second year, Wen Zhao was appointed to go out to recruit Shanxi's thief soldiers, and changed his position to follow the battle.

古文：大捷金岭川，鏖真宁之湫头镇，皆为军锋。
现代文：在金岭川大捷和真宁湫头镇激战中，变蛟都是军中的前锋。
English: In the fierce battle between Jinlingchuan Dajie and Janning Shantou Town, all of them were forwards in the army.

古文：文诏既战殁，变蛟收溃卒，复成一军。
现代文：文诏在战斗中死去以后，变蛟招回失散的士兵，又编成一军。
English: After Wen Zhao died in the battle, he changed his mind, called back the lost soldiers, and formed an army.

古文：总督洪承畴荐为副总兵，置麾下，与高杰破贼关山镇，逐北三十余里。
现代文：总督洪承畴推荐他做了副总兵官，隶属他的部下。变蛟和高杰在关山镇打败贼兵，追赶败兵三十多里。
English: Governor Hong Chengzheng recommended him to be the deputy commander-in-chief, subordinate to his subordinates. Zeng Rong and Gao Jie defeated the bandits in Guanshan Town and chased the defeated soldiers for more than thirty miles.

古文：又与副将尤翟文、游击孙守法追闯王高迎祥，与战凤翔官亭，斩首七百余级。
现代文：又与副将龙翟文、游击孙守法追击闯王高迎祥，同他在凤阳的官亭作战，斩获七百多首级。
English: He also pursued Wang Gao Yingxiang with the vice-general Long Qianwen and the guerrilla Sun Shoufa, and fought with him at the government pavilion in Fengyang, winning more than seven hundred heads.

古文：又与总兵左光先败迎祥乾州。迎祥中箭走，斩首三百五十余级。
现代文：又与总兵左光先在乾州打败了高迎祥，迎祥中箭逃跑，部下被斩首的有三百五十多人。
English: He also defeated Gao Yingxiang and Yingxiang Zhongqiao in Qianzhou with the general soldier Zuoguang. More than 350 of his subordinates were beheaded.

古文：已而迎祥自华阴南原绝大岭，夜出朱阳关。光先战不利，赖变蛟陷阵，乃获全。
现代文：不久高迎祥从华阴南部的平原出发翻越崇山峻岭，乘夜间出袭朱阳关，光先作战失利，靠着变蛟冲锋陷阵，才得以不死。
English: Not long after, Gao Yingxiang set out from the plains in the south of Huayin to climb over the high mountains and take the night to attack Zhuyang Pass. He was defeated in the first battle, but he was able to survive by changing his position and charging.

古文：九年破闯将澄城。偕光先等追至靖虏卫，转战安定、会宁，抵静宁、固宁，贼屡挫。
现代文：九年，变蛟在澄城打败闯王的将领，同光先等追到靖虏卫，转战在安定、会宁等地，抵达静宁、固宁，贼兵屡遭挫败。
English: In the ninth year, the generals who defeated the invaders in Chengcheng were defeated by the changelings, and they were pursued to Jingruiwei by the same light. They fought in places such as Ding'an and Huaning, and arrived at Jing'an and Huaning. The robber soldiers were repeatedly defeated.

古文：其秋追混天星等，败之蒲城。贼西走平凉、巩昌，复击破之。
现代文：当年秋天，变蛟追击混天星等贼首，在蒲城打败了他们，贼兵向西逃往平凉、巩昌，变蛟又击败了他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zeng Rong chased the heads of thieves such as Ming Tian Xing and defeated them in Pucheng. The thieves fled west to Pingliang and Gongchang, and Zeng Rong defeated them again.

古文：十年二月，巡抚孙传庭部卒许忠叛，勾贼混十万谋犯西安。
现代文：十年二月，巡抚孙传庭部下的士兵许忠叛变，勾结贼将混十万打算进犯西安。
English: In February of the 10th year, the soldiers under the inspector Sun Chuanting's department, Xu Zhong, mutinied and planned to invade Xi'an with the collusion of 100,000 thieves.

古文：变蛟方西追过天星，闻乱急还，贼遂遁。
现代文：变蛟正在外边追击过天星，听说这边发生叛乱急忙返回，叛兵于是逃走了。
English: The changeling was chasing the star outside. Hearing that there was a rebellion on this side, he hurried back. The rebels then fled.

古文：传庭已诛迎祥，其党闯将混天星、过天星踞洮、岷、阶、文深谷间。
现代文：传庭这时已经杀了迎祥，他的同党过天星、混天星盘踞在洮州、岷州、阶州、文县的深山巨谷中。
English: At that time, Zengting had already killed Yingxiang, and his fellow party members were scattered in the deep mountain valleys of Bozhou, Bozhou, Chaozhou and Wenxian.

古文：承畴遣变蛟、光先及祖大弼、孙显祖合击。
现代文：承畴派遣变蛟、光先以及祖大弼、孙显祖联合出击。
English: Zengzhuang dispatched and transformed, and Guangxian as well as Zu Dajuan and Sun Xianzu jointly attacked.

古文：四月望，入山，遇贼郭家坝，大雨。诸将力战，贼死伤无算，食尽引还。
现代文：四月十五日，官军进入山中，在郭家坝与贼兵相遇，天正下着大雨，各位将领竭力作战，贼兵死伤不计其数。
English: On April 15th, the government army entered the mountains and met the bandits at Guojiaba. It was raining heavily, and the generals fought hard. The bandits were killed and wounded in large numbers.

古文：九月，阶州陷，与光先并停俸。
现代文：后来因为粮食吃光他们只好率兵返回。九月，阶州陷落，变蛟与光先同时被扣发了俸禄。
English: Later, because they ran out of grain, they had no choice but to return with their soldiers. In September, Joshu fell, and Zengya and Guangxian were both deprived of their salaries.

古文：俄擢都督佥事，为临洮总兵官。
现代文：不多久被提升为都督佥事，担任临洮总兵官。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of viceroy and served as the chief military officer of Linyi.

古文：当是时，承畴、传庭共矢灭贼。传庭战于东，承畴战于西，东贼几尽。贼在西者，复由阶、成出西和、礼县。
现代文：这个时候，承畴和传庭一起发誓要消灭贼兵，传庭在东面作战，承畴在西面，东面的贼兵几乎全部被剿灭完了，在西面的贼兵又从阶州、成县出击西和与礼县。
English: At this time, Zhengzang and Chuanying together vowed to wipe out the bandits. Chuanying fought in the east, Zhengzang in the west, and the bandits in the east were almost completely wiped out. The bandits in the west also attacked Xihe and Lixian from Zhouzhou and Chengxian.

古文：光先、显祖皆无功，独变蛟降小红狼。
现代文：光先、显祖都没有立什么战功，只有变蛟降服了小红狼。
English: Neither the Light Pioneers nor the Enlightened Ancestors achieved any military feats, and only the Little Red Wolf was defeated by the Degenerates.

古文：余贼窜走徽州、两当、成、凤间，不敢大逞。
现代文：剩余的贼兵逃窜到徽州、西当、成县、凤县一带，不敢大肆逞凶了。
English: The remaining robber soldiers fled to Huizhou, Xidang, Chengxian and Fengxian, and did not dare to be reckless.

古文：十月，贼瞷蜀中虚，陷宁羌州，分三道，连陷三十余州县。
现代文：十月，贼兵窥测到四川兵力空虚，就占领了宁羌州，分兵三路，连续占领了三十多个州县。
English: In October, the robber soldiers spied that the Sichuan army was empty and occupied Ningyanzhou. They divided the army into three parts and continuously occupied more than 30 states and counties.

古文：承畴率变蛟等由沔县历宁羌，过七盘、朝天二关。山高道狭，士马饥疲，岁暮抵广元，贼已走还秦。
现代文：承畴率领变蛟从沔县经过宁羌，翻过七盘、朝天两座山关，由于山高路窄，军马饥饿疲劳，年底才抵达广元，贼寇已经返回去陕西。
English: Led by Chengzhuang, Zengqi passed through Ningbo from Jixian County, and overcame the two mountain passes of Qipan and Chaotian. Due to the narrow mountain road and the hunger and fatigue of the horses, they only arrived in Guangyuan at the end of the year. The thieves have returned to Shaanxi.

古文：变蛟等回军邀击，斩首五百余级。
现代文：变蛟等返回拦截，斩获五百多首级。
English: Zeng Rong and others returned to intercept and captured more than five hundred heads.

古文：时兵部尚书杨嗣昌创 四正六隅 之说，限三月平贼。
现代文：当时兵部尚书杨嗣昌创立了 四正六隅 的战略计划，限期三个月剿尽贼兵。
English: At that time, Yang Shichang, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, created the strategic plan of "four principles and six angles," with a deadline of three months to wipe out the enemy soldiers.

古文：十一年四月以灭贼逾期，普议降罚，变蛟、光先并镌五级，戴罪办贼。
现代文：十一年四月因为逾期未能消灭贼兵，对各级官兵遍行降罚，朝廷把变蛟、光先贬官三级，让他们戴罪办理剿贼事务。
English: In April of the eleventh year, because it was too late to eliminate the bandit soldiers, the imperial court reduced the punishment for officers and soldiers at all levels. The imperial court demoted the officials to the third level, and made them bear the crime of handling bandit affairs.

古文：贼之再入秦也，其渠魁号六队者，与大天王、混天王、争管王四部连营东犯，混天星、过天星二部仍伏阶、文，独闯将李自成以三月自洮州出番地。
现代文：贼兵再次进入陕西以后，他们的首领有一个号称六队的，同大天王、混天王、军管王四部联合向东进犯。混天星、过天星两支队伍仍然潜伏在阶州、文县两地，只有闯王李自成在三月里从洮州出兵西番。
English: After the bandits once again entered Shaanxi, their leader had a so-called six-team, with the four departments of the Great King, the Mixed King, and the Military Governor jointly attacking to the east. The two teams of the Mixed Star and the Crossed Star still lurked in the two places of Chaozhou and Wen County, and only the King Li Zicheng sent troops from Zhangzhou to the west in March.

古文：承畴令变蛟偕贺人龙追之，连战斩首六千七百有奇。
现代文：承畴命令变蛟同贺人龙追击他们，连续作战，共斩敌六千七百多首级。
English: He ordered his subordinates to pursue them, and they fought continuously, killing more than 6,700 of the enemy.

古文：番地乏食，贼多死亡。
现代文：西番地面上缺少粮食，贼兵死亡很多。
English: There was a shortage of food on the ground in the western part of the country, and many soldiers died.

古文：变蛟转战千里，身不解甲者二十七昼夜。
现代文：变蛟转战千里，身穿的铠甲有二十七个昼夜没有解下过。
English: He went from battle to battle, and for twenty-seven days and nights he did not take off his armor.

古文：余贼溃入塞。
现代文：剩下的贼兵败逃到边塞上去了。
English: The remaining bandits fled to the border fortress.

古文：大弼驻洮州，扼战不力。乃走入岷州及西和、礼县山中。
现代文：大弼驻守洮州，扼防贼兵不够得力，给他们逃到岷州以及西和、礼县一带的山中。
English: Daju garrisoned Luzhou, but the anti-thief soldiers were not strong enough, so they fled to Luzhou and the mountains around Xihe and Lixian.

古文：变蛟还剿，贼伏匿不敢出，惟六队势犹张。
现代文：变蛟返回围剿，贼兵躲藏起来，不敢出战，只有六队的势力还很嚣张。
English: The robber soldiers hid and did not dare to go out to fight. Only the forces of the six teams were still very arrogant.

古文：六月，光先自固原进兵，贼已奔陇州、清水。
现代文：六月，光先从固原出兵，贼兵已逃到陇州、清水。
English: In June, soldiers were dispatched from Gouyuan, but the bandits had already fled to Zhangzhou and Qingshui.

古文：光先追至秦州，六队及争管王复走成县、阶州，为变蛟所扼。
现代文：光先追到秦州，六队同争管王又逃到成县、阶州，被变蛟遏制住。
English: The light was first chased to Qinzhou, and the six competing teams fled to Chengxian and Chaozhou, where they were contained by the changelings.

古文：其别部号三队及仁义王、混天王降于光先，而自成、六队及其党祁总管避秦兵，复谋犯蜀，副将马科、贺人龙拒之。
现代文：他们的分支部队号称三队的及仁义王、混天王的贼群向光先投降了，而自成、六队及其同党祁总管避开陕西的官兵，又谋划进犯四川，副将马科、贺人龙挡住了他们。
English: The band of thieves known as the Three Squads and the King of Righteousness and Benevolence and the King of Confusion surrendered to Guangxian first, while Zicheng, the Six Squads, and their fellow Party cadres avoided the officers and soldiers of Shaanxi and plotted to invade Sichuan. Vice-commanders Ma Ke and He Renlong blocked them.

古文：将还走阶、文及西乡，惮变蛟，乃走汉中，又为光先所扼。
现代文：他们打算回到阶州、文县以及西乡一带，又害怕变蛟，于是逃到汉中去，路上又被光先遏制了，不能往前进。
English: They planned to return to Chaozhou, Wenshan and the Xixianglu area, but they were afraid of losing their power, so they fled to Hanzhong. On the way, they were stopped by the Light Pioneers and could not move forward.

古文：六队、祁总管皆降，惟自成东遁。
现代文：六队、祁总管都投降了，只有自成往东边跑掉。
English: The six teams and the general manager of the Shanshan all surrendered, only to run away to the east on their own.

古文：承畴令变蛟穷追，而设三伏于潼关之南原。
现代文：承畴命令变蛟穷追不舍，又在潼关南部的平原地带设下三支伏兵。
English: The order was given to pursue the enemy relentlessly, and three ambushes were set up on the plains in the southern part of Shaoguan.

古文：变蛟追及，大呼斫贼。伏尽起，贼尸相枕藉。
现代文：变蛟追上贼兵，大声喊叫着挥刀就砍，三支伏兵又全部出动，贼兵尸体横七竖八地堆了一地。
English: Zeng Xuan caught up with the thief soldiers, shouted loudly and waved his sword to cut them down. All three ambush soldiers were dispatched again, and the bodies of the thief soldiers were piled up horizontally and vertically.

古文：村民用大棒击逃者。
现代文：村民们也用大棒追击逃贼。
English: The villagers also chased the escapees with big sticks.

古文：自成妻女俱失，从七骑遁去。余皆降。
现代文：自成的妻子、女儿都丢失了，带着七个骑兵逃离，其余的贼都投降了。
English: Having lost his wife and daughter, he fled with seven horsemen, and the rest of the thieves surrendered.

古文：是时，曹兵最强，各镇依之以为固，录关中平贼功，进变蛟左都督。
现代文：当时变蛟的兵力最强，各军靠着他才坚不可摧。朝廷评定他在关中剿贼的功绩，提升他做了左都督。
English: At that time, Zhuge Liang's army was the strongest, and all the armies relied on him to be indestructible. The court evaluated his achievements in suppressing the bandits in Guanzhong, and promoted him to the post of Zuo governor.

古文：十一月，京师戒严，召承畴入卫，变蛟及光先从之。
现代文：十一月，京师戒严。朝廷召承畴去保卫京师，变蛟和光先跟随着他。
English: In November, the capital was placed under martial law. The imperial court was summoned to defend the capital, and Zeng Rong and Guang Xian followed him.

古文：明年二月，抵近畿，帝遣使迎劳，将士各有赐。
现代文：第二年二月，他们抵达京师周围，庄烈帝派使者前来迎接、慰问，将士们都得到了赏赐。
English: In February of the following year, when they arrived in the vicinity of the capital, Emperor Zhu Rong sent an envoy to greet and offer condolences, and the soldiers were all rewarded.

古文：未几，战浑河，无功。再战太平砦北，小有斩获。
现代文：不久，变蛟在浑河开战，没有什么战功，又在太平砦的北面作战，获取了一点战果。
English: Soon after, Zengqi went to war in Hunhe, with little success, and fought on the north side of Taiping Fort, gaining a little success.

古文：及解严，留屯遵化。
现代文：等到戒严解除后，变蛟被留下来驻守遵化。
English: After the martial law was lifted, Zeng Yao was left to stay in Zunhua.

古文：麾下皆秦卒，思归，多逃亡者，追斩之乃定。
现代文：他的部下都是陕西兵，因想念家乡，有许多逃亡的人，变蛟对他们加以追捕、斩杀后军心才安定下来。
English: His subordinates were all soldiers from Shaanxi Province. Because they missed their hometown, there were many fugitives. They were hunted down and killed before the military spirit settled down.

古文：时张献忠、罗汝才既降复叛，陕西再用兵。
现代文：这时张献忠、罗汝才投降以后又再次反叛，陕西又开战了。
English: At this time, Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai rebelled again after surrendering, and Shaanxi went to war again.

古文：总督郑崇俭乞令变蛟兵西还，帝不许，寻用为东协总兵官。
现代文：总督郑崇俭请求让变蛟率兵西去，庄烈帝不答应，不久任用变蛟当了东协总兵官。
English: Governor Zheng Chongjian requested that Zeng Yao lead the soldiers to the west, but Emperor Zhuang did not agree, and soon appointed Zeng Yao as the general officer of the Eastern Association.

古文：十三年五月，锦州告急。从总督承畴出关，驻宁远。
现代文：十三年五月，锦州告急，变蛟跟随总督洪承畴出关，驻守宁远。
English: In May of the thirteenth year, Jinzhou was in a hurry, so he followed the governor Hong Chengzhuang out of the customs and stationed in Ningyuan.

古文：七月与援剿总兵左光先、山海总兵马科、宁远总兵吴三桂、辽东总兵刘肇基，遇大清兵于黄土台及松山、杏山，互有杀伤。大清兵退屯义州。
现代文：七月，同援剿总兵官左光先、山海总兵马科、宁远总兵吴三桂、辽东总兵刘肇基在黄土台以及松山、杏山遇上大清部队，双方互有伤亡，大清部队退后驻扎到义州。
English: In July, General Zuo Guangxian, General Shanhai, General Wu Sangui, and General Liu Zhaoji of Liaodong met the Qing forces in Huangdutai, Matsuyama, and Xingshan. There were casualties on both sides, and the Qing forces retreated and were stationed in Yizhou.

古文：承畴议遣变蛟、光先、科之兵入关养锐，留三桂、肇基于松、杏间，佯示进兵状。
现代文：承畴打算让变蛟、光先、马科的部队进关来养精蓄锐，留吴三桂、刘肇基的部队在松山、杏山之间活动，假装着进攻的样子。
English: Chengzhuang planned to let the troops of Zengqi, Guangxian and Ma Ke enter the pass to refresh themselves and stay sharp, while the troops of Wu Sangui and Liu Zhaoji stayed in the area between Matsuyama and Xingshan, pretending to attack.

古文：又请解肇基任，代以王廷臣；遣光先西归，代以白广恩。
现代文：后来又请求解除刘肇基的官职，让王廷臣取代了他；派遣光先西归，以白广恩接替了他。
English: Later, he asked for Liu Zhaoji to be relieved of his post, and Wang Tingchen to replace him; he sent Guang Xiangui to replace him with Bai Guangwen.

古文：部议咸从之，而请调旁近边军，合关内外见卒十五万人备战守。
现代文：兵部讨论后都同意了他的意见。然后承畴又请求调遣附近的边防部队联合关内外将士十五万人以备防守。
English: After discussion, the military agreed with his opinion. He then requested the nearby border troops to mobilize 150,000 soldiers from both inside and outside the joint customs area to prepare for defense.

古文：用承畴言，师行粮从，必刍粮足支一岁，然后可议益兵。
现代文：承畴的意见认为，军队出征军粮也应随行，一定要凑足一年的粮草然后才能讨论增加兵力。
English: The consensus of opinion is that the army should also be accompanied by military grain, and it must make up for a year of grain and grass before it can discuss increasing the number of troops.

古文：帝然之，敕所司速措给。
现代文：庄烈帝认为是这样，就下令有关部门迅速凑齐供给他。
English: Zhuo Ledei thought so, and ordered the relevant departments to quickly come up with the money for him.

古文：征宣府总兵杨国柱、大同总兵王朴、密云总兵唐通各拣精兵赴援。
现代文：朝廷召集宣府总兵杨国柱、大同总兵王朴、密云总兵唐通，要他们各自挑选部下的精兵前往增援。
English: The imperial court summoned Yang Guozhu, the general of the Xuanfu army, Wang Pak, the general of the Datong army, and Tang Tong, the general of the Miyun army, and asked them to choose their best soldiers to go to the reinforcement.

古文：以十四年三月偕变蛟、科、广恩先后出关，合三桂、廷臣凡八大将，兵十三万，马四万，并驻宁远。
现代文：他们在十四年三月同变蛟、马科、广恩先后出关，加上三桂、廷臣等共八员大将，十三万士兵，马匹四万，一起驻扎在宁远。
English: In March of the 14th year, Tongzheng, Ma Ke and Guang En successively left the customs, together with Sangui and Tingchen, a total of eight generals, 130,000 soldiers and 40,000 horses were stationed together in Ningyuan.

古文：承畴主持重，而朝议以兵多饷艰，职方郎张若麒趣战。
现代文：承畴主张用兵要谨慎稳重，而朝廷的意见认为这么多部队凑来粮饷也不容易，应速战速决。职方郎张若麒前来催促承畴出兵。
English: Chojeong advocated that the use of troops should be prudent and steady, while the opinion of the imperial court was that it was not easy for so many troops to get together food and supplies, and it should be resolved quickly. Zhang Ruojun, a worker, came to urge Chojeong to send troops.

古文：承畴念祖大寿被围久，乃议急救锦州。
现代文：承畴考虑到祖大宽被围困已很长时间了，于是决定立即援救锦州。
English: Taking into account that Zu Daqiang had been besieged for a long time, he decided to immediately rescue Jinzhou.

古文：七月二十八日，诸军次松山，营西北冈。
现代文：七月二十八日，各军停驻在松山，在西北的山岗上扎了营。
English: On July 28th, the armies halted at Matsuyama and encamped on a hill to the northwest.

古文：数战，围不解。
现代文：多次出战，始终不能解围。
English: He went out to fight several times, but was never able to break the siege.

古文：八月，国柱战殁，以山西总兵李辅明代之。
现代文：八月，国柱战死，山西总兵李辅取代了他的职务。
English: In August, Guozhu was killed in battle, and Shanxi General Li Shu replaced him.

古文：承畴命变蛟营松山之北，乳峰山之西，两山间列七营，环以长壕。
现代文：承畴命变蛟在松山的北面、乳峰山的西面共扎下七个军营，周围环绕着长长的战壕。
English: Seven military camps, surrounded by long trenches, were built on the north side of Matsuyama and the west side of Mt.

古文：俄闻我太宗文皇帝亲临督阵，诸将大惧。及出战，连败，饷道又绝。
现代文：不久听说我们太宗文皇帝亲自来督阵，这些战将非常害怕，等到出战时，接连吃了败仗，运送粮草的道路又被切断。
English: Soon we heard that our Emperor Taizongwen had personally come to the governor's camp. These soldiers were very afraid. When they went to war, they suffered successive defeats, and the roads for transporting grain and grass were cut off.

古文：朴先夜遁。通、科、三桂、广恩、辅明相继走。
现代文：于是王朴先趁夜逃走，唐通、马科、三桂、广恩、辅明也相继逃跑了。
English: As a result, Wang Pu took advantage of the night to escape, and Tang Tong, Ma Ke, Sangui, Guang En, and Fu Ming also fled one after another.

古文：自杏山迤南沿海，东至塔山，为大清兵邀击，溺海死者无算。
现代文：他们从杏山往南沿着海边，东到塔山，受到大清兵的阻击，淹死在海中的人不计其数。
English: They went south from Xingshan along the seashore and east to Tashan. They were blocked by the Qing soldiers, and countless people drowned in the sea.

古文：变蛟、廷臣闻败，驰至松山，与承畴固守。
现代文：变蛟、廷臣听说失败的消息后骑马赶来松山，同承畴一起牢牢防守。
English: After hearing the news of the defeat, Zeng Rong, the courtier, rode to Matsuyama and defended firmly together with Zheng Zheng.

古文：三桂、朴奔据杏山。
现代文：三桂、王朴逃出后占据了杏山。
English: After Sangui and Wang Pu escaped, they occupied Anxious Mountain.

古文：越数日，欲走还宁远。至高桥遇伏，大败，仅以身免。
现代文：过了几天，想回到宁远来，走到高桥遇上了埋伏，大败，只保全了自家性命而已。
English: A few days later, when he wanted to return to Ningyuan, he walked to Gaoqiao and was ambushed, defeated, and only saved his own life.

古文：先后丧士卒凡五万三千七百余人。
现代文：这次战役，官军先后丧失士兵共五万三千七百多人。
English: In this battle, the government army lost a total of more than 53,700 soldiers.

古文：自是锦州围益急，而松山亦被围，应援俱绝矣。
现代文：从这以后锦州的包围圈更加收紧了，松山又被包围，什么增援部队都没有了。
English: Since then, the encirclement of Jinzhou has become tighter, Matsuyama has been encircled again, and there are no reinforcements left.

古文：九月，承畴、变蛟等尽出城中马步兵，欲突围出，败还。
现代文：九月，承畴、变蛟等率领所有的骑兵和步兵想突围出去，失败而回。
English: In September, all the cavalry and infantry led by Chengzhuang, Zengzhuang and others tried to break out of the encirclement, but failed and returned.

古文：守半年，至明年二月，副将夏成德为内应，松山遂破。
现代文：他们又继续防守了半年，到第二年二月，副将夏成德给大清部队做内应，松山于是被打了下来。
English: They continued to defend for another half a year, and by February of the following year, Vice Admiral Xia Chengde made a request to the Great Qing Army, and Matsuyama was defeated.

古文：十一年起故官。及城被围，领前锋拒守甚力，城破竟死。三月，大寿遂以锦州降。
现代文：承畴、变蛟、廷臣以及巡抚丘民仰，旧总兵祖大乐，兵备道张斗、姚恭、王三祯，副将江翥、饶勋、朱文德，以及参将以下共一百多军官都被抓获、杀死，只有承畴与大乐没有被杀。三月里，大寿就把锦州交出投降了。
English: More than a hundred officers, including the following generals, were captured and killed: Chengzang, Zengzang, the courtier and the governor, Qiu Minqian; the former commander-in-chief, Zu Dalek; the commanders of the army, Zhang Douran, Yao Qiong, and Wang Sanqi; the vice-commanders, Jiang Qian, Rao Xun, Zhu Wende; and the general. Only Chengzang and Zhu Dalek were not killed. In March, Dazhou surrendered Jinzhou.

古文：杏山、塔山连失，京师大震。
现代文：杏山、塔山也接连失守，京师受到很大震动。
English: Anxious Mountain and Tashan also lost their defenses one after another, and the capital division was greatly shaken.

古文：诏赐诸臣祭葬，有司建祠。
现代文：后来，朝廷颁布诏书，赐予殉难的各位大臣以祭奠、安葬，让有关部门为他们建立祠庙。
English: Later, the imperial court issued an imperial edict, awarding the martyred ministers with a memorial service and burial, and allowing the relevant departments to build shrines and temples for them.

古文：变蛟妻高氏以赠荫请，乃赠荣禄大夫、太子少保，世荫锦衣指挥佥事。
现代文：变蛟的妻子请求给予追赠、封荫，朝廷追赠他为荣禄大夫、太子少保，荫封后世子孙为世袭锦衣指挥佥事。
English: The wife of the deceased requested to be given a posthumous gift and a gong, the court gave him a posthumous gift as a doctor of honor, the prince's minor protector, and the descendants of the future generations were given a hereditary brocade dress.

