古文：太宗下会同元年春正月戊申朔，晋及诸国遣使来贺。
现代文：会同元年春正月初一，晋及各国派使者前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year, Jin and other countries sent envoys to come to congratulate.

古文：晋使且言已命和凝撰《圣德神功碑》。
现代文：晋使者并且说明已经命和凝撰作《圣德神功碑》。
English: The Jin envoy also explained that he had ordered and composed the "Monument to the Divine Virtue."

古文：戊辰，遣人使晋。
现代文：二十一日，派人出使晋。
English: On the 21st, he sent an envoy to Jin.

古文：二月壬午，室韦进白麃。
现代文：二月初五，室韦进献白。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, Shuwae Jin gave a speech.

古文：戊子，铁骊来贡。
现代文：十一日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，猎松山。
现代文：二十日，皇上狩猎于松山。
English: On the 20th, the emperor went hunting in Matsuyama.

古文：戊戌，幸辽河东。
现代文：二十日，临幸辽河东。
English: On the 20th, Linxing, east of Liaohe.

古文：丙申，上思人皇王，遣惕隐率宗室以下祭其行宫。
现代文：十九日，皇上思念人皇王，派惕隐率领宗室以下人等祭祀其行宫。
English: On the 19th, the emperor sent a memorial to the deceased emperor, and Peitaiyin led the members of the imperial family and others to offer a sacrifice at the imperial palace.

古文：丁未，诏增晋使所经供亿户。
现代文：三十日，诏令增加晋使者所经之处供给役使的户数。
English: On the 30th, an imperial edict was issued to increase the number of households to be supplied with envoys wherever the envoys went.

古文：三月壬戌，将东幸，三克言农务方兴，请减辎重，促还朝，从之。
现代文：三月十五日，将东幸，三克声称农事正展开，请求减少辎重，促请还朝，从之。
English: On March 15th, the general Dongxing and Sanke claimed that agricultural work was in progress, requested to reduce the weight of straw, and urged the government to comply.

古文：丙寅，女直来贡。
现代文：十九日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，东幸。
现代文：二十六日，东幸。
English: On the 26th, Dongxing.

古文：夏四月戊寅朔，如南京。甲申，女直来贡。
现代文：夏四月初一，至南京。初七，女真前来进贡。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, he arrived in Nanjing. On the seventh day of the first month, Nanzhen came to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，幸温泉。
现代文：初八，临幸温泉。
English: Hatsuhachi, Rinzai Onsen.

古文：己丑，还宫，朝于皇太后。
现代文：十二日，回宫，朝见皇太后。
English: On the twelfth day, he returned to the palace and met the empress dowager.

古文：丁酉，女直贡弓矢。
现代文：二十日，女真贡上弓箭。
English: On the 20th day, Nyoshin paid tribute with a bow and arrow.

古文：己亥，西南边大详稳耶律鲁不古奏党项捷。
现代文：二十二日，西南边大详稳耶律鲁不古呈进党项俘虏。
English: On the 22nd, the southwestern border of the large detailed and stable Yale Lvgu submitted to the party prisoners.

古文：五月甲寅，晋复遣使请上尊号，从之。
现代文：五月初八，晋再次派使者请求奉上尊号，从之。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth lunar month, Jin once again sent an envoy to request that the honorific title be bestowed upon him.

古文：六月丙子朔，吐谷浑及女直东贡。
现代文：六月初一，吐谷浑及女真前来进贡。
English: On the first day of June, Tugu Hun and Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：辛卯，南唐来贡。
现代文：十六日，南唐前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, Southern Tang came to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，诏建日月四时堂，图写古帝王事于两庑。
现代文：十八日，诏令建造日月四时堂，将古帝王事迹绘于两廊。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor ordered the construction of the Sun and Moon Hall at 4:00 a.m., and the deeds of the ancient emperors were painted on the two galleries.

古文：秋七月癸亥，遣使赐晋马。
现代文：秋七月十八日，派使者赐给晋马匹。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, an envoy was sent to give Jin horses.

古文：丁卯，遣鹘离底使晋，梅里了古使南唐。
现代文：二十二日，派鹘离底出使晋，梅里了古出使南唐。
English: On the 22nd, Pa Ying left the bottom and sent an envoy to Jin, and Meili Ya Gu sent an envoy to South Tang.

古文：戊辰，遣中台省右相耶律述兰迭烈哥使晋，临海军节度使赵思温副之，册晋帝为英武明义皇帝。
现代文：二十三日，派中台省右相耶律述兰迭烈哥出使晋，临海军节度使赵思温为副使，册封晋帝为英武明义皇帝。
English: On the 23rd, the Right Minister of Zhongtai Province, Yerutsulan Derenger, was sent to send an envoy to Jin. At the naval festival, Zhao Siwen was appointed as the deputy envoy, and Emperor Jin was proclaimed as Emperor Yingwu Mingyi.

古文：八月戊子，女直来贡。
现代文：八月十四日，女真前来进贡。
English: On August 14th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，吐谷浑、乌孙、靺鞨皆来贡。
现代文：二十四日，吐谷浑、乌孙、革末革曷都来进贡。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Tu Gu Hun, Wusun, and Ge Mok Gyeong all came to pay tribute.

古文：九月庚戌，黑车子室韦贡名马。
现代文：九月初六，黑车子室韦献上名马。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Black Chariot's Murowe presented a famous horse.

古文：边臣奏晋遣守司空冯道、左散骑常侍韦勋来上皇太后尊号，左仆射刘昫、右谏议大夫卢重上皇帝尊号，遂遣监军寅你已充接伴。
现代文：边臣奏称晋派守司空冯道、左散骑常侍韦勋前来给皇太后上尊号，左仆射刘日旬、右谏议大夫卢重来给皇帝上尊号，于是派遣监军寅你已充任接伴。
English: The frontiersman said that the Jin Dynasty sent the governor of the province, Feng Dao, and the left rider, Wei Xun, to give the empress dowager the title of the emperor, the left servant, Liu Rishun, and the right officer, Lu Chong, to give the emperor the title of the emperor, and then sent the inspector of the army, Yin You, to act as the successor.

古文：壬子，诏群臣及高年，凡授大臣爵秩，皆赐锦袍、金带、白马、金饰鞍勒，著于令。
现代文：初八，诏令群臣及高年之人，凡是授给大臣爵禄之时，一律赐给锦袍、金带、白马、金饰马鞍勒，并将这一规定写到政令上。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that all ministers and senior citizens should be given a brocade robe, a gold belt, a white horse, and a gold-decorated horse saddle when they were awarded a minister's peerage, and this provision was written into the decree.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，遣郎君迪里姑等抚问晋使。
现代文：冬十月初一，派郎君迪里姑等慰问晋使者。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the emperor sent emissaries to offer condolences to Emperor Jin, including his brother-in-law Dirigu.

古文：壬寅，晋遣使来谢册礼。
现代文：二十九日，晋国派使者前来谢册礼。
English: On the 29th, the State of Jin sent an envoy to thank the book.

古文：是日，复有使进独峰驼及名马。
现代文：同日，又有使者进献独峰驼及名马。
English: On the same day, envoys presented camels and famous horses.

古文：十一月甲辰朔，命南北宰相及夷离堇就馆赐晋使冯道以下宴。
现代文：十一月初一，命南北宰相及夷离堇到客馆中赐给晋使者冯道等人宴席。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, he ordered the Northern and Southern Chancellors and the Emigrants to the guest house to give a banquet to the envoy of the Jin Dynasty, Feng Dao and others.

古文：丙午，上御开皇殿，召见晋使。
现代文：初三，皇上在开皇殿召见晋国使者。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor summoned the envoys of the Jin Dynasty to the Imperial Palace.

古文：壬子，皇太后御开皇殿，冯道、韦勋册上尊号曰广德至仁昭烈崇简应天皇太后。
现代文：初九，皇太后亲临开皇殿，冯道、韦勋奉册礼上皇太后尊号曰广德至仁昭烈崇简应天皇太后。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Empress Dowager herself came to open the Imperial Palace, and Feng Dao and Wei Xun attended the opening ceremony. The Empress Dowager's honorific title was Guang De Zhi Ren Zhaorong Chong Jian Ying Emperor's Empress Dowager.

古文：甲子，行再生柴册礼。
现代文：二十一日，举行再生柴册礼。
English: On the 21st, a ceremony was held to celebrate the rebirth of the woodblocks.

古文：丙寅，皇帝御宣政殿，刘昫、卢重册上尊号曰睿文神武法天启运明德章信至道广敬昭孝嗣圣皇帝。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝驾临宣政殿，刘日旬、卢重奉册礼上皇上尊号为睿文神武法天启运明德章信至道广敬昭孝嗣圣皇帝。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor arrived at the Xuancheng Palace, and Liu Rishun and Lu Chong held a ceremony to record the emperor's name as Rui Wen, Shenwu, Fa Tianqi Yun, Ming De, Zhang Xin, and Da Guang.

古文：大赦，改元会同。
现代文：大赦天下，改元会同。
English: Amnesty for the whole world, change of the Yuan dynasty.

古文：是月，晋复遣赵莹奉表来贺，以幽、蓟、瀛、莫、涿、檀、顺、妫、儒、新、武、云、应、朔、寰、蔚十六州并图籍来献。
现代文：同月，晋又派赵莹上表祝贺，以幽、蓟、瀛、莫、涿、檀、顺、妫、儒、新、武、云、应、朔、寰、蔚十六州连同地图、户籍前来进献。
English: In the same month, Jin also sent Zhao Ying to congratulate on the table, and came to present the 16 states of Yu, Yu, Yu, Mo, Mo, Yu, Dan, Shun, Shun, Confucius, Xin, Wu, Yun, Ying, Shuo, Shun and Wei, together with maps and household registration.

古文：于是诏以皇都为上京，府曰临潢。
现代文：于是诏令以皇都为上京，府名临潢。
English: As a result, the imperial edict designated the imperial capital as Shangjing, and the name of the prefecture as Linyi.

古文：升幽州为南京，南京为东京。
现代文：升幽州为南京，南京为东京。
English: Shengyuzhou is Nanjing, and Nanjing is Tokyo.

古文：改新州为奉圣州，武州为归化州。
现代文：改新州为奉圣州，武州为归化州。
English: Xinzhou was changed to Feng Shengzhou, and Wuzhou was changed to Naturalization State.

古文：升北、南二院及乙室夷离堇为王，以主簿为令，令为刺史，刺史为节度使，二部梯里己为司徒，达剌干为副使，麻都不为县令，县达剌干为马步。
现代文：升北、南二院及乙室夷离堇为王，以主簿为令，令为刺史，刺史为节度使，二部梯里已为司徒，达剌干为副使，麻都不为县令，县达剌干为马步。
English: The Northern and Southern Second Courts and the Second Chamber of the Second Court of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the Second Chamber of the

古文：置宣徽、閤门使、控鹤、客省、御史大夫、中丞、侍御、判官、文班牙署、诸宫院世烛，马群、遥辇世烛，南北府、国舅帐郎君官为敞史，诸部宰相、节度使帐为司空，二室韦闼林为仆射，鹰坊、监冶等局官长为详稳。
现代文：设置宣徽、阁门使，控鹤、客省、御史大夫、中丞、侍御、判官、文班牙署、诸宫院世烛，马群、遥辇世烛，以南北府、国舅帐郎君官为敞史，以各部宰相、节度使帐为司空，以二室韦闼林为仆射，以鹰坊、监冶等局之官长为详稳。
English: It sets up the Imperial Emblem, the Courier of the Imperial Court, the Control Crane, the Guest Province, the Chief Historian, the Junior Middle Officer, the Chamberlain, the Judge, the Spanish Literature Office, the Court Candelabra of the Imperial Court, the Horse Group, and the Faraway Candelabra, with the North and South Prefectures, the Uncle of the State as the Open History, the Prime Minister of each Ministry, and the Candelabra of the Festival as the Sky, the Second Chamber of Wei Yulin as the Palm, and the heads of the Eagle Square, the Supervisor of Metallurgy, and other bureaus as the Detailed Stability.

古文：十二月戊戌，遣同括、阿钵等使晋，制加晋冯道守太傅，刘昫守太保，馀官各有差。
现代文：十二月二十五日，派同括、阿钵等人出使晋国，下制加晋冯道为守太傅，刘日旬为守太保，其余官员各有升进。
English: On December 25th, the envoys from Jin Province, including Tonglu, Aqun and others, were dispatched to Jin Province. Under the system, Feng Dao from Jin Province was appointed as the governor of Jin Province, Liu Rishun was appointed as the governor of Jin Province, and the remaining officials were promoted.

古文：二年春正月乙巳，以受晋册，遣使报南唐、高丽。
现代文：二年春正月初三，以受晋册封，派使者报告南唐、高丽。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of spring, he sent an envoy to report on Southern Tang and Goryeo.

古文：丁未，御开皇殿，宴晋使冯道以下，赐物有差。
现代文：初五，御临开皇殿，宴请晋国使者冯道以下，赐给物品各若干。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor opened the imperial palace, and the emissaries of the Jin Dynasty, including Feng Dao, were invited to the banquet, and each of them was given a number of items.

古文：戊申，晋遣金吾卫大将军马从斌、考功郎中刘知新来贡珍币，命分赐群臣。
现代文：初六，晋派遣金吾卫大将军马从斌、考功郎中刘知新前来贡献珍宝财物，下令分赐给群臣。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Jin Dynasty sent the great general Ma Congbin and the great scholar Liu Zhixin to contribute precious treasures and ordered them to be distributed to the ministers.

古文：丙辰，晋遣使谢免沿边四州钱币。
现代文：十四日，晋派使者为免除沿边四州钱币致谢。
English: On the 14th, the Jin sent an envoy to express their gratitude for the exemption of coins from the four states along the border.

古文：二月戊寅，宴诸王及节度使来贺受册礼者，仍命皇太子、惕隐迪辇饯之。
现代文：二月初六，宴请诸王及前来祝贺受册礼的节度使，又命皇太子、惕隐迪辇为之饯行。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, he held a banquet for the kings and the regents who had come to congratulate him on his ordination, and ordered the crown prince, Tiin Di, to lead the procession.

古文：癸巳，谒太祖庙，赐在京吏民物，及内外群臣官赏有差。
现代文：二十一日，拜谒太祖庙，赐给在京百姓财物，又赏赐给内外群臣官位各有等差。
English: On the twenty-first day, he paid homage to the Ancestor's Temple, bestowed wealth and goods on the people in Beijing, and rewarded the ranks of officials both at home and abroad.

古文：丁酉，加兼侍中、左金吾卫上将军王鄑检校太尉。
现代文：二十五日，加兼侍中、左金吾卫上将军王晋阝为检校太尉。
English: On the 25th, Wang Jintao, a vice-chamberlain and commander of the Left King's Guard, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三月，畋于褭潭之则。
现代文：三月，狩猎于袅潭之畔。
English: In March, hunting on the shore of Lake Bi.

古文：戊申，女直来贡。
现代文：初六，女真前来进贡。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，封皇子述律为寿安王，罨撒葛为太平王。
现代文：十五日，封皇子述律为寿安王，罨撒葛为太平王。
English: On the fifteenth day, Fong's son Shuritsu became King Shouan, and Caesar Ge became King Taiping.

古文：己巳，大赉百姓。
现代文：二十七日，大赏百姓。
English: On the 27th, the people were greatly rewarded.

古文：夏四月乙亥，幸木叶山。
现代文：夏四月初四，临幸木叶山。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of summer, Linxing Muji Mountain is at its peak.

古文：癸巳，东京路奏狼食人。
现代文：二十二日，东京路奏称狼吃人。
English: On the 22nd, Tokyo Rokuso called wolves cannibals.

古文：五月乙巳，禁南京鬻牝羊出境。
现代文：五月初四，禁止南京卖母羊出境。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Nanjing was banned from selling ewes abroad.

古文：思奴古多里等坐盗官物，籍其家。
现代文：思奴古多里等人因窃盗公物获罪，被抄家。
English: Sinu Gudori and others were convicted of theft of public property and their homes were raided.

古文：南唐遣使来贡。
现代文：南唐派使者前来进贡。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，以所贡物赐群臣。
现代文：初六，以所贡物品分赐给群臣。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, he distributed the tribute items to his retainers.

古文：戊申，回鹘单于使人乞授官，诏第加刺史、县令。
现代文：初七，回鹘单于派人请求授予官职，诏令依次加为刺史、县令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Hui Dynasty sent a person to request the granting of an official post, and the imperial edict was successively added to the history and county order.

古文：六月丁丑，雨雪。
现代文：六月初七，下雪。
English: On the seventh day of the sixth month, it began to snow.

古文：是夏，驻跸频跸淀。
现代文：这年夏天，歇驾于频跸淀。
English: In the summer of this year, he stayed in Fenyuyang.

古文：秋七月戊申，晋遣使进犀带。
现代文：秋七月初九，晋派遣使者进献犀带。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Jin sent an envoy to present a rhinoceros band.

古文：庚戌，吐谷浑来贡。
现代文：十二日，吐谷浑前来进贡。
English: On the twelfth day, Tugu Hun came to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，敞史阿钵坐奉使失职，命笞之。
现代文：十六日，敞史阿钵因犯奉命出使失职之罪，被鞭笞。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Shihai was whipped for committing the crime of dereliction of duty.

古文：闰月癸未，乙室大王坐赋调不均，以木剑背挞而释之；并罢南、北府民上供，及宰相、节度诸赋役非旧制者。
现代文：闰七月十四日，乙室大王因犯赋调不均之罪，在被木剑背击打后释放。并免除南、北二府百姓赋税中解交朝廷的部分以及宰相、节度使所设各种赋役不合旧制者。
English: On Leap July 14th, Emperor Bishitsu was released after being beaten with the back of a wooden sword for committing the crime of unequal taxation. He was also exempted from the part of the tax paid by the people of the two provinces in the north and south to the imperial court, as well as the various taxes imposed by the prime minister and the governor-general that did not conform to the old system.

古文：乙酉，遣的烈赐晋乌古良马。
现代文：十六日，派遣的烈赐给晋乌古良马。
English: On the 16th, the dispatched martyrs were given to Jin Ugurama.

古文：己丑，以南王府二刺史贪蠹，各杖一百，仍系虞候帐，备射鬼箭，选群臣为民所爱者代之。
现代文：二十日，因南王府二刺史贪赃害民，每人受杖一百，又拘囚于虞候帐，准备用鬼箭射杀之；挑选群臣为民所爱戴者取代之。
English: On the 20th day, due to the corruption and harm caused to the people by the southern royal government, each person received a hundred canes, and was also detained in the state waiting account, ready to shoot them with ghost arrows; choose a group of subjects to replace them with those loved by the people.

古文：八月乙丑，晋遣使贡岁币，奏输戌、亥二岁金币于燕京。
现代文：八月二十七日，晋派使者贡献岁币，奏请运送戌、亥两年之金币到燕京。
English: On August 27th, the Emperor of Jin sent an envoy to donate the New Year's coins and requested that the gold coins of the Year of the Rooster and the Year of the Pig be transported to Yanjing.

古文：九月甲戌，阻卜阿离底来贡。
现代文：九月初六，阻卜阿离底前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Dangbo Ah Li Di came to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，遣使使晋。
现代文：十一日，派使者出使晋。
English: On the 11th, he sent an envoy to Jin.

古文：冬十月丁未，上以乌古部水草肥美，诏北、南院徙三石烈户居之。
现代文：冬十月初十，皇上认为乌古部水草肥美，诏令北、南院迁徙三石烈民户到那里居住。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the winter, the emperor thought that the water and grass in the ancient part of the country were beautiful, so he ordered the Northern and Southern Courts to relocate the three-stone families to live there.

古文：十一月丁亥，铁骊、敦煌并遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月二十日，铁骊、敦煌均派使者来朝贡。
English: On November 20, Tieyuan and Dunhuang both sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十二月庚子，钓鱼于土河。
现代文：十二月初四，在土河钓鱼。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, go fishing in the Tu River.

古文：甲子，回鹘使者傔人有以刃相击者，诏付其使处之。
现代文：二十八日，回鹘使者仆人有持刀刃相斗者，诏令交给使者处理。
English: On the 28th, there was a sword fight between the servants of the Emissary of the Hui Dynasty, and the Emissary was ordered to deal with it.

古文：三年春正月戊子，吴越王遣使来贡。
现代文：三年春正月二十二日，吴越王派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the third year of Spring, King Wu Yue sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚寅，人皇王妃来朝。
现代文：二十四日，人皇王妃前来朝见。
English: On the 24th, Empress Dowager Cixi came to see the emperor.

古文：回鹘使乞观诸国使朝见礼，从之。
现代文：回鹘使者请求观看各国使者朝见礼仪，得到允许。
English: In response, the envoy asked to watch the ceremonial meeting of the ambassadors of various countries and was allowed to do so.

古文：壬辰，遣陪谒阿钵使晋至生辰礼。
现代文：二十六日，派遣陪谒、阿钵出使晋国送生辰礼。
English: On the 26th, an envoy from Jin Province was dispatched to attend the birthday ceremony.

古文：晋以并、镇、忻、代之吐谷浑来归。
现代文：晋将并、镇、忻、代之吐谷浑送回我国。
English: Jin will also send Zhen, Yao, and Tujugun back to China.

古文：二月己亥，奚王劳骨宁率六节度使朝贡。
现代文：二月初二，奚王劳骨宁率领六节度使前来朝贡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：庚子，乌古遣使献伏鹿国俘，赐其部夷离堇旗鼓以旌其功。
现代文：初二，乌古派使者进献伏鹿国俘虏，赐给该部夷离堇旗鼓以表彰其功劳。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Emperor Ughu sent an envoy to offer sacrifice to the captives of the Deer Kingdom, and awarded the Ministry of Emigration with a gong in recognition of its service.

古文：壬寅，女直来贡。
现代文：初五，女真前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，墨离鹘末里使回鹘阿萨兰还，赐对衣劳之。
现代文：十四日，墨离鹘末里出使回鹘阿萨兰回国，赐给对衣表示慰劳。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Mo Liang sent an envoy to Hui Asalan to return to China, and gave him a pair of clothes to express his consolation.

古文：乙卯，鸭渌江女直遣使来觐。
现代文：二十七日，鸭绿江女真派使者前来朝觐。
English: On the 27th, the Empress Dowager of the Yalu River sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：三月戊辰，遣使使晋，报幸南京。
现代文：三月初二，派使者出使晋，告知皇上将临幸南京。
English: On the second day of March, an envoy was sent to inform Jin that the emperor would be visiting Nanjing.

古文：己巳，如南京。
现代文：初三，到南京。
English: In my junior year, I went to Nanjing.

古文：辛未，命惕隐耶律涅离骨德率万骑先驱。
现代文：初五，命惕隐耶律涅离骨德率领一万骑为前锋。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was my destiny to lead ten thousand horsemen as a forward.

古文：壬申，次石岭，以奚王劳骨宁、监军寅你已朝谒不时，切责之。
现代文：初六，驻于石岭，奚王劳骨宁监军寅你已不按时朝谒，被严辞责备。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, stationed in Shiling, the commander of the army, Yin You, was severely reprimanded for not making the pilgrimage on time.

古文：丙子，鲁不姑上党项俘获数。
现代文：初十，鲁不姑表上党项俘虏及俘获物品数目。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the number of prisoners and captured items on the party item of Lu Bu Gu's list increased.

古文：癸未，猎水门，获白鹿。
现代文：十七日，猎于水门，获白鹿。
English: On the 17th, he hunted in Shuimen and caught a white deer.

古文：庚寅，诏扈从扰民者从军律。
现代文：二十四日，诏令随从骚扰百姓者按军律处置。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor issued an order to deal with those who harassed the people in accordance with military regulations.

古文：甲午，幸蓟州。
现代文：二十八日，临幸蓟州。
English: On the 28th, Linxing will leave Bozhou.

古文：乙未，晋及南唐各遣使来觐。
现代文：二十九日，晋与南唐分别派使者前来朝觐。
English: On the 29th, Jin and Southern Tang separately sent emissaries to the imperial court.

古文：夏四月庚子，至燕，备法驾，入自拱辰门，御元和殿，行入閤礼。
现代文：夏四月初五，到燕京，备法驾，自拱辰门进入，御临元和殿，行入阁礼。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, go to Yanjing, prepare the law, enter from the Arch Gate, enter the Imperial Palace, and enter the pavilion.

古文：壬寅，遣人使晋。
现代文：初七，派人出使晋。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, he sent an envoy to Jin.

古文：乙巳，幸留守赵延寿别墅。
现代文：初十，临幸留守赵延寿别墅。
English: At the age of ten, Lin was fortunate enough to stay at Zhao Yanshou's villa.

古文：丙午，晋遣宣徽使杨端、王眺等来问起居。
现代文：十一日，晋派宣徽使杨端、王眺等前来问候皇上起居。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Jin sent Emperor Xuanzong to ask Yang Duan, Wang Qian and others to come and greet the emperor.

古文：壬子，御便殿，宴晋及诸国使。
现代文：十七日，御临便殿，宴请晋使者及各国使者。
English: On the seventeenth day, His Majesty came to the Ben Hall and held a banquet for the envoys of the Jin Dynasty and the envoys of various countries.

古文：丙辰，晋遣使进茶药。
现代文：二十日，晋派使者呈进茶药。
English: On the 20th, an envoy from the Jin Dynasty came to present the herbal medicine.

古文：壬戌，御昭庆殿，宴南京群臣。
现代文：二十七日，驾临昭庆殿，宴饮南京群臣。
English: On the 27th, he arrived at the Zhaoqing Palace and dined with a group of ministers from Nanjing.

古文：癸亥，晋遣使贺端午，以所进节物赐群臣。
现代文：二十八日，晋派使者祝贺端午节，皇上将进献之节日礼物赐给群臣。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor of Jin sent an envoy to congratulate the Dragon Boat Festival, and the Emperor gave the holiday gifts to the ministers.

古文：乙丑，南唐进白龟。
现代文：三十日，南唐进献白龟。
English: On the 30th, the Southern Tang Dynasty presented white turtles.

古文：五月庚午，以端午宴群臣及诸国使，命回鹘、敦煌二使作本俗舞，俾诸使观之。
现代文：五月初五，因端午节而宴饮群臣及各国使者，命回鹘、敦煌二国使者跳当地舞让各国使者观看。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, a group of ministers and emissaries from various countries feasted because of the Dragon Boat Festival, and the emissaries of the two countries in Dunhuang danced a local dance for the emissaries of various countries to watch.

古文：庚辰，晋遣使进弓矢。
现代文：十五日，晋派使者进献弓箭。
English: On the 15th, Jin sent an envoy to present bows and arrows.

古文：甲申，遣皇子天德及检校司徒邸用和使晋。
现代文：十九日，派皇子天德及检校司徒邸用和出使晋。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Jin dispatched the prince Tiande and the procurator of the school to use and dispatch Jin.

古文：戊子，阅骑兵于南郊。
现代文：二十三日，在南郊检阅骑兵。
English: On the 23rd, there was a cavalry review in the southern suburbs.

古文：六月乙未朔，东京宰相耶律羽之言渤海相大素贤不法，诏僚佐部民举有才德者代之。
现代文：六月初一，东京宰相耶律羽之奏称渤海相大素贤违法，诏令臣僚及部民推举有才能德行者取代之。
English: On the first day of June, Tokyo's prime minister, Yerutani, issued a proclamation declaring that Bokkai's prime minister, Daisuke Sukenobu, was illegal, and ordered his ministers and subordinates to nominate a capable moralist to replace him.

古文：丙申，阅步卒于南郊。
现代文：初二，在南郊检阅步兵。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, in the southern suburbs, the infantry was reviewed.

古文：庚子，晋及辖剌骨只遣使来见。
现代文：初六，晋及辖剌骨只派使者前来觐见。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Jin and Empress Dowager Guo only sent an envoy to pay a courtesy call.

古文：壬寅，驾发燕京，命中书令萧僧隐部诸道军于长坐营。
现代文：初八，从南京起驾，命中书令萧僧隐率各路军驻扎于长坐营。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, after driving from Nanjing, he received a letter ordering Xiao Zengyin to lead all the troops stationed in the Changzai Camp.

古文：癸丑，次奉圣州。
现代文：十九日，驻于奉圣州。
English: On the 19th, it was stationed in Feng Shengzhou.

古文：甲寅，劳军士。
现代文：二十日，慰劳军士。
English: On the 20th, the consolatory labor sergeant left.

古文：秋七月己巳，猎猾底烈山。
现代文：秋七月初六，出猎于猾底烈山。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in the Jidi Mountains.

古文：癸酉，朝于皇太后。
现代文：初十，朝见皇太后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Empress Dowager came to see the Emperor.

古文：丙子，从皇太后视人皇王妃疾。
现代文：十三日，随皇太后探视人皇王妃病情。
English: On the 13th, she accompanied the Empress Dowager to inspect the condition of the Empress Dowager.

古文：戊寅，人皇王妃萧氏薨。
现代文：十五日，人皇王妃萧氏薨。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Empress Dowager Xiao died.

古文：己卯，以安重荣据镇州叛晋，诏征南将军柳严边备。
现代文：十六日，因安重荣割据镇州反晋，诏令征南将军萧柳严守边防。
English: On the 16th, because of An Chong Rong, Zhenzhou was divided into anti-Jin, and Xiao Liu, the general of the Southern Expedition, was ordered to strictly guard the border.

古文：丙戌，徙人皇王行宫于其妃薨所。
现代文：二十三日，迁人皇王行宫到其妃逝世处。
English: On the 23rd, the royal entourage was moved to the place where the queen had died.

古文：辛卯，晋遣使请行南郊礼，许之。
现代文：二十八日，晋派使者请求行南郊礼，得到允许。
English: On the 28th, an envoy sent by the Jin Dynasty requested to perform the Nanjiao ceremony, which was allowed.

古文：八月己亥，诏东丹吏民为其王倍妃萧氏服。
现代文：八月初六，诏令东丹吏民为其王耶律倍之妃萧氏服丧。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the Eastern Dan Li Min was ordered to hold a funeral for King Yerutube's consort, Lady Xiao.

古文：庚子，阻卜来贡。
现代文：初七，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the mourners came to pay their respects.

古文：壬寅，遣使南唐。
现代文：初九，派使者到南唐。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent an envoy to Southern Tang.

古文：乙巳，阻卜、黑车子室韦、赁烈等国来贡。
现代文：十二日，阻卜、黑车子室韦、赁烈等国前来朝贡。
English: On the twelfth day, the tributes of the Imperial Court were brought by countries such as Sobo, Kuroketsu, Shumway, and Ryoryo.

古文：南唐遣使求青毡帐，赐之。
现代文：南唐使者求赐青毡帐，得赐。
English: The emissary of the Southern Tang Dynasty asked for the account of the Qing Dynasty, and it was granted.

古文：戊申，以安端私城为白川州。
现代文：十五日，以安端私城为白川州。
English: On the fifteenth day, the city of Ando was designated as Shirakawa Prefecture.

古文：辛亥，鼻骨德使乞赐爵，以其国相授之。
现代文：十八日，鼻骨德使者请求赐爵，授之以鼻骨德国国相之职。
English: On the eighteenth day, the emissary of the German Empire asked for a knighthood and the post of the German Minister of the Empire.

古文：甲寅，阻卜来贡。
现代文：二十一日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zibo came to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，置白川州官属。
现代文：二十二日，设置白川州属吏。
English: On the 22nd, Shirakawa prefectural officials were set up.

古文：丙辰，诏以于谐里河、胪朐河之近地，给赐南院欧堇突吕、乙斯勃、北院温纳何剌、三石烈人为农田。
现代文：二十三日，诏令将于谐里河、胪朐河之近地赐给南院欧堇突吕、乙斯勃、北院温纳何剌三石烈百姓作为农田。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict gave the land near the Hunli River and the Minhe River to the Southern Yuan, Ouyu Tulu, Bishibo, and the Northern Yuan, Wenna He, as farmland.

古文：九月庚午，侍中崔穷古言： 晋主闻陛下数游猎，意请节之。 
现代文：九月初八，侍中崔穷古称： 晋主听说陛下多次游赏田猎，私下请皇上加以节制。 
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the chambermaid Cui Qiangu said: The Jin Lord heard that His Majesty had visited the hunting grounds many times, and privately asked the Emperor to restrain him.

古文：上曰： 朕之畋猎，非徒从乐，所以练习武事也。 
现代文：皇上说： 朕从事田猎，并非只是为了享乐，而是要借此练习武事。 
English: The emperor said: I am engaged in field hunting, not just for pleasure, but to practice martial arts.

古文：乃诏谕之。
现代文：于是下诏晓谕晋主。
English: So he issued an edict to the crown prince.

古文：壬午，边将奏破吐谷浑，擒其长；诏止诛其首恶及其丁壮，馀并释之。
现代文：二十日，边将奏称攻破吐谷浑，擒获其酋长；诏令只诛杀其首恶及丁壮，其余一概免罪。
English: On the 20th, the frontier commander reported that he had defeated the Tugu Huns and captured their chieftain; the edict only ordered the killing of the first evil and Ding Zhuang, and the rest were all exonerated.

古文：丙戌，晋遣使贡名马。
现代文：二十四日，晋派使者进贡名马。
English: On the 24th, the Jin Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute to famous horses.

古文：戊子，女直及吴越王遣使来贡。
现代文：二十六日，女真及吴越王派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 26th, Empress Zhen and King Wu Yue sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月辛丑，遣克郎使吴越，略姑使南唐。
现代文：冬十月初九，派克官郎出使吴越，略姑出使南唐。
English: On the ninth day of the tenth month of the winter, Gao Peikang sent his envoy to Wuyue, and his aunt sent her envoy to Nantang.

古文：庚申，晋遣使贡布，及请亲祠南岳，从之。
现代文：二十八日，晋派使者贡献布匹，又请皇上亲临祠祭南岳，从之。
English: On the 28th, Jin sent an envoy to contribute cloth, and also invited the emperor to come to the ancestral hall to celebrate Nangyue.

古文：十一月己巳，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书言晋密事。
现代文：十一月初八，南唐派使者奉上蜡丸书信告知晋机密之事。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the South Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to inform Jin of the confidential matter.

古文：丁丑，诏有司教民播种纺绩。
现代文：十六日，诏令有司教导百姓播种纺织。
English: On the 16th, the emperor issued an edict instructing officials to teach the people to sow textiles.

古文：除姊亡妹续之法。
现代文：废除姊死妹续弦之法。
English: Abolish the law of sister-in-law succession.

古文：十二月壬辰朔，率百僚谒太祖行宫。
现代文：十二月初一，率百官拜谒太祖行宫。
English: On the first day of December, hundreds of officials came to pay homage to Emperor Taizu.

古文：甲午，燔柴，礼毕，祠于神帐。
现代文：初三，行柴册礼，在神帐祭祀。
English: On the third day of junior high school, a firecracker ceremony is held, and a sacrifice is made in the tabernacle.

古文：丙申，遣使使晋。
现代文：初五，派使者出使晋。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to Jin.

古文：丙辰，诏契丹人授汉官者从汉仪，听与汉人婚姻。
现代文：二十五日，诏令契丹人授汉官者依从汉人礼仪，听任与汉人婚配。
English: On the 25th, the Khitan people ordered the Han officials to follow the Han etiquette and marry Han people.

古文：丁巳，诏燕京皇城西南堞建凉殿。
现代文：二十六日，诏令在燕京皇城西南城墙上建凉殿。
English: On the 26th, a decree was issued to build the Summer Palace on the southwest wall of the Yanjing Imperial City.

古文：是冬，驻跸于伞淀。
现代文：这年冬天，歇驾于伞淀。
English: This winter, I stayed in Umbrella Lake.

古文：四年春正月壬戌，以乙室、品卑、突轨三部鳏寡不能自存者，官为之配。
现代文：四年春正月初三，对于不能养活自己的乙室、品卑、突轨三部的鳏夫寡妇，由官府为之选择配偶。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the government chooses a spouse for widowed widows who are unable to support their second wives, low-class, and unruly.

古文：丙子，南唐遣使来贡。
现代文：十六日，南唐派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，涅剌、乌隗部献党项俘获数。
现代文：二十日，涅剌、乌隗部献上党项俘虏、战利品之数目。
English: On the 20th, Nirvana and the Black Hand presented the party with the number of captives and spoils of war.

古文：己丑，诏定征党项功。
现代文：二十九日，诏令甄定征伐党项的功劳大小。
English: On the 29th, the imperial decree was issued to determine the amount of merit in the conquest of the party.

古文：二月丙申，皇太子获白獐。
现代文：二月初六，皇太子获得白獐。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, the crown prince received the white scepter.

古文：甲辰，晋遣使进香药。
现代文：十四日，晋派使者进献香药。
English: On the 14th, Jin sent an emissary to offer incense.

古文：丙子，铁骊来贡。
现代文：丙子日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the third month, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，诏有司编《始祖奇首可汗事迹》。
现代文：二十七日，诏令有司编撰《始祖奇首可汗事迹》。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict ordered a division to compile the "Ancestor's Remarkable Deeds."

古文：己未，晋遣杨彦询来贡。且言镇州安重荣跋扈状，遂留不遣。
现代文：二十九日，晋派遣杨彦询前来进贡，并且陈说镇州安重荣跋扈情形，于是扣留他不让他回去。
English: On the 29th, Jin sent Yang Yanzhen to pay tribute, and told him that Zhenzhou was safe and prosperous, so he detained him and would not let him go back.

古文：是月，晋镇州安重荣执辽使者拽剌。
现代文：同月，晋镇州安重荣拘执我国使者拽剌。
English: In the same month, Jin Zhenzhou An Chong Rong detained our envoy and dragged him away.

古文：三月，特授回鹘使阔里于越，并赐旌旗、弓剑、衣马，馀赐有差。
现代文：三月，特授回鹘使者阔里于越官职，并赐给他旌旗、弓剑、衣马，其余人等也得到赏赐若干。
English: In March, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty, Kuo Li, was specially awarded the official post in Yue. He was also given a banner, a bow and sword, clothes and a horse. Other people also received some rewards.

古文：癸酉，晋以许祀南郊，遣使来谢，进黄金十镒。
现代文：十三日，晋因我国准许其在南郊祭天，派使者前来致谢，进献黄金十镒。
English: On the 13th, Jin sent an envoy to express his gratitude for China's permission to hold the festival in the southern suburbs, offering ten gold ingots.

古文：夏四月己卯，晋遣使进樱桃。
现代文：夏四月己卯日，晋派遣使者进献樱桃。
English: On the last day of the fourth month of the summer, Jin sent an envoy to present cherries.

古文：五月庚辰，吐谷浑夷离堇苏等叛入晋。
现代文：五月二十一日，吐谷浑夷离堇耶律苏等人反叛投晋。
English: On May 21st, the Huni of Tugu rebelled and voted for Jin.

古文：遣牒蜡往谕晋及太原守臣。
现代文：皇上派牒蜡前往告晓晋及太原守臣。
English: The emperor sent Cho Wax to tell Xiao Jin and Taiyuan Shouwen.

古文：六月辛卯，振武军节度副使赵崇逐其节度使耶律画里，以朔州叛，附晋。
现代文：六月初二，振武军节度副使赵崇驱逐其节度使耶律画里，以朔州反叛，依附于晋。
English: On the second day of June, Zhao Chong, deputy commander of the Zhenwu Army, drove out his subordinate commander, Ye Lu, who rebelled with Shuozhou and attached himself to Jin.

古文：丙午，命宣徽使褭古只赴朔州，以兵围其城，有晋使至，请开壁，即勿听，驿送阙下。
现代文：十七日，皇上命宣徽使袅古只前往朔州，率兵包围州城，并指令如有晋使来到该州，请求撤围，不要马上听信他的话而是将晋使执送到朝中。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor ordered Xuan Hu to go to Shuozhou and encircle the state capital with his soldiers. He also ordered that if any envoys came to Shuozhou, they should request to withdraw from the encirclement, not to immediately listen to his words, but to send the envoys to the central government.

古文：秋七月癸亥，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：秋七月初五，南唐派使者奉上蜡丸书信。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, an envoy from the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a letter with wax balls.

古文：丙寅，褭古只奏请遣使至朔令降，守者犹坚壁弗纳。
现代文：初八，袅古只奏请派使者到朔州命令对方投降，守城者仍坚守壁围不肯接纳使者。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Gonggu only requested that an envoy be sent to Shuozhou to order the other side to surrender. The defenders of the city still held fast to the wall and refused to accept the envoy.

古文：且言晋有贡物。命即以所贡物赐攻城将校。
现代文：袅古只又说晋国将有贡品来，皇上下令立即将晋所贡物品赐给攻城将领。
English: Xinggu only said that tribute would come from Jin, and the emperor immediately ordered that the tribute from Jin be given to the general who attacked the city.

古文：己巳，有司奏神纛车有蜂巢成蜜，史占之，吉。
现代文：十一日，有司奏称神纛车上有蜂筑巢酿蜜。史官占卜之，得吉兆。
English: On the 11th day, Siso said that there was a beehive nesting on the shrine car to make honey. The historian divined that it was a good omen.

古文：壬申，晋遣使进水晶砚。
现代文：十四日，晋派使者进献水晶砚。
English: On the 14th, Jin sent an emissary to present a crystal gong.

古文：八月癸巳，南唐奉蜡丸书。
现代文：八月初六，南唐奉上蜡丸书信。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Nantang received the wax round letter.

古文：庚子，晋遣使进犀弓、竹矢。
现代文：十三日，晋派使者进献犀弓、竹箭。
English: On the 13th, Jin sent an envoy to present rhinoceros bows and bamboo arrows.

古文：吴越王遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：吴越王派使者奉上蜡丸书信。
English: King Wu Yue sent an envoy to present a wax-filled letter.

古文：九月壬申，有星孛于晋分。
现代文：九月十五日，有彗星出现于晋之分野。
English: On the 15th of September, a comet appeared in the Tsuru-Shinshi area.

古文：丁丑，幸归化州。
现代文：二十日，临幸归化州。
English: On the 20th, Lin was fortunate enough to be naturalized.

古文：冬十月辛丑，有司奏燕、蓟大熟。
现代文：冬十月十五日，有司奏称燕、蓟大丰收。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, there was a call for a large harvest of swallows and cormorants.

古文：癸卯，吴越王遣使来贡。
现代文：十七日，吴越王派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 17th, King Wu Yue sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一月丙寅，晋以讨安重荣来告。
现代文：十一月初十，晋以讨伐安重荣事前来报告。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the first month of the year, Jin announced that he would launch a crusade against Anzhu Rong.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑请降，遣使抚谕。
现代文：十四日，吐谷浑请求降附，皇上派使者前去抚慰晓谕。
English: On the fourteenth day, Tukugahun requested to surrender, and the emperor sent an envoy to appease him.

古文：阻卜来贡，以其物赐左右。
现代文：阻卜前来进贡，将其贡品赐给左右。
English: Dabo came to pay tribute, and gave his tribute to both sides.

古文：丙子，鸭渌江女直来贡。
现代文：二十日，鸭绿江女真前来进贡。
English: On the 20th, the Yalu River maid came to pay tribute.

古文：壬午，以永宁、天授二节及正旦、重午、冬至、腊并受贺，著令。
现代文：二十六日，因永宁、天授二节及正旦、重午、冬至、腊日均受到朝贺，将此事写到每月月令上。
English: On the 26th, because Yongning, Tianju 2nd Festival, and Zhengdan, Chongwu, Winter Solstice, and Leshi all received morning greetings, the matter was written on the monthly calendar.

古文：十二月戊子，晋遣使来告山南节度使安从进反。
现代文：十二月初三，晋派使前来报告山南节度使安从进反叛。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, an envoy from the Jin Dynasty came to report that the Shannan Sect had rebelled.

古文：诏以便宜讨之。
现代文：诏令可以便宜从事，征讨安氏。
English: The imperial edict can be carried out inexpensively, and the An clan can be solicited.

古文：庚寅，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：初五，南唐派使者奉上蜡丸书信。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the envoy of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a wax round letter.

古文：戊戌，晋遣王升鸾来贡。
现代文：十三日，晋派王升鸾前来进贡。
English: On the 13th, Jin sent Wang Shengxuan to bring tribute.

古文：戊申，晋以败安重荣来告，遂遣杨彦询归。
现代文：二十三日，晋以击败安重荣事前来报告。于是我国送杨彦询归晋。
English: On the 23rd, Jin reported that he had defeated An Chongrong in advance. Therefore, China sent Yang Yancheng back to Jin.

古文：辛亥，晋遣使乞罢戍兵，诏惕隐朔古班师。
现代文：二十六日，晋派使者请求撤去戍兵，诏令惕隐朔古班师。
English: On the 26th, Jin sent an envoy to request the withdrawal of the Han soldiers, and the imperial edict was issued to withdraw the ancient division.

古文：甲寅，攻拔朔州，遣控鹤指挥使谐里劳军。
现代文：二十九日，攻下朔州，派控鹤指挥使谐里慰问将士。
English: On the 29th, after the capture of Shuozhou, he sent the commander of the controlling cranes to send condolences to the soldiers.

古文：时褭古只战殁城下，上怒，命诛城中丁壮，仍以叛民上户三十为褭古只部曲。
现代文：因袅古只战死于城下，皇上发怒，下令诛杀城中丁壮，又将叛民上等户三十户作为袅古只部曲。
English: The Emperor was angry and ordered the killing of Ding Zhuang in the city, and thirty of the rebels' upper-class households were designated as the "Ancient Warriors."

古文：五年春正月丙辰朔，上在归化州，御行殿受群臣朝。
现代文：五年春正月初一，皇上在归化州登临行殿接受群臣朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the emperor ascended the throne in the naturalization state to receive a group of courtiers.

古文：以诸道贡物进太后及赐宗室百僚。
现代文：将诸道贡物进献给皇太后，并赐给宗室百官。
English: Tributes from all walks of life were presented to the empress dowager and given to the 100 officials of the imperial family.

古文：戊午，诏求直言，北王府郎君耶律海思应诏，召对称旨，特授宣徽使。
现代文：初三，下诏求直言，北王府郎君耶律海思应诏觐见皇上，应对之间很得皇上欢心，被特授为宣徽使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he made a direct request to the emperor, and the prince of the Northern King's Court, Yeruhai Si, agreed to meet with the emperor. The emperor was very pleased with his response, and he was specially awarded the title of Imperial Herald.

古文：诏政事令僧隐等以契丹户分屯南边。
现代文：诏令政事令僧隐等人率契丹民户分头屯驻于南境。
English: Zhao Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi Rongzhi

古文：戊辰，晋函安重荣首来献。
现代文：十三日，晋函盛安重荣首级前来进献。
English: On the 13th, the head of Jinhan Sheng'an and Chong Rong came to present it.

古文：上数欲亲讨重荣，至是乃止。
现代文：皇上多次想亲自征讨安重荣。到这时见重荣已死，心愿方了。
English: The emperor wanted to personally recruit An Chongrong many times. By this time, seeing that Chongrong was dead, his wish was granted.

古文：癸酉，遣使使晋。
现代文：十八日，派使者出使晋。
English: On the 18th, he sent an envoy to Jin.

古文：是月，晋以朔州平，遣使来贺，遂遣客省使耶律化哥使晋，并致生辰礼。
现代文：同月，晋因朔州平定，派使者前来祝贺，皇上于是派客省使耶律化哥出使晋国并送上生辰礼。
English: In the same month, due to the pacification of Shuozhou, Jin sent an envoy to congratulate him. The emperor then sent the provincial envoy, Yelu Huagong, to send an envoy to Jin and present him with a birthday gift.

古文：二月壬辰，上将南幸，以诸路有未平者，召太子及群臣议，皆曰： 今襄、镇、朔三州虽已平，然吐谷浑为安重荣所诱，犹未归命，宜发兵讨之，以警诸部。 
现代文：二月初八，皇上将要南幸，因诸路尚有未平定者，召太子及群臣商议对策，大家都说 ：现下襄、镇、朔三州，尽已平定，然而吐谷浑为安重荣所引诱，仍未归服听命，应当派兵讨伐它，以警告其他各部。 
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor summoned the crown prince and his retainers to discuss how to deal with Nanko, since there were still some roads that had not been pacified. Everyone said, "Now Xiang, Zhen, and Shuo three provinces have been completely pacified. However, Tugu has been lured by An Chongrong and has not yet obeyed his orders. Troops should be sent to fight it as a warning to other provinces."

古文：上曰： 正与朕合。 
现代文：皇上说 ：正合朕意。 
English: The emperor said, "It is in accordance with my wishes."

古文：遂诏以明王隈恩代于越信恩为西南路招讨使以讨之，且谕明王宜先练习边事，而后之官。
现代文：于是下诏以明王隈恩代替于越信恩为西南路招讨使以讨伐吐谷浑，又晓谕明王应当先行熟悉边防之事，然后去赴任。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that Ming Wang Kuwen, instead of Yue Xin'en, should be chosen as the leader of the southwestern route, and that Ming Wang should first familiarize himself with border defense, and then go to work.

古文：甲午，如南京。遣使使晋索吐谷浑叛者。
现代文：初十，皇上到南京，派使者出使晋索要吐谷浑叛人。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor went to Nanjing and sent an envoy to Jin to ask him to get rid of the Tugu Hun rebels.

古文：乙未，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：十一日，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, people came to pay tribute.

古文：三月乙卯朔，晋遣齐州防御使宋晖业、翰林茶酒使张言来问起居。
现代文：三月初一，晋派齐州防御使宋晖业、翰林茶酒使张言前来问候皇上起居。
English: On the first day of March, the Jin sent the defense envoy of Qizhou, Song Yingye, and the tea and wine envoy of Hanlin, Zhang Yan, to come and greet the emperor.

古文：闰月，驻跸阳门。
现代文：闰三月，歇驾于阳门。
English: In leap March, rest at the gate of the sun.

古文：夏四月甲寅朔，铁骊来贡，以其物分赐群臣。
现代文：夏四月初一，铁骊前来进贡，将其贡物分赐给群臣。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Tie Xuan came to pay tribute and gave his tribute to the courtiers.

古文：丙子，晋遣使进射柳鞍马。
现代文：二十二日，晋派使者进献射柳所需鞍马。
English: On the 22nd, an envoy from the Jin Dynasty came to offer the pommel horse needed to shoot the willow.

古文：五月五日戊子，禁屠宰。
现代文：五月五日，禁止屠宰。
English: Slaughter was banned on 5 May.

古文：六月癸丑朔，晋齐王重贵遣使来贡。
现代文：六月初一，晋齐王石重贵派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of June, Wang Shizhong of Jinqi sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，徒睹古、素撒来贡。
现代文：初五，徒睹古、素撒前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Tsujiko and Susa came to pay tribute.

古文：乙丑，晋主敬瑭殂，子重贵立。
现代文：十三日，晋主石敬瑭崩殂，子石重贵即位。
English: On the 13th day of the Jin Dynasty, the head of the Jin Dynasty, Shi Jingyao, died, and his son, Shi Juki, ascended to the throne.

古文：戊辰，晋遣使告哀，辍朝七日。
现代文：十六日，晋派使者前来报丧，皇上为之停止上朝七日。
English: On the 16th, Jin sent an envoy to report the death, and the emperor stopped going to court for seven days.

古文：庚午，遣使往晋吊祭。
现代文：十八日，派使者前往晋国吊慰祭祀。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent to Jin Province to offer condolences.

古文：丁丑，闻皇太后不豫，上驰入侍，汤药必亲尝。
现代文：二十五日，得知皇太后病重，皇上火速赶去侍候，进汤药时必定自己先尝过。
English: On the 25th, learning that the Empress Dowager was seriously ill, the Emperor hurried to wait for her. He must have tasted the yakitori first before taking it.

古文：仍告太祖庙，幸菩萨堂，饭僧五万人。
现代文：又告祭于太祖庙，前往菩萨堂，管待五万僧人饭食。
English: He also preached at Taizu Temple, went to the Bodhisattva Hall, and served meals to fifty thousand monks.

古文：七月乃愈。
现代文：皇太后的病到七月才痊愈。
English: The empress dowager did not recover from her illness until July.

古文：秋七月庚寅，晋遣金吾卫大将军梁言、判四方馆事朱崇节来谢，书称孙，不称臣，遣客省使乔荣让之。
现代文：秋七月初八，晋派金吾卫大将军梁言、判四方馆事朱崇节前来致谢，书信中称 孙 不称 臣 ，皇上派客省使乔荣前往责备。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Jin Dynasty sent Liang Yan, the general of King Wuwei, and Zhu Chong, the librarian of the Court of the Four Quarters, to express their gratitude. The letter said that Sun was not a minister, and the emperor sent the provincial envoy Qiao Rong to reprimand him.

古文：景延广答曰： 先帝则圣朝所立，今主则我国自册。
现代文：景延广回答说 ：先帝乃是圣朝所立，今天子则是我国自己册立。
English: Jing Yanguang replied, "The previous emperor was established by the Holy Dynasty, but today's emperor was established by our country itself."

古文：为邻为孙则可，奉表称臣则不可。 
现代文：为邻国为孙子辈是可以的，上表称臣则不行。 
English: It is possible to be a grandchild of a neighboring country, but it is not possible to be a vassal according to the above table.

古文：荣还，具奏之，上始有南伐之意。
现代文：乔荣回来，详细上奏，皇上开始产生南伐之意。
English: Qiao Rong came back and played it in detail. The emperor began to think of the Southern Expedition.

古文：辛卯，阻卜、鼻骨德、乌古来贡。
现代文：初九，阻卜、鼻骨德、乌古前来进贡。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, Zibo, Nanzhongde, and Wugu came to pay tribute.

古文：将军闼德里、蒲骨等率降将辖德至阙，并献所获。
现代文：将军闼德里、蒲骨等率降将辖德到宫中，且献上所获物品。
English: The generals would bring the emperor to the palace and present him with the items they had obtained.

古文：丁未，晋遣使以祖母哀来告。
现代文：二十四日，晋因祖母过世派使者前来报告。
English: On the 24th, Jin sent an envoy to report on the death of his grandmother.

古文：八月辛酉，女直、阻卜、乌古各贡方物。
现代文：八月初十，女真、阻卜、乌古分别贡献土产。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, Nyanzhen, Dangb and Wugu contributed to the local production respectively.

古文：甲子，晋复襄州。
现代文：十三日，晋免除襄州赋税。
English: On the 13th, Jin exempted Yangzhou from taxation.

古文：戊辰，诏河东节度使刘知远送叛臣乌古指挥使由燕京赴阙。
现代文：十七日，诏令河东节度使刘知远送叛臣乌古指挥使由燕京来朝中。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Liu Zhiyuan was ordered by the Hengtong Jiedu to send the commanding envoy of the traitor Ugu from Yanjing to the Middle Kingdom.

古文：癸酉，遣天城军节度使萧拜石吊祭于晋。
现代文：二十二日，派天城军节度使萧拜石到晋吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 22nd, the Tiancheng Army sent Xiao Baishi to Jin to offer condolences.

古文：九月壬辰，遣使贺晋帝嗣位。
现代文：九月十一日，派使者祝贺晋帝即位。
English: On September 11, an envoy was sent to congratulate Emperor Jin on his accession to the throne.

古文：冬十月己巳，征诸道兵。
现代文：冬十月十九日，征发诸道兵马。
English: In the winter, on October 19th, soldiers and horses from all provinces were conscripted.

古文：遣将军密骨德伐党项。
现代文：派将军密骨德讨伐党项。
English: Send a general with a strong backbone to fight the Party.

古文：十一月乙未，武定军奏松生枣。
现代文：十一月十五日，武定军奏称松树生枣。
English: On November 15th, the Wuding Army called the pine tree jujube.

古文：十二月癸亥，晋遣使来谢。
现代文：十二月十四日，晋派使者前来致谢。
English: On December 14th, Jin sent an envoy to the emperor to express his thanks.

古文：是冬，驻跸赤城。
现代文：这年冬天，出巡途中暂住于赤城。
English: This winter, while on tour, he temporarily stayed in Akagi.

古文：六年春二月乙卯，晋遣使进先帝遗物。
现代文：六年春二月初七，晋派使者进献先帝敬瑭之遗物。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the 6th year of the Spring, the Emperor Jin sent an envoy to present the relics of the former Emperor Jing Yi.

古文：辛酉，晋遣使请居汴，从之。
现代文：十三日，晋派使者请求准予建都汴京，从之。
English: On the thirteenth day, Jin sent an envoy to request permission to build the capital, Yangjing, which was complied with.

古文：三月己卯朔，吴越王遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初一朔，吴越王派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of March, King Wu Yue sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲申，梅里喘引来归。
现代文：初六，梅里喘引前来归附。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Meili was so excited that she came to join.

古文：戊子，南唐遣使奉蜡丸书。
现代文：初十，南唐派使者进献蜡丸书信。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to present a wax round letter.

古文：丁未，晋至汴，遣使来谢。
现代文：十七日，晋迁都至汴，派使者前来致谢。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the emperor sent an envoy to the court to express his gratitude.

古文：夏四月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一朔，日食。
English: Summer, the first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：五月己亥，遣使如晋致生辰礼。
现代文：五月二十二日，派使者前往晋国致送生辰礼。
English: On May 22, an envoy was sent to Jin Province to deliver a birthday gift.

古文：六月丁未朔，铁骊来贡。
现代文：六月初一朔，铁骊前来进贡。
English: At the beginning of June, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：己未，奚锄骨里部进白麝。
现代文：十三日，奚锄骨里部进献白麝。
English: On the 13th, the inner part of the tibia was presented with egrets.

古文：辛酉，莫州进白鹊。
现代文：十五日，莫州进献白鹊。
English: On the 15th, Mozhou presented egrets.

古文：晋遣使贡金。
现代文：晋派使者贡献金子。
English: The Jin Dynasty sent emissaries to contribute gold.

古文：秋八月丁未朔，晋复贡金。
现代文：秋八月初一朔，晋再次贡献金子。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of August, Jin contributed gold again.

古文：己未，如奉圣州。
现代文：十三日，皇上到奉圣州。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor went to Bongseongju.

古文：晋遣其子延煦来朝。
现代文：晋派其皇子石延煦前来朝拜。
English: Jin sent his prince, Shi Yanjun, to pay homage.

古文：冬十一月辛卯，上京留守耶律迪辇得晋谍，知有二心。
现代文：冬十一月十七日，上京留守耶律迪辇获得晋之谍报，得知晋有二心。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th month of the winter, Ye Lu Di Yao, who was staying in Beijing, received a spy report from Jin and learned that Jin had two hearts.

古文：甲辰，铁骊来贡。
现代文：三十日。铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 30th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月丁未，如南京，议伐晋。
现代文：十二月初三，皇上到南京，商议讨伐晋国。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the emperor went to Nanjing to discuss the campaign against Jin.

古文：命赵延寿、赵延昭、安端、解里等由沧、恒、易、定分道而进，大军继之。
现代文：命赵延寿、赵延昭、安端、解里等人由沧、恒、易、定四州分路进发，大军紧随其后。
English: Zhao Yanzhou, Zhao Yanzhao, Anduan, Qieli and others were ordered to advance from Cang, Heng, Yi and Ding four states, followed by the army.

古文：是岁，杨彦昭请移镇奈泺及新镇，从之。
现代文：这一年，杨彦昭请求移镇奈泊及新镇，从之。
English: In that year, Yang Yan Zhao requested to move to Naipo Town and Xinzhen Town, and they complied.

古文：七年春正月甲戌朔，赵延寿、延昭率前锋五万骑次任丘。
现代文：七年春正月初一朔，赵延寿、赵延昭率前锋五万骑驻扎于任丘。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Spring, Zhao Yan Shou and Zhao Yan Zhao led the vanguard of fifty thousand horsemen stationed in Renqiu.

古文：丙子，安端入雁门，围忻、代。
现代文：初三，安端进入雁门，包围了忻州、代州。
English: On the third day of the first month, Anduan entered the Wild Goose Gate and encircled Zhangzhou and Daizhou.

古文：己卯，赵延寿围贝州，其军校邵珂开南门纳辽兵，太守吴峦投井死。
现代文：初六，赵延寿包围贝州，贝州军校邵珂打开南门迎接我军，太守吴峦投井而死。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Zhao Yanshou encircled Beizhou, Beizhou Military Academy Shao Ke opened the south gate to welcome our army, and the eunuch Wu Haotong died in the well.

古文：己丑，次元城，授延寿魏、博等州节度使，封魏王，率所部屯南乐。
现代文：十六日，皇上驻扎于元城，授赵延寿为魏博等州节度使，封为魏王，率所部屯驻于南京。
English: On the 16th, the emperor stationed in Yuancheng, conferred Zhao Yanshou as Wei Bo and other state festival envoys, named Wei Wang, and stationed the headquarters in Nanjing.

古文：丙申，遣兵攻黎阳，晋张彦泽来拒。
现代文：二十三日，派兵攻打黎阳，晋张彦泽前来拒战。
English: On the 23rd, troops were sent to attack Liyang, and Jin Zhang Yanze came to refuse to fight.

古文：辛丑，晋遣使来修旧好，诏割河北诸州，及遣桑维翰、景延广来议。
现代文：二十八日，派遣使者来修旧好，下诏割让河北诸州，且派桑维翰、景延广前来商谈。
English: On the 28th, he sent an envoy to mend fences, and issued an edict to cede Hebei to the states, and sent Sang Weihan and Jing Yanguang to negotiate.

古文：二月甲辰朔，攻博州，刺史周儒以城降。
现代文：二月初一，攻打博州，刺史周儒开城降。
English: On the first day of February, they attacked Bozhou, stabbed Zhou Ru, and captured the city.

古文：晋平卢军节度使杨光远密道辽师自马家口济河。
现代文：晋平卢军节度使杨光远暗中导引辽军自马家口渡河。
English: Yang Guangyuan secretly led the Liao army across the river from the mouth of the Majia River.

古文：晋将景延广命石斌守麻家口，白再荣守马家口。
现代文：晋将景延广命令石斌把守麻家口，白再荣把守马家口。
English: Jin general Jing Yanguang ordered Shi Bin to guard Ma Jiakou and Bai Zairong to guard Ma Jiakou.

古文：未几，周儒引辽军麻答营于河东，攻郓州北津，以应光远。
现代文：不久，周儒导引我军麻答扎营于河东，攻打郓州北津，以接应杨光远。
English: Soon after, Zhou Ru led our army, the Mahat, to camp in the east of the river and attack Beijin in Bozhou in order to meet Yang Guangyuan.

古文：晋遣李守贞、皇甫遇、梁汉璋、薛怀让将兵万人，缘河水陆俱进。
现代文：晋派李守贞、皇甫遇、梁汉璋、薛怀让率兵万人，沿黄河水陆并进。
English: Jin dispatched Li Shouzhen, Wang Fuyu, Liang Hanzhong, and Xue Huaijian to march along the Yellow River with ten thousand soldiers.

古文：辽军围晋别将于戚城，晋主自将救之，辽师解去。
现代文：我军包围晋别将于戚城，晋主自己率兵救援，辽军解围而去。
English: Our army encircled Jinbei in Qicheng, the Jin lord led his own soldiers to rescue, and the Liao army broke the siege and left.

古文：守贞等至马家口，麻答遣步卒万人筑营垒，骑兵万人守于外，馀兵屯河西。
现代文：李守贞等到达马家口，麻答派步兵万人修筑工事，以骑兵万人守卫于外，其余人马屯驻于河西。
English: When Li Shouzhen and others arrived at Majiakou, Ma Du sent ten thousand infantrymen to build the construction, ten thousand cavalrymen to guard outside, and the rest of the people were stationed in Hexi.

古文：渡未已，晋兵薄之，辽军不利。
现代文：渡河未毕，晋军逼近，辽军失利。
English: Before crossing the river, the Jin army was approaching, and the Liao army was defeated.

古文：三月癸酉朔，赵延寿言： 晋诸军沿河置栅，皆畏怯不敢战。
现代文：三月初一，赵延寿说： 晋诸军沿黄河设立营栅，都胆怯不敢作战。
English: On the first day of March, Zhao Yanshou said: The Jin armies set up camp along the Yellow River, but they were too timid to fight.

古文：若率大兵直抵澶渊，据其桥梁，晋必可取。 
现代文：如果率大军直抵澶渊，占据桥梁，必定可以取晋。 
English: If you lead a large army straight to the abyss and occupy the bridge, you will certainly be able to win promotion.

古文：是日，晋兵驻澶渊，其前军高行周在戚城。
现代文：这天，晋军驻于澶渊，其前军高行周在戚城。
English: On this day, the Jin army was stationed in Shanyuan, and its former army Gao Xingzhou was in Qicheng.

古文：乃命延寿、延昭以数万骑出行周右，上以精兵出其左。
现代文：于是命赵延寿、赵延昭率数万骑出击于行周右侧，皇上率精兵出击其左侧。
English: Therefore, Zhao Yan Shou and Zhao Yan Zhao ordered tens of thousands of horsemen to attack on the right side of the march, and the emperor led the elite soldiers to attack on the left side.

古文：战至暮，上复以劲骑突其中军，晋军不能战。
现代文：战至日暮，皇上又以精锐骑兵冲击其中军，晋军不能抵挡。
English: The battle lasted until nightfall, when the emperor attacked the Chinese army with elite cavalry, and the Jin army could not resist.

古文：会有谍者言晋军东面数少，沿河城栅不固，乃急击其东偏，众皆奔溃。
现代文：适逢有间谍告知晋军东面人数少，沿河之城池营栅不坚固，于是火速攻击其东边偏悬处，守敌均四散溃逃。
English: At the right time, a spy told the Jin army that the number of people in the east was small, and the camp gate of the city along the river was not strong, so they quickly attacked the hanging place on the east side, and the defenders scattered and fled.

古文：纵兵追及，遂大败之。
现代文：辽军纵兵追上逃兵，大败之。
English: The Liao longitudinal army caught up with the deserters and suffered a great defeat.

古文：壬午，留赵延昭守贝州，徙所俘户于内地。
现代文：初十，留赵延昭守贝州，将俘虏的民户迁徙到内地。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Yan Zhao was left in charge of Beizhou, and the captive households were moved to the mainland.

古文：夏四月癸丑，还次南京。
现代文：夏四月十一日，回师驻于南京。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, he returned to Nanjing.

古文：辛未，如凉陉。
现代文：二十九日，到凉陉。
English: On the 29th, we went to Lengyan.

古文：五月癸酉，耶律拔里得奏破德州，擒刺史尹居璠及将吏二十七人。
现代文：五月初二，耶律拔里得奏称攻破德州，擒获刺史尹居及将吏二十七人。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Yerubali made a report that he had conquered Texas, and had killed Shi Yinju and twenty-seven generals.

古文：六月甲辰，黑车子室来贡。
现代文：六月初四，黑车子室韦前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the black chariot came to pay tribute.

古文：乙巳，纴没里、要里等国来贡。
现代文：初五，纟壬没里、要里等国前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the lunar calendar, countries such as Min Min, Ya Li and others came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月己卯，晋杨光远遣人奉蜡丸书。
现代文：秋七月初九，晋杨光远派人送来蜡丸书信。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Jin Yang Guangyuan sent a person to deliver a wax ball letter.

古文：辛卯，晋遣张晖奉表乞和，留晖不遣。
现代文：二十一日，晋派张晖前来上表求和，被扣留。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Jin sent Zhang Xuan to petition for peace, but he was detained.

古文：八月辛酉，回鹘遣使请婚，不许。
现代文：八月二十一日，回鹘派使者请求与我国结为婚姻，未得到允许。
English: On August 21, an envoy sent by the Uighurs requested to marry with our country, but was not allowed.

古文：是月，晋镇州兵来袭飞狐，大同军节度使耶律孔阿战败之。
现代文：同月，晋镇州兵马袭击飞狐，被大同军节度使耶律孔阿击败。
English: In the same month, the Jin Zhen Zhou soldiers and horses attacked the flying fox and were defeated by the Datong Army.

古文：九月庚午朔，北幸。
现代文：九月初一，皇上北幸。
English: On the first day of September, Emperor Hokuchika passed away.

古文：冬十月丁未，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：冬十月初八，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, people came to pay tribute.

古文：壬戌，天授节，诸国进贺，惟晋不至。
现代文：二十三日，是天授节，各国进献贺礼，只有晋没来。
English: On the 23rd, it was the Day of Consecration. All countries presented gifts, but Jin did not come.

古文：十一月壬申，诏征诸道兵，以闰月朔会温榆河北。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏征发诸道兵马，预定于闰十二月初一会师于温榆河以北。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, troops and horses from all the provinces were requisitioned and dispatched, and the first division was scheduled to arrive in the north of the Wenlu River at the beginning of December.

古文：十二月癸卯，南伐。
现代文：十二月初五，南伐。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：甲子，次古北口。
现代文：二十六日，驻于古北口。
English: On the 26th, it was stationed in Gubeikou.

古文：闰月己巳朔，阅诸道兵于温榆河。己卯，围恒州，下其九县。
现代文：闰十二月初一，在温榆河检阅诸道兵马。十一日，包围恒州，攻下其所辖九个县。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, the troops and horses of all the provinces were inspected in Wenlu River. On the 11th day, they encircled Hengzhou and conquered the nine counties under its jurisdiction.

古文：八年春正月庚子，分兵攻邢、洺、磁三州，杀掠殆尽。
现代文：八年春正月初三，分兵攻打邢、氵名、磁三州，杀戮掳掠殆尽。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, the detachments attacked and defeated the three prefectures of Shandong, Henan and Zhejiang, and the killing and plundering were exhausted.

古文：入邺都境。
现代文：我军进入邺都境内。
English: Our army entered the territory of Xindu.

古文：张从恩、马全节、安审琦兵悉陈于相州安阳水之南。
现代文：晋张从恩、马全节、安审琦兵马尽数列阵于相州安阳水以南。
English: Jin Zhang Cong En, Ma Quan Jie, An Ji, and other soldiers and horses were lined up in the south of Anyang Water in Xiangzhou.

古文：皇甫遇与濮州刺史慕容彦超将兵千骑来觇辽军。
现代文：皇甫遇与濮州刺史慕容彦超率骑兵千骑前来侦伺我军动向。
English: The emperor met with the governor of Zhangzhou, Shishi Muronghan, who led a thousand cavalry to come and investigate the movement of our army.

古文：至邺都，遇辽军数万，且战且却，至榆林店。
现代文：在邺都遭遇我军数万，且战且退，到达榆林店。
English: In Shidu, tens of thousands of our troops encountered, and fought and retreated, reaching the Yulin store.

古文：辽军继至，遇与彦超力战百馀合，遇马毙，步战，审琦引骑兵逾水以救，辽军乃还。
现代文：我军紧跟着到来，皇甫遇与慕容彦超力战百余个回合，皇甫遇坐骑倒毙，只好徒步作战，安审琦率骑兵渡河来救，我军才回来。
English: Our army followed closely behind. The emperor met with Murongyan and fought more than a hundred rounds. The emperor was killed by a horse and had to fight on foot. The security officer led the cavalry across the river to rescue, and our army came back.

古文：二月，围魏，晋将杜重威率兵来救。
现代文：二月，我军包围魏州，晋将杜重威率兵来救。
English: In February, our army encircled Weizhou, and Jin general Du Chongwei led the troops to rescue.

古文：戊子，晋将折从阮陷胜州。
现代文：二十一日，晋将折从阮攻陷胜州。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Jin general turned from Ruan to invade and capture Shengzhou.

古文：三月戊戌，师拔祁州，杀其刺史沈斌。
现代文：三月初二，我军攻下祁州，杀其刺史沈斌。
English: On the second day of March, our army captured Zhangzhou and killed its leader, Shen Bin.

古文：庚子，杜重威、李守贞攻泰州。
现代文：十四日，杜重威、李守贞攻泰州。
English: On the 14th, Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen attacked Taizhou.

古文：戊子，赵延寿率前锋薄泰城。
现代文：二十二日，赵延寿率前锋进逼泰城。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Yanshou led the forwards into Taicheng.

古文：己未，重威、守贞引兵南遁，追至阳城，大败之。
现代文：二十三日，杜重威、李守贞领兵南逃，辽军追至阳城，大败晋军。
English: On the 23rd, Du Chongwei and Li Shouzhen led the soldiers to flee to the south, and the Liao Army chased them to Yangcheng and defeated the Jin Army.

古文：复以步卒为方阵来拒，与战二十馀合。
现代文：晋又以步兵为方阵前来拒战，交战二十余回合。
English: Jin also came to oppose the battle with infantry as a phalanx, and fought more than 20 rounds.

古文：壬戌，复搏战十馀里。
现代文：二十六日，两军又拼搏战斗十余里。
English: On the 26th, the two armies fought hard for more than ten miles.

古文：癸亥，围晋兵于白团卫村。
现代文：二十七日，辽包围晋军于白团卫村。
English: On the 27th, Liao besieged the Jin army in Baiyunwei village.

古文：晋兵下鹿角为营。
现代文：晋军埋下带尖木树枝为营寨。
English: The Jin army buried the camphor tree branches as a camp.

古文：是夕大风。
现代文：这天夜里刮起了大风。
English: There was a strong wind that night.

古文：至曙，命铁鹞军下马，拔其鹿角，奋短兵入击。顺风纵火扬尘，以助其势。
现代文：到天亮，辽命铁鹞军下马，拔出带尖桩树枝，挥舞短刀进击，并顺风纵火扬起烟尘以助声势。
English: By dawn, the Liao Sheng army dismounted, pulled out branches with piles, waved knives to attack, and set fire to the wind to raise smoke and dust to help the momentum.

古文：晋军大呼曰： 都招讨何不用兵，令士卒徒死！ 
现代文：晋军大声呼喊说 ：都招讨为何不用兵出战，却让士卒白白送死！ 
English: The Jin army shouted loudly, "Why don't you invite soldiers to fight, but let the soldiers die in vain!"

古文：诸将皆奋出战。
现代文：晋诸将均奋勇出战。
English: The promoted generals will all fight bravely.

古文：张彦泽、药元福、皇甫遇出兵大战，诸将继至，辽军却数百步。
现代文：张彦泽、药元福、皇甫遇出兵大战，诸将也接着出战，我军被迫后退数百步。
English: Zhang Yanze, Yue Yuanfu, and Emperor Fu were sent out to fight in the great battle, and the generals also went out to fight, and our army was forced to retreat hundreds of steps.

古文：风益甚，昼晦如夜。
现代文：风更大了，白天里昏暗如夜。
English: The wind picked up and the day became as dark as night.

古文：符彦卿以万骑横击辽军，率步卒并进，辽军不利。
现代文：符彦卿率万骑横击我军，并率步兵齐头并进，我军失利。
English: Lord Fuhiko led ten thousand horsemen to attack our army, and led the infantry to advance side by side, and our army was defeated.

古文：上乘奚车退十馀里，晋追兵急，获一橐驼乘之乃归。
现代文：皇上乘奚车退却十余里，晋追兵威迫甚急，皇上得到一匹橐驼乘坐，才得以逃回。
English: The emperor retreated more than ten miles by mule cart, the pursuit of the Jin soldiers was very urgent, the emperor got a camel ride, and was able to escape back.

古文：晋兵退保定州。
现代文：晋军退守定州。
English: The Jin army retreated to defend Dingzhou.

古文：夏四月甲申，还次南京，杖战不力者各数百。
现代文：夏四月十九日，回军驻于南京，对作战不力者各杖数百下。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, the returning troops stationed in Nanjing marched out to give hundreds of strokes of the cane to those who were unable to fight.

古文：庚寅，宴将士于元和殿。
现代文：二十五日，宴饮将士于元和殿。
English: On the 25th, the banquet will be held at the Yuanhe Hall.

古文：癸巳，如凉陉。
现代文：二十八日，至凉陉。
English: On the 28th, it will be cool.

古文：六月戊辰，回鹘来贡。
现代文：六月初四，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，吐谷浑、鼻骨德皆来贡。
现代文：初七，吐谷浑、鼻骨德均来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Tu Guhun and Nanzhongde all came to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，黑车子室韦来贡。
现代文：十七日，黑车子室韦前来进贡。
English: On the seventeenth day, the black chariot of Shumway came to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，赵延寿奏晋兵袭高阳，戍将击走之。
现代文：二十三日，赵延寿奏称晋军偷袭高阳，被守将击退。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Yanshou made a speech saying that the Jin army made a sneak attack on Gaoyang, and the defenders repulsed it.

古文：秋七月乙卯，猎平地松林。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，田猎于平地松林。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of autumn, the hunting began in the flat pine forest.

古文：晋遣孟守中奉表请和，仍以前事答之。
现代文：晋派遣孟守中上表求和，并对上次交战之事做了解释。
English: Jin sent Meng Shou Zhong Shang to the table to sue for peace, and to explain the last war.

古文：八月己巳，诏侍卫萧素撒阅群牧于北陉。
现代文：八月初六，诏令侍卫萧素撒在北陉检阅各道地方官。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Xiao Susa, the imperial guard, was ordered to inspect the local officials in Beilun.

古文：九月壬寅，次赤山，宴从臣，问军国要务，对曰： 军国之务，爱民为本。
现代文：九月初九，驻扎于赤山，宴饮从臣，向他们询问军国要务，回答说： 军国之要务，以爱民为本。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, stationed in Akayama, he held a banquet for his vassals, and asked them about the important tasks of the military state. He replied, "The important tasks of the military state are based on love for the people."

古文：民富则兵足，兵足则国强。 
现代文：百姓富裕则兵员充足，兵员充足则国家强大。 
English: When the people are rich, there are enough soldiers, and when there are enough soldiers, the country is strong.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：皇上觉得有理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：辛酉，还上京。
现代文：二十八日，回上京。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：冬十月辛未，祠木叶山。
现代文：冬十月初八，祭祀木叶山。
English: In winter, on the 8th day of the 10th month, the festival is held at Mujiyama.

古文：十一月戊戌，女直、铁骊来贡。
现代文：十一月初五，女真、铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Nyanzhen and Tiexuan came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月癸亥朔，朝谒太祖行宫。
现代文：十二月初一，朝拜太祖行宫。
English: On the first day of December, it is time to pay homage to Taizu.

古文：乙丑，云州节度使耶律孔阿获晋谍者。
现代文：初三，云州节度使耶律孔阿逮获晋国间谍。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Yunnan Festival made Yelu Konga catch the Jin spies.

古文：戊辰，腊，赐诸国贡使衣马。
现代文：初六，腊日，赐各国前来进贡的使者衣服、马匹。
English: On the 6th day of the first lunar month, Lahi, he gave clothes and horses to the emissaries of various countries who came to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月庚子，回鹘来贡。
现代文：九年春正月初八，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，女直来贡。
现代文：十五日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：二月戊辰，鼻骨德奏军籍。
现代文：二月初七，鼻骨德奏上其军队名籍。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, his military record was issued.

古文：三月乙亥，吐谷浑遣军校恤烈献生口千户，授恤烈检校司空。
现代文：三月初八，吐谷浑军校恤烈进献生口千户，皇上授恤烈为检校司空。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, thousands of households in the Tokugawa Hun military school donated their lives to the emperor, and the emperor awarded the donation to the school inspector.

古文：夏四月辛酉朔，吐谷浑白可久来附。
现代文：夏四月初一，吐谷浑白可久前来归附。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, the white storks of Tukoku come to rest.

古文：是月，如凉陉。
现代文：同月，皇上到凉陉。
English: In the same month, the emperor went to Liangyao.

古文：五月庚戌，晋易州戍将孙方简请内附。
现代文：五月二十一日，晋易州守将孙方简请求内附。
English: On May 21st, Sun Fangyan, the governor of Jin Yi Province, sent a request.

古文：六月戊子，谒祖陵，更閟神殿为长思。
现代文：六月二十九日，拜谒祖陵，改称神殿为长思殿。
English: On June 29th, the ancestral mausoleum was renamed the Changsidong Temple.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏征诸道兵，敢伤禾稼者，以军法论。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，下诏征发诸道兵马，对于胆敢伤害庄稼者，以军法论处。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued to conscript soldiers and horses of all sects, and those who dared to harm the farmers were punished by martial law.

古文：癸丑，女直来贡。
现代文：二十五日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，以阻卜酋长曷剌为本部夷离堇。
现代文：二十七日，以阻卜酋长曷剌为本部夷离堇。
English: On the 27th, with the chief of Dangb District as the headquarter, they left Dang.

古文：八月丙寅，乌古来贡。
现代文：八月初八，乌古前来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：是月，自将南伐。
现代文：同月，皇上亲自统兵南征。
English: In the same month, the Emperor personally led the Southern Expedition.

古文：九月壬辰，阅诸道兵于渔阳西枣林淀。是月，赵延寿与晋张彦泽战于定州，败之。
现代文：九月初五，在渔阳枣林淀检阅诸道兵马。同月，赵延寿与晋张彦泽交战于定州，击败晋军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, soldiers and horses from all the provinces were inspected in Yuyang Zao Lin Dian. In the same month, Zhao Yanshou and Jin Zhang Yanzhe fought in Dingzhou, defeating the Jin army.

古文：冬十一月戊子朔，进围镇州。
现代文：冬十一月初一，进军包围镇州。
English: On the first day of November in winter, they marched to encircle Zhenzhou.

古文：丙申，先遣候骑报晋兵至，遣精兵断河桥，晋兵退保武强。
现代文：初九，先遣候骑报告晋军到来，便派精兵扼断河桥，晋军退守武强。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, after sending horsemen ahead to report the arrival of the Jin army, he sent elite soldiers to cut off the river bridge, and the Jin army retreated to Wuqiang.

古文：南院大王迪辇、将军高模翰分兵由瀛州间道以进，杜重威遣贝州节度使梁汉璋率众来拒。
现代文：南院大王迪辇、将军高模翰分兵自瀛州抄小路进发，杜重威派贝州节度使梁汉璋率兵前来拒战。
English: The great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Dizun, and the general Gao Mochan sent their troops to advance along a small road from Bozhou. Du Chongwei sent the governor of Bozhou to make Liang Hanzhong and his soldiers come to resist the war.

古文：与战，大败之，杀梁汉璋。
现代文：我军与之交战，大败晋军，杀汉璋。
English: Our army fought with them, defeated the Jin army, and killed Han Yu.

古文：杜重威、张彦泽引兵据中渡桥，赵延寿以步卒前击，高彦温以骑兵乘之，追奔逐北，僵尸数万，斩其将王清，宋彦筠堕水死。
现代文：杜重威、张彦泽率兵据守中渡桥，赵延寿率步兵前往攻打，高彦温也趁机率骑兵进击，打得晋军四散奔逃，横尸数万，斩杀其将王清，宋彦筠则落水而死。
English: Du Chongwei and Zhang Yanze led the soldiers to defend Zhongdu Bridge, Zhao Yanshou led the infantry to attack, and Gao Yanwen also took the opportunity to attack the cavalry, causing the Jin army to scatter and flee, leaving tens of thousands of corpses, killing its commander Wang Qing, and Song Yanjuan fell into the water and died.

古文：重威等退保中渡寨。
现代文：杜重威等退守中渡寨。
English: Du Chongwei and others left the garrison and went to Wuzhai.

古文：义武军节度使李殷以城降，遂进兵，夹滹沱而营。去中渡寨三里，分兵围之。
现代文：义武军节度使李殷举城投降。我军于是前进，在滹沱河两岸安营扎寨，在离中渡寨三里的地方对晋军分兵进行包围。
English: The festival of the volunteer army caused Li Yin to surrender the city. Our army then advanced, camped on both sides of the Wei River, and encircled the Jin army detachment three miles from Zhongduzhai.

古文：夜则列骑环守，昼则出兵抄掠。复命大内惕隐耶律朔骨里及赵延寿分兵围守，自将骑卒夜渡河出其后。攻下栾城，降骑卒数千。
现代文：夜里就布防骑兵环守，白天则出兵剽劫财物，又命大内惕隐耶律朔骨里及赵延寿分兵包围扼守晋兵，皇上自己率领骑兵夜里渡河从其后面出击，攻下栾城，招降骑兵数千。
English: At night, he set up a defensive cavalry ring to guard, and during the day, he sent soldiers to loot and rob the property. He also ordered the emperor to surround and encircle the Yangshuo and Zhao Yanshou detachments to protect the Jin soldiers. The emperor himself led the cavalry to cross the river at night and attack from behind, capture the Lucheng, and recruit thousands of cavalry.

古文：分遣将士据其要害。
现代文：又分头派遣将士据守要害之处。
English: In addition, soldiers were dispatched separately to guard key locations.

古文：于是军中预备军食，三日不得举烟火，但获晋人，即黥而纵之。
现代文：下令军中预备干粮，三日内不得举烟火，俘获晋人后，即在其面上黥墨然后放走。
English: He ordered the troops to prepare dry rations and not to set off fireworks for three days. After the Jin soldiers were captured, they were inked on their faces and then released.

古文：诸馈运见者皆弃而走。
现代文：为晋军运送粮草者见到这些人后都弃粮而逃。
English: When the people who were transporting grain and grass for the Jin army saw these people, they all abandoned the grain and fled.

古文：于是晋兵内外隔绝，食尽势穷。
现代文：于是晋军内外隔绝，粮食被吃光，陷入穷途末路之中。
English: As a result, the Jin army was cut off from the outside world, ran out of food, and fell into a dead end.

古文：十二月丙寅，杜重威、李守贞、张彦泽等率所部二十万众来降。
现代文：十二月初十，杜重威、李守贞、张彦泽等率领所部二十万人前来投降。
English: On the 10th day of early December, Du Chongwei, Li Shouzhen, Zhang Yanzhe and others led 200,000 people from the headquarters to surrender.

古文：上拥数万骑，临大阜，立马以受之。
现代文：皇上为数万骑簇拥，登临大阜，勒马受降。
English: The Emperor, surrounded by tens of thousands of horsemen, arrived in Dafu, where he was forced to halt and surrender.

古文：授重威守太傅、邺都留守，守贞天平军节度使，馀各领旧职。
现代文：授杜重威为守太傅、邺都留守，李守贞为天平军节度使，其余诸将各领旧职。
English: Du Chongwei was appointed as the commander-in-chief, Shudu remained at home, Li Shuzhen was appointed as the military governor of the Tianping Army, and the rest of the generals held their old positions.

古文：分降卒之半付重威，半以隶赵延寿。
现代文：分降附人马之半数给杜重威，半数隶属于赵延寿。
English: Half of the people and horses were assigned to Du Chongwei, and the other half were assigned to Zhao Yanshou.

古文：命御史大夫解里、监军傅桂儿、张彦泽持诏入汴，谕晋帝母李氏，以安其意，且召桑维翰、景延广先来。
现代文：命御史大夫解里、监军傅桂儿、张彦泽持诏书入汴京，晓谕晋帝母亲李氏，以安抚其心志，并且召桑维翰、景延广先来朝见。
English: In order to appease Emperor Jin's mother, Lady Li, Imperial Historian Ge Li, Military Inspector Fu Guier, and Zhang Yanzhe came to Beijing with an imperial edict, and called Song Weihan and Jing Yanguang to come to the imperial court first.

古文：留骑兵千人守魏，自率大军而南。
现代文：皇上留骑兵千人守魏，自率大军往南。
English: The emperor left a thousand cavalrymen to guard Wei, and led a large army to the south.

古文：壬申，解里等至汴，晋帝重贵素服拜命，舆母李氏奉表请罪。
现代文：十六日，解里等到达汴京，晋帝石重贵身着素服，拜服听命，用乘舆抬着其母亲上表请罪。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Ge Li and others arrived in Beijing. Jin Di Shi Chonggui dressed in plain clothes, bowed and obeyed orders, and pleaded with his mother on the table.

古文：初，重贵绝和好，维翰数谏止之，不从，至是彦泽杀维翰，绐言自经死。
现代文：起先，石重贵与我国断绝和好关系，桑维翰多次上谏制止，未被听从，到这时张彦泽杀桑维翰诈称其自缢而死。
English: At first, Shishigui severed good relations with our country, and Sanveihan was arrested several times, but was not listened to. At this time, Zhang Yanzhe killed Sanveihan and falsely claimed that he had committed suicide.

古文：诏收葬之，复其田园第宅，仍厚恤其家。
现代文：诏令收其尸下葬，恢复其田园宅第，并对其家属优加抚恤。
English: The imperial edict ordered his body to be buried, his rural residence to be restored, and his family to receive a generous pension.

古文：甲戌，彦泽迁重贵及其母若妻于开封府署，以控鹤指挥使李荣督兵卫之。
现代文：十八日，张彦泽迁石重贵及其母亲和妻子于开封府署，命控鹤指挥使李荣督率兵马守卫。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Yanze transferred Shi Jigui and his mother and wife to the Kaifeng government office, and ordered the commanding officer of the crane to make Li Rongduk lead the soldiers and horses to guard.

古文：壬午，次赤冈。
现代文：二十六日，皇上驻于赤冈。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor arrived in Akaoka.

古文：重贵举族出封丘门，稿索牵羊以待。
现代文：晋主石重贵举族出封丘门，以草绳肉袒自缚等待皇上。
English: The lord of Jin, Shigeki Shigeki, led his people out to seal the gate of the hill, and waited for the emperor with a straw rope.

古文：上不忍临视，命改馆封禅寺。
现代文：皇上不忍临视，命令改驻于封禅寺。
English: The emperor could not bear to see it and ordered that it be moved to Fuzen-ji Temple.

古文：晋百官缟衣纱帽，俯伏待罪。
现代文：晋百官身着缟衣，头戴纱帽，伏于地上请罪。
English: The officials of the Jin Dynasty, dressed in long robes and wearing capes, prostrated themselves on the ground to plead guilty.

古文：上曰： 其主负恩，其臣何罪。 
现代文：皇上说： 你们的主上负我恩德，你们这些为臣的又有何罪。 
English: The emperor said, "Your lordship is indebted to me for my benevolence, but what is the sin of your subjects?"

古文：命领职如故，即授安叔千金吾卫上将军。
现代文：命令他们仍领旧职。并当即封安叔千为金吾卫上将军。
English: He ordered them to retain their old posts, and immediately made Anshu Qian a general of Kinguwei.

古文：叔千出班独立，上曰： 汝邢州之请，朕所不忘。 
现代文：叔千出班独站一边，皇上说： 你在邢州时的请求，我是不会忘的。 
English: Uncle Qian left work to stand alone and said to the emperor, "I will never forget your request when you were in Zhangzhou.

古文：乃加镇国军节度使，盖在邢尝密请内附也。
现代文：于是加封他为镇国军节度使，原来安氏在邢时曾暗里请求内附。
English: As a result, he was given the title of the town's military festival envoy, which An had secretly requested when he was still alive.

古文：将军康祥执景延广来献，诏以牙筹数其罪，凡八，絷送都，道自杀。
现代文：将军康祥捉得景延广来献上，诏令用牙筹列举其罪状，共八条，将他押送京师，景延广于途中自杀。
English: General Kangxiang captured Jing Yanquan to present to the emperor, who ordered him to recite the eight articles of his indictment with his teeth, and sent him to the capital. On the way, Jing Yanquan committed suicide.

古文：大同元年春正月丁亥朔，备法驾入汴，御崇元殿受百官贺。
现代文：大同元年春正月初一，备法驾进入汴京，御临崇元殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of Datong in the first year of the year, he drove into Beijing to prepare for the Dharma and came to the Chongyuan Hall to receive the morning greetings of hundreds of officials.

古文：戊子，以枢密副使刘敏权知开封府，杀秦继旻、李彦绅及郑州防御使杨承勋，以其弟承信为平卢军节度使，袭父爵。
现代文：初二，以枢密副使刘敏暂时代管开封府，杀秦继、李彦绅及郑州防御使杨承勋，以其弟杨承信为平卢军节度使，承袭其父爵位。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Liu Min, the vice-envoy of the privy council, was appointed as the temporary governor of Kaifeng, Qin Ji, Li Yanshen and Yang Chengxun, the defense minister of Zhengzhou, were killed, and Yang Chengxin, his brother, was appointed as the military governor of Pinglu, inheriting his father's title.

古文：初，杨光远在青州求内附，其子承勋不听，杀其判官丘涛及弟承祚等自归于晋，故诛之。
现代文：当初，杨光远在青州请求内附，其子杨承勋不听，杀其判官丘涛及其弟杨承祚等人自己回到晋，所以现在被诛杀。
English: At the beginning, Yang Guangyuan in Qingzhou request, his son Yang Chengxun did not listen, and killed his judge Qiu Tao and his brother Yang Chengyao and others to return to Jin, so now he was killed.

古文：己丑，以张彦泽擅徙重贵开封，杀桑维翰，纵兵大掠，不道，斩于市。晋人脔食之。
现代文：初三，以张彦泽擅自迁石重贵到开封，杀桑维翰，纵兵大肆抢掠，犯了不道之罪，在市中被处斩，晋人割其肉食之。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Yanzhe arbitrarily moved precious stones to Kaifeng, killed San Weihan, plundered the soldiers, committed the crime of immorality, was beheaded in the city, and the Jin people cut his meat.

古文：辛卯，降重贵为崇禄大夫、检校太尉，封负义侯。
现代文：十五日，降石重贵为崇禄大夫、检校太尉，封为负义侯。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shigeki Shigeki was promoted to doctor of Chonglu and inspector of schools, and was given the title of vice-mayor.

古文：癸巳，以张砺为平章事，晋李崧为枢密使，冯道为太傅，和凝为翰林学士，赵莹为太子太保，刘昫守太保，冯玉为太子少保。
现代文：十七日，任命张砺为平章事，晋李崧为枢密使，冯道为太傅，和凝为翰林学士，赵莹为太子太保，刘日旬为守太保，冯玉为太子少保。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Ye was appointed as Ping Zhangji, Jin Li Rong as Privy Envoy, Feng Dao as Taifu, He Rong as Hanlin Scholar, Zhao Ying as Prince Taipo, Liu Rishun as Shou Taipo, and Feng Yu as Prince Shao Bao.

古文：癸卯，遣赵莹、冯玉、李彦韬将三百骑送负义侯及其母李氏、太妃安氏、妻冯氏、弟重睿、子延煦、延宝等于黄龙府安置。
现代文：二十七日，派赵莹、冯玉、李彦韬率三百骑送负义侯及其母李氏、太妃安氏、妻冯氏、弟石重睿、子石延煦、石延宝等人到黄龙府安置。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Ying, Feng Yu and Li Yanqi sent 300 cavalrymen to escort Nanyi Hou, his mother Li, his wife An, his wife Feng, his brother Shi Chongrui, his son Shi Yanlu, Shi Yanbao and others to Huanglongfu for resettlement.

古文：仍以其宫女五十人、内宦三人、东西班五十人、医官一人、控鹤四人、庖丁七人、茶酒司三人、仪鸾三人、健卒十人从之。
现代文：依旧以其宫女五十人，内宦三人、东西班五十人、医官一人、控鹤四人、庖丁七人、茶酒司三人、仪鸾三人、健卒十人随从之。
English: He was still accompanied by fifty of his maids of honour, three courtiers, fifty courtiers of the East and West Divisions, one medical officer, four overseers, seven cooks, three stewards of tea and wine, three maids of honour, and ten attendants.

古文：二月丁巳朔，建国号大辽，大赦，改元大同。
现代文：二月初一，建国号为大辽，大赦天下，改元大同。
English: On the first day of February, the founding name of the country was Daliao, and it was renamed Datong.

古文：升镇州为中京。
现代文：升镇州为中京。
English: Shangzhenzhou is in the middle of Beijing.

古文：以赵延寿为大丞相兼政事令、枢密使、中京留守，中外官僚将士爵赏有差。
现代文：以赵延寿为大丞相兼政事令、枢密使、中京留守，内外官僚将士赐爵赐物各有等差。
English: With Zhao Yanshou as the grand minister of war and political affairs, the confidential envoy, and the one who stayed in Beijing, the bureaucrats at home and abroad gave knighthoods to each other.

古文：辛未，河东节度使北平王刘知远自立为帝，国号汉。诏以耿崇美为昭义军节度使，高唐英为昭德军节度使，崔廷勋为河阳军节度使，分据要地。
现代文：十五日，河东节度使北平王刘知远自立为帝，国号汉，皇上诏令以耿崇美为昭义军节度使，高唐英为昭德军节度使，崔延勋为河阳军节度使，分头据守要地。
English: On the 15th, the Hedong Festival made Peiping King Liu Zhiyuan independent as the emperor, the country name Han, and the emperor ordered Geng Chongmei to be the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army, Gao Tangying to be the festival envoy of the Shoude Army, and Cui Yanxun to be the festival envoy of the Heyang Army, and they were assigned to guard important places.

古文：三月丙戌朔，以萧翰为宣武军节度使，赐将吏爵赏有差。
现代文：三月初一，以萧翰为宣武军节度使，赐将帅下吏爵位物品各有等差。
English: On the first day of March, Xiao Han was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army, and the items that were given to the generals and subordinate officers were all unequal.

古文：壬寅，晋诸司僚吏、嫔御、宦寺、方技、百工、图籍、历象、石经、铜人、明堂刻漏、太常乐谱、诸宫县、卤簿、法物及铠仗，悉送上京。
现代文：十七日，晋诸司僚佐、嫔御、宦寺、方技、百工、图籍、历象、石经、铜人、明堂刻漏、太常乐谱、诸宫县、卤簿、法物及铠仗，尽数送往上京。
English: On the seventeenth day, Jin sent to Beijing as many as possible, including the assistant secretary, the imperial court, the imperial palace, the imperial court temple, the square, the hundred craftsmen, the picture books, the historical figures, the stone scriptures, the bronze man, the Ming hall engraving, the Tai Chang music score, the palace counties, the book of records, the legal documents, and the battle.

古文：磁州帅梁晖以相州降汉，己酉，命高唐英讨之。
现代文：磁州军帅梁晖以相州降于汉，二十四日，命高唐英讨伐之。
English: On the 24th, the commander of the Magnetized State Army, Liang Jun, was ordered to march against Tang Ying.

古文：夏四月丙辰朔，发自汴州，以冯道、李崧、和凝、李浣、徐台符、张砺等从行。
现代文：夏四月初一，自汴州出发，以冯道、李崧、和凝、李遆、徐台符、张砺等人随行。
English: On the first day of April in summer, they set out from Zhangzhou, accompanied by Feng Dao, Li Wei, He Jeng, Li Wei, Xu Taifu, Zhang Wei and others.

古文：次赤冈，夜有声如雷，起于御幄，大星复陨于旗鼓前。
现代文：驻于赤冈，夜里有声音响如雷，起于御帐，大星又陨落在旗鼓前。
English: I was stationed in Akaoka, and at night there were thunderous noises coming from the palace, and a great star fell in front of the drum.

古文：乙丑，济黎阳渡，顾谓侍臣曰： 朕此行有三失：纵兵掠刍粟，一也；括民私财，二也；不遽遣诸节度还镇，三也。 
现代文：初十，渡过黎阳渡，回头对侍臣说： 我此行有三个过失：纵兵抢掠刍粟，此其一；搜括百姓私财，此其二；没有立即将各路节度使派回镇所，此其三。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month, after crossing the Liyang River, he turned back to his attendant and said, "I have made three mistakes on this trip. First, I robbed poppies; second, I collected the people's private money; and third, I did not immediately send the festival envoys back to the town.

古文：皇太弟遣使问军前事，上报曰： 初以兵二十万降杜重威、张彦泽，下镇州。
现代文：皇太弟派使者问军前事务，皇上回答说： 先是派兵二十万降服了杜重威、张彦泽，攻下镇州。
English: The crown prince sent an envoy to inquire about pre-war affairs, to which the emperor replied: First, we sent 200,000 soldiers to subdue Du Chongwei and Zhang Yanze and capture Zhenzhou.

古文：及入汴，视其官属具员者省之，当其才者任之。
现代文：待到进入汴京，见其官属有尸位素餐者即罢黜之，才当其任者任用之。
English: It was not until he entered Beijing that his appointees were appointed after he had dismissed the officials who had not eaten a proper meal.

古文：司属虽存，官吏废堕，犹雏飞之后，徒有空巢。
现代文：官属尽管依旧保存，但是官吏都怠惰不视事，好比雏鸟飞走之后，只剩下些空巢。
English: Although the officials are still preserved, the officials are lazy and ignore things, just like after the chicks fly away, only some empty nests are left.

古文：久经离乱，一至于此。
现代文：久经离乱，以至于此。
English: After a long period of disarray, it has come to this.

古文：所在盗贼屯结，土功不息，馈饷非时，民不堪命。
现代文：所到之处盗贼聚众造反，土木工程一刻不停，军需不能按时供给，百姓无法承受差遣。
English: Wherever they went, the thieves rallied the masses to revolt, civil engineering works were incessant, military supplies could not be supplied on time, and the people could not bear to be sent away.

古文：河东尚未归命，西路酋帅亦相党附，夙夜以思，制之之术，惟推心庶僚、和协军情、抚绥百姓三者而已。
现代文：河东至今还没有归顺，西路的军帅们也互相党附，我日夜都在考虑，制服他们的办法，只有对百官以诚心相待、协调军心、安抚百姓三者而已。
English: So far, the eastern part of the river has not surrendered, and the military commanders on the western road have also attached themselves to each other. I have been considering day and night, and the only way to subdue them is to treat the officials with sincerity, coordinate the military spirit, and appease the people.

古文：今所归顺凡七十六处，得户一百九万百一十八。
现代文：现在归顺于我的总共七十六处，得户口一百零九万零一百一十八户。
English: A total of seventy-six places have now surrendered to me, and a total of 1,090,118 households have obtained hukou.

古文：非汴州炎热，水土难居，止得一年，太平可指掌而致。
现代文：如果不是汴州炎热，水土不服难于居住，只需一年，我就可以轻而易举地使天下太平。
English: If it weren't for the hot weather in Zhangzhou and the soil and water being difficult to live in, I could easily pacify the world in just one year.

古文：且改镇州为中京，以备巡幸。
现代文：已改镇州为中京，以便于巡幸。
English: Zhenzhou has been changed to Zhongjing in order to facilitate sightseeing.

古文：欲伐河东，姑俟别图。
现代文：至于讨伐河东等事，姑且留待以后再计议。
English: As for the crusade to the east of the river and other matters, let them be discussed later.

古文：其概如此。 
现代文：军前事务大纲如此。 
English: This is the outline of pre-war affairs.

古文：戊辰，次高邑，不豫。
现代文：十三日，驻于高邑，皇上病重。
English: On the 13th, the emperor was seriously ill while staying in Gaoyu.

古文：丁丑，崩于栾城，年四十六。
现代文：二十二日，驾崩于栾城，时年四十六岁。
English: On the 22nd, he passed away in Handan, at the age of 46.

古文：是岁九月壬子朔，葬于凤山，陵曰怀陵，庙号太宗。
现代文：这一年九月初一，下葬于凤山，陵墓曰怀陵，庙号太宗。
English: This year, on the first day of September, he was buried in Fengshan, the mausoleum is called Huairing, and the temple is called Taizong.

古文：统和二十六年七月，上尊谥孝武皇帝。
现代文：统和二十六年七月，奉上尊号谥为孝武皇帝。
English: In July, 26 years after the unification, he was given the title of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：重熙二十一年九月，增谥孝武惠文皇帝。
现代文：重熙二十一年九月，增谥为孝武惠文皇帝。
English: In September of the 21st year of Chongxi, Zeng Rong became the Emperor Xiaowu Huiwen.

