古文：黄帝曰：愿闻脉度。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道人体经脉的长度。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the length of the human meridians.

古文：岐伯答曰：手之六阳，从手至头，长五尺，五六三丈。
现代文：岐伯回答说：手的左右共六条阳经，从手至头，每条经脉长为五尺，六条经一共是三丈长。
English: Qibo replied, "There are a total of six meridians on the left and right of the hand. From the hand to the head, each meridian is five feet long, and the six meridians are altogether three feet long.

古文：手之六阴，从手至胸中，三尺五寸，三六一丈八尺，五六三尺，合二丈一尺。
现代文：手的左右共六条阴经，从手至胸中，每条是三尺五寸长，三六一丈八尺，五六三尺，六条一共是二丈一尺长。
English: On the left and right of the hand, there are a total of six yinjing, from the hand to the chest, each is three feet and five inches long, 361 feet and eight feet, 563 feet, and six are a total of two feet and one foot long.

古文：足之六阳，从足上至头，八尺，六八四丈八尺。
现代文：足的左右共六条阳经，从足向上至头是八尺，六条经共为四丈八尺长。
English: There are a total of six yangjing on the left and right of the foot, eight feet from the foot up to the head, and the six yangjing are a total of four feet and eight feet long.

古文：足之六阴，从足至胸中，六尺五寸，六六三丈六尺，五六三尺，合三丈九尺。
现代文：足的左右共六条阴经，从足至胸中，每条六尺五寸长，六六三丈六尺，五六三尺，六条共三丈九尺长。
English: On the right and left side of the foot, there are a total of six yinjing, from the foot to the middle of the chest, each of which is six feet and five inches long, six feet and six inches long, five feet and six inches long, and six feet and nine inches long.

古文：跷脉从足至目，七尺五寸，二七一丈四尺，二五一尺，合一丈五尺。
现代文：跷脉每一条从足至目的长度为七尺五寸，左右两条，二七一丈四尺，二五一尺，共为一丈五尺长。
English: The length of each ligament from the foot to the end is seven feet and five inches, two on the left and right, 271 feet and four inches, and 251 feet, for a total length of one foot and five inches.

古文：督脉、任脉，各四尺五寸，二四八尺，二五一尺，合九尺。
现代文：督脉、任脉各为四尺五寸，二四八尺，二五一尺，两条合为九尺。
English: The Guzmai and Renmai are 4'5," 248" and 251," respectively, and the two together are 9."

古文：凡都合一十六丈二尺，此气之大经隧也。
现代文：所有这些经脉合起来一共是一十六丈二尺长，这就是人体营气通行的主要通路。
English: All these meridians add up to a total length of 16.2 meters, which is the main passageway for the passage of human qi.

古文：经脉为里，支而横者为络，络之别者为孙。
现代文：经脉的循行为里，其间分支出来并在经脉之间横行联络的叫做络脉，别出络脉的细小脉络叫做孙络。
English: In the course of the meridians, those that branch out and connect between the meridians are called the vas deferens, and the small vas deferens that do not connect are called the vas deferens.

古文：盛而血者疾诛之，盛者泻之，虚者饮药以补之。
现代文：孙络中气盛而且血多的，应该立即用放血等方法快速地除去邪气，邪气盛的用泻的方法治疗，虚的服用药物来调补。
English: Sun Luo is full of qi and has a lot of blood, so he should immediately use bloodletting and other methods to quickly remove the evil qi. The evil qi is treated by the method of laxity, and the false qi is treated by taking medicine.

古文：五脏常内阅于上七窍也。
现代文：五脏的精气，常从体内经历于面部而上通于七窍。
English: The essence of the five viscera often passes from the body to the face and up to the seven acupoints.

古文：故肺气通于鼻，肺和则鼻能知臭香矣。
现代文：肺气通鼻窍，肺的功能正常，鼻子才能闻到各种气味。
English: Lung qi passes through the nostrils, lung function is normal, and the nose can smell all kinds of odors.

古文：心气通于舌，心和则舌能知五味矣。
现代文：心气通舌窍，心的功能正常，舌才能辨别出各种滋味。
English: The heart and qi are connected to the tongue, the heart functions normally, and the tongue can distinguish various tastes.

古文：肝气通于目，肝和则目能辨五色矣。
现代文：肝气通眼窍，肝的功能正常，眼睛才能辨别各种颜色。
English: Liver qi passes through the eye, the liver function is normal, and the eyes can distinguish various colors.

古文：脾气通于口，脾和则口能知五谷矣。
现代文：脾气通口窍，脾的功能正常，口中才能辨别食物的各种味道。
English: The spleen is the gateway to the mouth, the spleen functions normally, and it is only in the mouth that the various tastes of food can be distinguished.

古文：肾气通于耳，肾和则耳能闻五音矣。
现代文：肾气通耳窍，肾的功能正常，双耳才能听见各种声音。
English: Kidney qi passes through the ear, kidney function is normal, and both ears can hear all kinds of sounds.

古文：五脏不和则七窍不通；六腑不合则留为痈。
现代文：五脏的功能失于调和，与其对应的七窍就不能正常地发挥功能；六腑的功能失于调顺，那邪气就会滞留结聚而生成痈。
English: If the functions of the five viscera are out of harmony, the corresponding seven meridians cannot function normally; if the functions of the six bowels are out of harmony, the evil qi will remain and condense to form pus.

古文：故邪在腑则阳脉不和，阳脉不和则气留之，气留之则阳气盛矣。
现代文：因此，若是邪气留在六腑之中，那么属阳的经脉就不能和顺通利，阳脉不和顺，阳气就会发生停歇、留滞，阳气留滞，就会相对的偏盛。
English: Therefore, if the evil qi remains in the six meridians, then the meridians belonging to the yang cannot benefit from the smooth flow, and if the yang vein is not smooth, the yang qi will stop and remain stagnant, and if the yang qi remains stagnant, it will have a relative predominance.

古文：阳气太盛则阴不利，阴脉不利则血留之，血留之则阴气盛矣。
现代文：阳气太盛就会导致阴脉不通利，阴脉不通利，会导致血流停滞，血流停滞则阴气过盛。
English: If yang qi is too strong, it will lead to blockage of yin vein, blockage of yin vein will lead to stagnation of blood flow, and stagnation of blood flow will lead to overabundance of yin qi.

古文：阴气太盛则阳气不能荣也，故曰关。
现代文：如阴气过盛，就会影响阳气不能营运入内，这就叫做关。
English: If the yin qi is too strong, it will affect the yang qi can not be operated inside, which is called off.

古文：阳气太盛，则阴气弗能荣也，故曰格。
现代文：如阳气太盛，就会影响阴气不能外出与阳气相交，这就叫格。
English: If the yang qi is too strong, it will affect the yin qi can not go out and intersect with the yang qi, which is called lattice.

古文：阴阳俱盛，不得相荣，故曰关格。
现代文：阴阳二气皆过盛，不能阴阳调和、互相荣养，就叫做关格。
English: Yin and yang are both overflowing, and if yin and yang cannot be reconciled and mutually nurtured, it is called a barrier.

古文：关格者，不得尽期而死也。
现代文：关格是阴阳离决、不相交通的表现。
English: The junction is a manifestation of the separation of yin and yang and the lack of communication.

古文：黄帝曰：跷脉安起安止，何气荣水？
现代文：关格的人活不到应有的年纪就要早死。黄帝说：跷脉从哪里起到哪里止，是借助哪条经脉之气而使它运行的呢？
English: The people of Guange will die early if they do not live up to their rightful age. Huangdi said: Where does the umbilical cord start from, where does it end, and with the help of which meridian does it run?

古文：岐伯答曰：跷脉者，少阴之别，起于然骨之后。上内踝之上，直上循阴股，入阴，上循胸里，入缺盆，上出人迎之前，入頄，属目内眦，合于太阳、阳跷而上行，气并相还则为濡目，气不荣则目不合。
现代文：岐伯回答说：阴跷脉是足少阴经脉的支别，起于然谷穴之后的照海穴，向上经过足内踝的上方，直行向上沿大腿内侧进入前阴，再向上到达胸部进入缺盆，继续上行出于人迎的前面，进入颧骨连属内侧的眼角，合于太阳、阳跷脉而继续上行，阴、阳跷脉二气相合，可以滋润目睛，若是脉气不能荣养眼睛，就会出现目张不合的现象。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The yin-yang vein is the branch of the foot-less-yin meridian. It starts from the valley after the valley, passes up the inside of the ankle, goes straight up along the inside of the thigh, enters the anterior yin, and then goes up to the chest to enter the isthmus. It continues to go up from the front of the person, enters the medial eye corner of the tibia, connects to the sun and the impotence vein, and continues to go up. The yin and impotence veins match the two qi, which can moisturize the eyes. If the qi cannot nourish the eyes, there will be a phenomenon of

古文：黄帝曰：气独行五脏，不荣六腑，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：脉气只行于五脏之间，而不能荣养六腑，是什么原因呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Pulse qi can only travel between the five viscera, but it cannot honor the six bowels. What is the reason for this?"

古文：岐伯答曰：气之不得无行也，如水之流，如日月之行不休，故阴脉荣其脏，阳脉荣其腑，如环之无端，莫知其纪，终而复始，其流溢之气，内溉脏腑，外濡腠理。
现代文：岐伯回答说：脉气的运行是不停息的，就像水的流动，日月的运行，永无休止。所以，阴脉运行于五脏，阳脉运行于六腑，也是这样如环无端的运行，没有起点，也无法计算它的转流次数。经脉之气不停的流动运行着，行在内则营养五脏六腑，溢在外则濡养肌肉皮肤。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The movement of the pulse qi is ceaseless, just like the flow of water, the movement of the sun and the moon, never ending. Therefore, the anus runs in the five viscera, and the yang vein runs in the six pharynx. It also runs like this, like a ring without a point, without a starting point, and it is impossible to calculate the number of times it turns. The flow of the meridional qi is incessant, and it nourishes the five viscera when it is inside the body, and nourishes the muscles and skin when it is outside the body.

古文：黄帝曰：跷脉有阴阳，何脉当其数？
现代文：黄帝问：跷脉有阴有阳，究竟哪条应计算在一丈五尺的跷脉总长度之内呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: There are yin and yang in the umbilical cord, which one should be calculated within the total length of the umbilical cord of one and a half feet?

古文：岐伯曰：男子数其阳，女子数其阴。
现代文：岐伯回答说：男子的计算值，是指阳跷脉；女子的计算值，是指阴跷脉。
English: Qibo replied: The calculated value for men refers to the vas deferens; the calculated value for women refers to the vas deferens.

古文：当数者为经，其不当数者为络也。
现代文：计算于脉度总数之内的称为经，不计算在内的称为络。
English: Calculated within the total pulse rate is called the meridian, not including the calculation is called the meridian.

