古文：尉元慕容白曜
现代文：尉元，字苟仁，代郡人。
English: He was a lieutenant, a gongren, and a representative of the county.

古文：尉元，字苟仁，代人也。
现代文：世代都是豪族。父亲尉目斤，因有勇有谋而著称于当时。
English: All generations were members of the local ruling families. His father was a lieutenant and was known at the time for his bravery and resourcefulness.

古文：世为豪宗。父目斤，勇略闻于当时。泰常中，为前将军，从平虎牢，颇有军功，拜中山太守。元年十九，以善射称。
现代文：泰常年间，任前将军，跟从皇帝平定虎牢，颇有军功，被授任为中山太守。尉元十九岁的时候，以善于骑射而著称。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizang, as a former general, he followed the emperor to pacify the tiger's stronghold, and was awarded the title of Zhongshan Dazhu. At the age of nineteen, he was famous for being good at riding and shooting.

古文：神中，为虎贲中郎将，转羽林中郎。小心恭肃，以匪懈见知。
现代文：神年间，任虎贲中郎将，转任羽林中郎，为人小心谨慎，恭谨严肃，以勤勉不懈而受到皇帝知遇。
English: During the years of the gods, he was appointed as the vice-commander of the Tiger Clan, and later as the vice-commander of the Ulin Clan. He was a cautious, respectful and serious person, and was well-received by the emperor for his hard work.

古文：世祖嘉其宽雅有风貌，稍迁驾部给事中。
现代文：世祖赞赏他宽雅有风度，不久迁任为驾部给事中。
English: The patriarch appreciated his generosity, elegance and good manners, and he was soon transferred to the driving department.

古文：从幸海隅，赐爵富城男，加宁远将军。
现代文：尉元跟随皇帝东临海边，世祖赐给他富城男的爵位，加授宁远将军。
English: Yi Yuan followed the emperor east to the seashore. The ancestor gave him the title of Fucheng's son and promoted him to General Ningyuan.

古文：和平中，迁北部尚书，加散骑常侍，进爵太昌侯，拜冠军将军。
现代文：和平年间，尉元迁任北部尚书，加散骑常侍，晋爵为太昌侯，被授为冠军将军。
English: During the years of peace, the lieutenant general was transferred to the Northern Shangshu, and he was given the title of Champion General.

古文：天安元年，薛安都以徐州内附，请师救援。
现代文：天安元年，薛安都据徐州归附朝廷，请求派兵救援。
English: In the first year of Tian'an, Xue Andu was annexed to the imperial court according to Xuzhou, and requested the dispatch of soldiers for rescue.

古文：显祖以元为使持节、都督东道诸军事、镇南大将军、博陵公，与城阳公孔伯恭赴之。
现代文：显祖任命尉元为使持节、都督东道诸军事、镇南大将军、博陵公，与城阳公孔伯恭一道前往救援。
English: Emperor Xianzu appointed Lieutenant Yuan as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the host of the military, General Zhenan, and Boling, and went to the rescue together with Chengyang Gong Boqiong.

古文：刘彧东平太守、无盐戍主申纂诈降。
现代文：刘彧的东平太守、无盐戍主申纂诈降。
English: Liu Bei's Dongping Dazhong and Wuxi Dazhong's master petitioned for a fraudulent demotion.

古文：元知非诚款，外示容纳，而密备焉。
现代文：尉元知道他并非诚心归附，外表上表示对他容纳，但暗中则严加防备。
English: Ye Yuan knew that he was not a sincere adherent. On the surface, he said that he would accommodate him, but secretly he was on high alert.

古文：刘彧兗州刺史毕众敬遣东平太守章仇扌剽诣军归款，元并纳之。
现代文：刘彧的兖州刺史毕众敬派东平太守章仇到魏军请降，尉元一并接纳了他。
English: Liu Bei's governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Bi, respectfully sent the Dongping Taishou Zhang Qi to the Wei army to ask for surrender, and all the generals accepted him.

古文：遂长驱而进，贼将周凯望声遁走。
现代文：于是魏军长驱直入，贼将周凯望风而逃。
English: As a result, the Wei commander drove straight in, and the thieves chased Zhou Kai away.

古文：彧遣将张永、沈攸之等率众讨安都，屯于下磕。
现代文：刘彧派遣张永、沈攸之等人率军征讨薛安都，屯驻于下磕。
English: Liu Bei dispatched Zhang Yong, Shen Youzhi and others to lead an army to conquer Xue'an, and they settled in Xiamen.

古文：永乃分遣羽林监王穆之领卒五千，守辎重于武原，龙骧将军谢善居领卒二千据吕梁，散骑侍郎张引领卒二千守茱萸，督上租粮，供其军实。
现代文：张永就分派羽林监王穆之领兵五千人，在武原守护辎重，派龙骧将军谢善居领兵二千人据守在吕梁，派散骑侍郎张引领兵二千人据守茱萸，督促租粮，用来充实军队的供给。
English: Zhang Yong dispatched 5,000 soldiers led by Wu Lin, the overseer of Wu Lin, to guard Zhouzhong in Wuyuan, sent 2,000 soldiers led by Longjing General Xie Sanju to guard Luliang, and sent 2,000 soldiers led by Zhang Zhouzhong, the horseman, to guard Zhuye, to supervise the rent of grain, which was used to enrich the supply of the army.

古文：安都出城见元，元依朝旨，授其徐州刺史。
现代文：薛安都出城来见尉元，尉元依照朝廷旨意，授任他为徐州刺史。
English: Xue Andu went out of the city to see Fong Yuan, who, in accordance with the will of the imperial court, appointed him as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：遣中书侍郎高闾、李璨等与安都俱还入城，别令孔伯恭精甲二千，抚安内外，然后元入彭城。
现代文：又派中书侍郎高闾、李璨等与薛安都一同回到城中，另外让孔伯恭率精兵二千人，巡抚安定城内外，然后尉元就进入彭城。
English: He also sent the chief secretary Gao Wei, Li Wei and others to return to the city together with Xue Antu. In addition, he asked Kong Bo Qiong to lead two thousand elite soldiers, the governor to stabilize the city inside and outside, and then the lieutenant entered Pengcheng.

古文：元以张永仍据险要，攻守势倍，惧伤士卒。
现代文：尉元因张永仍据守险要之地，攻守双方势均力敌，恐怕士卒伤亡。
English: Because Zhang Yong was still defending a critical place, the two sides were evenly matched, and I am afraid that there will be casualties.

古文：乃命安都与璨等固守，身率精锐，扬兵于外，分击吕梁，绝其粮运。
现代文：就命薛安都与李璨等固守徐州，亲自率领精锐部队，在城外宣扬国威，分兵攻击吕梁，断绝敌军的粮食运输。
English: On the orders of Xue Andu and Li Yan, they firmly defended Xuzhou, personally led the elite troops, promoted national prestige outside the city, attacked Luliang, and cut off the enemy's grain transportation.

古文：善居遁奔茱萸，仍与张引东走武原。
现代文：谢善居逃奔茱萸，接着与张引向东逃往武原。
English: Xie Shanju fled to Zhuji, and then he and Zhang Yuxuan fled eastward to Takehara.

古文：驰骑追击，斩首八百余级。
现代文：尉元令骑兵飞驰追击，斩首八百余级。
English: Lieutenant Yuan ordered the cavalry to pursue at high speed, beheading more than 800 soldiers.

古文：武原穷寇八千余人，拒战不下。
现代文：武原剩下的敌军八千余人，拒战不降。
English: The remaining enemy forces in Takehara, numbering more than eight thousand, refused to surrender.

古文：元亲擐甲胄，四面攻之，破穆之外营，杀伤太半，获其辎重五百余乘，以给彭城诸军。
现代文：尉元亲自穿上甲胄，率军四面攻击，突破王穆之的外营，杀伤敌军大半，缴获其辎重车辆五百余辆，用来供给彭城诸军。
English: Yi Yuan personally put on armor and led the army to attack on all sides, breaking through Wang Muzhi's foreign camp, killing and wounding most of the enemy army, and capturing more than five hundred of his heavy vehicles, which were used to supply the army of Pengcheng.

古文：然后收师缓战，开其走路。
现代文：然后尉元收兵缓战，给敌军让开一条逃路。
English: Then the lieutenant general called off the battle, giving the enemy an escape route.

古文：穆之率余烬奔于永军。
现代文：王穆之率领残余部队逃到张永军中。
English: Wang Muzhi led the remaining troops to flee to Zhang Yongjun.

古文：永势挫力屈，元乘胜围之，攻其南门，永遂捐城夜遁。
现代文：张永势挫力竭，尉元乘胜围住下磕，攻打其南门，张永就弃城连夜逃遁。
English: Zhang Yong's strength was exhausted, and his lieutenant Yuan Sheng encircled Xiamen and attacked its south gate. Zhang Yong abandoned the city and fled overnight.

古文：伯恭、安都乘势追击，时大雨雪，泗水冰合，永弃船而走。
现代文：孔伯恭、薛安都趁势追击，当时正逢大雨雪，泗水冰冻，张永只得弃船而逃。
English: Both Kong Boqiong and Xue An took advantage of the situation to pursue. At that time, there was heavy rain and snow, and the water was frozen. Zhang Yong had to abandon the ship and flee.

古文：元豫测永必将奔亡，身率众军，邀其走路，南北奋击，大破于吕梁之东。
现代文：尉元预测张永一定会奔逃，就亲自率领众军，拦截他的逃路，南北两面奋力追击，大败张永军于吕梁山东。
English: Lt. Yuan predicted that Zhang Yong would definitely flee, so he personally led the army, intercepted his escape route, and pursued both north and south, and defeated Zhang Yong's army in Luliang Shandong.

古文：斩首数万级，追北六十余里，死者相枕，手足冻断者十八九。
现代文：斩首数万级，向北追击六十余里，敌军死者相互枕藉，手足冻断者十之八九。
English: Decapitated tens of thousands of levels, chased more than sixty miles to the north, the dead of the enemy were lying next to each other, and nine out of ten had their hands and feet frozen.

古文：生擒刘彧使持节、都督梁南北秦三州诸军事、梁秦二州刺史、宁朔将军、益阳县开国侯垣恭祖；龙骧将军、羽林监沈承伯等。
现代文：生擒刘彧的使持节，都督梁、南、北秦三州诸军事，梁、秦二州刺史，宁朔将军，益阳县开国侯垣恭祖；龙骧将军、羽林监沈承伯等。
English: On the Envoys' Day of Liu Bei, the military of the three states of Liang, South Qin and North Qin, the military governor of Liang, the military governor of the two states of Qin, the general of Ningshuo, the founding father of Yiyang County, the general of Longyi, and the warden of Ulin, Shen Chengbo, etc.

古文：永、攸之轻骑走免。
现代文：张永、沈攸之轻骑逃走得以幸免。
English: Zhang Yong and Shen You escaped with minor injuries.

古文：收其船车军资器械不可胜数。
现代文：缴获船车、军资器械不可胜数。
English: The number of captured ships, vehicles and military equipment is immeasurable.

古文：刘彧东徐州刺史张谠据围城，徐州刺史王玄载守下邳，辅国将军、兗州刺史樊昌侯王整，龙骧将军、兰陵太守桓忻驱掠近民，保险自固。
现代文：刘彧的东徐州刺史张谠据守团城，徐州刺史王玄载据守下邳，辅国将军、兖州刺史樊昌侯王整，龙骧将军、兰陵太守桓忻驱掠附近的百姓，据险自固。
English: Liu Bei's East Xuzhou vassal Zhang Ye was in charge of Tuancheng, Xuzhou vassal Wang Xuan Zi was in charge of Jiaozuo, Fu Guo Geng, Zhang Zhou vassal Juchang Hou Wang Jie, Long Yu Geng, Lanling Taizhou vassal Huan Ye drove away the nearby people, and they were safe and secure.

古文：元遣慰喻，张谠及青州刺史沈文秀等皆遣使通诚，王整、桓析相与归命。
现代文：尉元派人前去抚慰晓喻，张谠和青州刺史沈文秀等人都派使者前来传达归诚之意，王整、桓忻相率归附朝廷。
English: Yi Yuan sent people to comfort Xiaoyu, Zhang Ye and Qingzhou's top official, Shen Wenxiu, sent envoys to convey their sincere intention to return, and Wang Jian and Huan Yuxiang returned to the imperial court.

古文：元表曰： 彭城仓廪虚罄，人有饥色，求运冀、相、济、兗四州粟，取张永所弃船九百艘，沿清运致，可以济救民。 
现代文：尉元向皇帝上表说： 彭城仓廪已经空虚，百姓面有饥色，请求运送冀、相、济、兖四州之粟，取张永所丢弃的船只九百艘，沿清河运到，可以用来济救新近归附之民。 
English: Ye Yuan made a report to the emperor, saying: Pengcheng's storehouses are empty, and the people are hungry. He requested that the poppies of the four provinces of Ji, Xiang, Jie and Jie be transported, and that the nine hundred ships abandoned by Zhang Yong be taken and transported along the Qing River, so that they could be used to help the newly annexed people.

古文：显祖从之。
现代文：显祖听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：又表分兵置戍，进定青冀。
现代文：尉元又上表请求分兵设置戍所，进而平定青、冀一带。
English: The lieutenant also requested the detachment of soldiers to set up a post on the table, and then pacify the Qing and Hebei regions.

古文：复表曰： 彭城贼之要蕃，不有积粟强守，不可以固。
现代文：又上表说： 彭城是贼军的重要边城，如果没有粮食储积和强兵防守，就不可能得以巩固。
English: The above table also said: Pengcheng is an important border town of the thief army. If there is no grain storage and strong defense, it is impossible to consolidate.

古文：若储粮广戍，虽刘彧师徒悉动，不敢窥淮北之地。
现代文：倘若储备粮草、广置戍所，即使刘彧之军全部出动，也不敢觊觎淮北之地。
English: If grain and grass were stockpiled and storehouses were widely set up, even if Liu Bei's entire army were to be dispatched, they would not dare to invade northern Huai'an.

古文：此自然之势也。 
现代文：这是自然的形势。 
English: This is a natural situation.

古文：诏曰： 待后军到，量宜守防。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 等待后军到来，根据情况加强防守。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Wait for the rearguard to arrive, and strengthen the defense according to the situation.

古文：其青冀已遣军援，须待克定，更运军粮。 
现代文：青、冀方面已经派遣军队援助，须待平定之后，再运军粮。 
English: The Qing and Hebei provinces have already dispatched troops to provide assistance. After the war is over, the military rations will be re-shipped.

古文：元又表曰： 臣受命出疆，再离寒暑，进无邓艾一举之功，退无羊祜保境之略，虽淮岱获振，而民情未安。
现代文：尉元又进表说： 臣受命出任边疆，历经寒暑，进无邓艾一举之功，退无羊祜保境之略，虽然淮、岱大捷，但民情尚未安定。
English: The lieutenant-general also went into the table and said: The minister was ordered to serve as a frontier, and after experiencing the cold and heat, there was no Deng Ai's one-upmanship, and there was no sheep-herding strategy to protect the border. Although Huai and Zou were successful, the people's situation was not yet stable.

古文：臣以愚智，属当偏任，苟事宜宣彻，敢不以闻。
现代文：臣由于智力愚劣，只能委以辅佐之任，假如事情应当向皇上传达，不敢不具表上奏。
English: Owing to his inferior intellect, the vassal could only be entrusted with the role of assistant. If the matter was to be conveyed to the emperor, he dared not fail to report it.

古文：臣前表以下邳水陆所凑，先规殄灭，遣兵屡讨，犹未擒定。
现代文：臣前次上表陈说由于下邳是水陆交汇之地，早先计划消灭此地敌军，派兵屡次征讨，还是没有将其平定。
English: The minister said last time that because of the confluence of land and water, it had been planned to destroy the enemy forces in the Lower Yangtze, and the troops had been sent to the area several times, but they still failed to subdue the enemy forces.

古文：然彭城、下邳信命未断，而此城之人，元居贼界，心尚恋土。
现代文：然而彭城、下邳之间音信并未断绝，而且彭城这里的人，原先居住于贼境，心里还依恋故土。
English: However, the news between Pengcheng and Jiaozuo has not been cut off, and the people here in Pengcheng, who originally lived in the thief's country, are still attached to their homeland.

古文：辄相诳惑，希幸非望，南来息耗，壅塞不达，虽至穷迫，仍不肯降。
现代文：动辄互相诳骗蛊惑，希望侥幸实现非分之望，南边来的音信消息，因道路阻塞而不能到达，虽然下邳已经穷困窘迫，但仍然不肯归降。
English: They are constantly playing tricks on each other, hoping that they will be lucky enough to achieve their dreams. The news from the south cannot be reached because of the road blockage. Although the lower jaw has been impoverished and distressed, it still refuses to surrender.

古文：彭城民任玄朗从淮南至镇，称刘彧将任农夫、陈显达领兵三千，来循宿豫。
现代文：彭城之民任玄朗从淮南来到镇所，说刘彧部将任农夫、陈显达领兵三千，前来巡视宿豫。
English: Ren Xuanlang, a citizen of Pengcheng, came to the town hall from Huainan, saying that Liu Xibe would be a farmer and Chen Xianda would lead three thousand soldiers to inspect Suyuan.

古文：臣即以其日，密遣觇使，验其虚实，如朗所言。
现代文：臣就在当天，秘密派出侦探，前去验证其虚实，正如任玄朗所说的那样。
English: On the same day, the minister secretly sent a detective to verify its authenticity, as Ren Xuanlang said.

古文：臣欲自出击之，以运粮未接，又恐新民生变，遣子都将于沓千、刘龙驹等步骑五千，将往赴击。
现代文：臣想要亲自出城攻击他们，因为粮食尚未运到，又怕新归附的民众生变，就派子都将于沓千、刘龙驹等率步骑兵五千，准备前去攻击。
English: The minister wanted to personally go out of the city to attack them, because the grain had not yet arrived, and he was afraid that the newly annexed people would change, so he sent five thousand infantry and cavalry led by Xuan Zhou, Liu Longyu and others to prepare to attack.

古文：但征人淹久，逃亡者多，迭相扇动，莫有固志，器仗败毁，无一可用。
现代文：现在虽然气候日趋炎热，还是可以行军，兵贵神速，久停就会生变。
English: Now, although the weather is getting hotter and hotter, it is still possible to march, the soldiers are very fast, and they will change if they stop for a long time.

古文：臣闻伐国事重，古人所难，功虽可立，必须经略而举。
现代文：倘若天降大雨，也许可以凭借水路交通，运输粮草增加兵力，为大举进攻作好计划。
English: In the event of heavy rain, it may be possible to increase the number of troops by means of water transport, transport grain and grass, and plan for a large-scale attack.

古文：若贼向彭城，必由清泗过宿豫，历下邳；趋青州，路亦上纶胍仕病＜次粲檬χ袢粝榷ㄏ纶剿拊ィ蚧囱簦玻蚯嗉街钫蚩刹还ザ恕羲拇Σ环嗉剿浒危傩绽枪耍袒辰男抑摹３加抟晕耸颓嗉街Γ榷ǘ现兀狭鯊惫酥猓廾衲贤摹乃涫ⅲ藿蛲究梢颍欢匪渫薷叱强晒獭绱耍蚧幢弊跃伲堇陀酪荨袼湎蛉龋炭尚惺Γ猩袼伲迷蛏洹籼煊昙冉担蛞蛩肆敢嬷冢嫖？
现代文：就怕靠近淮水的民众，幡然改变他们的意图，青、冀二州，终究不能占领。
English: Even if the people close to Huai Shui are afraid to suddenly change their intentions, the two states of Qinghai and Hebei cannot be occupied after all.

古文：纸疵袷桓耐迹嗉蕉荩湮纯砂巍３奸肓抛艄惨椋涛娇扇弧粢怀拢逵兴鸢苤穑怀露扪椋殖晌茇柚铩┨旒浚粘加蘅睢?
现代文：臣与同僚属吏共同商议，都认为此事可行。如果隐瞒而不向朝廷陈述，就怕要承担造成失败损失的责任；向上陈述而得不到验证，又恐造成诬罔之罪。只有上天审察裁断，看到臣的愚劣忠诚之心。 
English: The vassal and his subordinate colleagues discussed the matter together and agreed that it was feasible. If he concealed the matter and did not report it to the imperial court, he feared that he would be held responsible for the loss caused by the failure; if he reported the matter to a higher authority and it was not verified, he feared that he would be guilty of slander. Only the heavenly court could judge and see the inferior loyalty of the vassal.

古文：彧复遣沈攸之、吴憘公领卒数万，从沂清而进，欲援下邳。
现代文：刘彧又派沈攸之、吴忄喜公率领将士数万人，从沂水、清水进发，想要援助下邳。
English: Liu Bei also sent tens of thousands of soldiers, led by Shen Youzhi and Wu Shuxi Gong, from Surabaya and Qingshui, to help Zhangye.

古文：元遣孔伯恭率步骑一万以拒之。并以攸之前败军人伤残手足、瘃瓦膝行者，尽送令还，以沮其众。
现代文：尉元派孔伯恭率领步骑兵一万拦拒敌军，并且把沈攸之所部被俘的手足伤残、冻伤体弱、以膝行走的人，全都遣送回去，用来挫伤敌军的士气。
English: The lieutenant general sent Kong Bo-hsiang to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry to block the enemy army, and sent back all of Shen Youyou's captives who were crippled, frostbitten, weak, and walking on their knees, in order to demoralize the enemy army.

古文：又表求济师。
现代文：又向朝廷上表请求增派军队。
English: He also petitioned the imperial court to send more troops.

古文：诏遣征南大将军慕容白曜赴之。
现代文：皇帝派遣征南大将军慕容白曜前去支援尉元。
English: The emperor sent Murong Baiyou, a general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, to the front to support Lieutenant Yuan.

古文：白曜到瑕丘，遇患。
现代文：慕容白曜到达瑕丘时，不巧患病。
English: By the time he reached Koecheok, he was ill.

古文：会泗水暴竭，贼军不得前进，白曜遂不行。
现代文：刚好泗水枯竭，贼军不能前进，慕容白曜也就不再往前走了。
English: Just as the water ran out, the bandit army could not advance, and Murong Baiyou did not move forward.

古文：伯恭大破贼军，攸之、憘公等轻骑遁走。
现代文：孔伯恭大败贼军，沈攸之、吴忄喜公等人快马逃走。
English: Kong Bo-kyong defeated the rebel army, while Shen Youzhi, Wu Shuxigong and others fled.

古文：元书与刘彧徐州刺史王玄载，示其祸福。
现代文：尉元写信给刘彧的徐州刺史王玄载，明示其得失祸福。
English: Ye Yuan wrote a letter to Liu Ye's Xuzhou assassin Wang Xuanzang, stating that it was a blessing and a curse.

古文：玄载狼狈夜走，宿豫、淮阳皆弃城而遁。
现代文：王玄载连夜狼狈逃走，宿豫、淮阳的守敌都弃城而逃。
English: Wang Xuanjie fled in panic overnight, and the defenders of Suyuan and Huaiyang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：于是遣南中郎将、中书侍郎高闾领骑一千，与张谠对为东徐州刺史；中书侍郎李璨与毕众敬对为东兗州刺史。
现代文：于是朝廷派南中郎将、中书侍郎高闾率领一千骑兵，与敌方张谠相对为东徐州刺史；中书侍郎李璨与敌方毕众敬相对为东兖州刺史。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent Nanzhong Rongzheng and Zhongshujing Rongzheng Gao Jun to lead a thousand cavalrymen, and confront the enemy Zhang Jun with the East Xuzhou attack; Zhongshujing Rongzheng Li Jun with the enemy Bi Congyi with the East Xuzhou attack.

古文：以安初附。
现代文：用以安抚初来归附的百姓。
English: Used to placate the newly converted people.

古文：拜元都督徐南北兗州诸军事、镇东大将军、开府、徐州刺史、淮阳公，持节、散骑常侍、尚书如故。
现代文：朝廷授任尉元为都督徐、南、北兖州诸军事，镇东大将军，开府，徐州刺史，淮阳公，持节、散骑常侍、尚书等职仍然照旧。
English: The imperial court appointed Lieutenant Yuan as the military governor of Xu, South and North Luzhou, the general of Zhendong, the governor of Kaifu, the historian of Xuzhou, the governor of Huaiyang, the festival, the horseback riding attendant, and the secretary, and so on.

古文：诏元曰： 贼将沈攸之、吴憘公等驱率蚁众，进寇下邳，卿戎昭果毅，智勇奋发，水陆邀绝，应时摧殄，自淮以北，荡然清定。
现代文：皇帝诏令尉元说： 贼将沈攸之、吴忄喜公等驱率蝼蚁之众，进犯下邳，你战绩显著，果敢刚毅，智勇奋发，从水陆进行拦截阻绝，及时予以摧垮消灭，淮水以北，荡然清宁安定。
English: The Emperor Zhaozhong ordered the lieutenant Yuan to say: "Thief Shen Youzhu, Wu Shuxigong and others drove the crowd of ants led by the ants and attacked the ants, you have a remarkable record, courage and fortitude, wisdom and courage, intercepted and blocked from the water and land, destroyed and eliminated in a timely manner, and north of Huai Shui, it is clear and peaceful and stable.

古文：皆是元帅经略，将士效力之所致也，朕用嘉焉。
现代文：这全都是元帅谋略有方，将士尽忠效力的结果，朕对此极为赞赏。
English: All of this is the result of the marshal's careful planning and the loyal efforts of his soldiers, which I greatly appreciate.

古文：所获诸城要害之处，分兵置戍，以帖民情。
现代文：对所占领的诸城要害之处，应当分兵设置戍所，以抚慰安定民心。
English: For the key points of the occupied cities, detachments should set up relief stations to soothe and stabilize the people's hearts.

古文：今方欲清荡吴会，悬旌秣陵，至于用兵所宜，开势进止，善加量度，动静以闻。 
现代文：现在正想要清荡吴会一带，悬挂旌旗于秣陵城，至于用兵所应注意的事项，作战形势的进攻与防守，你应好好加以考虑和策划，一切动静随时上报朝廷。 
English: Now you are trying to clean up the Wuhui area and hoist the banner in Fuling City. As for the matters you should pay attention to, the offensive and defensive of the combat situation, you should carefully consider and plan, and report all movements to the imperial court at any time.

古文：是时徐州妖人假姓司马，字休符，自称晋王，扇惑百姓。
现代文：当时徐州有个妖邪之人假称姓氏为司马，字休符，自称晋王，煽动蛊惑百姓。
English: At that time, there was an evil person in Xuzhou who pretended that his surname was Sima, and called himself Jin Wang to incite and mislead the people.

古文：元遣将追斩之。
现代文：尉元派部将追击斩掉了这个人。
English: The former lieutenant's faction chased down and chopped off this person.

古文：四年，诏征元还京赴西郊，寻还所镇。
现代文：皇兴四年，显祖下令征召尉元回京赴西郊庙祀，不久又回到所镇守的徐州。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, Emperor Xianzu ordered the enlistment of Lieutenant Yuan to return to Beijing to worship at a temple in the western suburbs, and he soon returned to Xuzhou, where he was garrisoned.

古文：延兴元年五月，假元淮阳王。
现代文：延兴元年五月，暂授尉元为淮阳王。
English: In May of the first year of Yanxing, Huaiyang Wang was temporarily awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三年，刘昱将萧顺之、王敕勤等领众三万，入寇淮北诸城，元分遣诸将，逆击走之。
现代文：延兴三年，刘昱的部将萧顺之、王敕鉞等人率领部众三万人，入侵淮北诸城，尉元分别派遣诸将，迎敌抗击，将其打败。
English: In the third year of Yanxing, Liu Bei's generals Xiao Shunzhi and Wang Hui led 30,000 men to invade the cities of northern Huaibei. The generals dispatched their generals separately to meet the enemy and defeat them.

古文：元表： 淮阳郡上党令韩念祖始临之初，旧民南叛，全无一人。
现代文：尉元给朝廷上表说： 淮阳郡上党县令韩念祖刚刚到任的时候，当地旧民反叛南逃，县中全无一人。
English: Lieutenant Yuan wrote to the imperial court: When Han Nianzu, the leader of Shangdang County, Huaiyang County, had just taken office, the local old people rebelled and fled to the south, and there was no one in the county.

古文：令抚绥招集，爱民如子，南亚民费系先等前后归附，户至二百有余。
现代文：令其进行安抚招集，韩念祖爱民如子，从南边回来的百姓费系先等人先后归附，县中民户到达二百多户。
English: Han Nianzu loved the people like a son, and the people who came back from the south were the first to be attached, reaching more than two hundred households in the county.

古文：南济阴郡睢陵县人赵怜等辞称念祖善于绥抚，清身洁己，请乞念祖为睢陵令。
现代文：南济阴郡睢陵县人赵怜等进言说，韩念祖善于安抚百姓，廉洁奉公，恳请韩念祖前去任睢陵县令。
English: Zhao Lei, a native of Fuling County, South Jiyin County, said that Han Nianzu was good at appeasing the people, was honest and served the public, and implored Han Nianzu to serve as the governor of Fuling County.

古文：若得其人，必能招集离叛，成立一县。 
现代文：如果能派这个人去，必定能够招集叛离的民众，成立一个县。 
English: If we can send this person, we will surely be able to gather the people who have defected and establish a county.

古文：显祖诏曰： 树君为民，民情如此，可听如请。 
现代文：显祖下诏说： 树立君主是为人民，民情既然如此，可以听从他们的请求。 
English: Emperor Xianzu issued an edict saying: It is for the people to establish a monarch, and since the people's conditions are such, it is possible to listen to their requests.

古文：元好申下人之善，皆此类也。
现代文：尉元喜欢宣扬下属的长处，就像以上所述的那样。
English: The lieutenant likes to promote the strengths of his subordinates, as mentioned above.

古文：太和初，征为内都大官。
现代文：太和初年，高祖征召尉元回京任内都大官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizu, Gaozu conscripted Jigen to return to Beijing to take up the post of Inner Metropolitan.

古文：既而出为使持节、镇西大将军、开府、统万镇都将，甚得夷民之心。
现代文：不久尉元出任使持节、镇西大将军、开府、统万镇都将，很得边地民族的人心。
English: Soon after, the lieutenant general was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the general of the west of the town, the governor of Kaifu, and the general of all towns, which greatly won the hearts of the people in the border areas.

古文：三年进爵准阳王，以旧老见礼，听乘步挽，杖于朝。
现代文：太和三年，高祖进封尉元的爵位为淮阳王，对他以朝廷元老之礼相见，特许他乘坐人力车、拄拐杖入朝。
English: In the 3rd year of the Taihe era, Gao Zu Jinfeng Fuzhiyuan was given the title of Huaiyang King. He was treated with the courtesy of an imperial elder, and was allowed to enter the imperial court by rickshaw and on crutches.

古文：萧道成既自立，多遣间谍，扇动新民，不逞之徒，所在蜂起。
现代文：萧道成自立为帝之后，派遣许多间谍，煽动新近归附的百姓，以致不法之徒，四处蜂起。
English: After Xiao Daocheng established himself as emperor, he sent many spies to instigate the newly-annexed people, causing lawless people to rise up everywhere.

古文：以元威名夙振，征为使持节、侍中、都督南征诸军事、征西大将军、大都将，余官如故，总率诸军以讨之。
现代文：朝廷因为尉元早已威名四震，就召他为使持节、侍中、都督南征诸军事、征西大将军、大都将，其余官职如故，总率诸军前往征讨。
English: Because the imperial court had already been impressed by Iugen's prestige, they called him to be envoy, chamberlain, governor of the south, general of the army, general of the army in the west, and general of the army. The rest of the official positions remained the same, and he led the army to go to the conquest.

古文：元讨五固贼桓和等，皆平之。
现代文：尉元征伐五固的贼将桓和等人，全都平定了他们。
English: Lieutenant Yuan subdued the bandits of Wugu, led by General Huan He and others, and pacified them all.

古文：东南清晏，远近帖然。
现代文：东南部清宁太平，远近都来归附。
English: In the southeast, Qingning is peaceful and tranquil, and people from near and far have come to adhere to it.

古文：入为侍中、都曹尚书，迁尚书令。
现代文：尉元入朝任侍中、都曹尚书，迁任尚书令。
English: Yi Yuan entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, Du Cao Shangshu, and was transferred to Shangshu Ling.

古文：十三年，进位司徒。
现代文：太和十三年，尉元进位为司徒。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiwa era, 尉元 was promoted to 司徒.

古文：十六年，例降庶姓王爵，封山阳郡开国公，食邑六百户。
现代文：太和十六年，按照条例降低所封庶姓人的王爵，封尉元为山阳郡开国公，食邑六百户。
English: In the 16th year of the Taisho era, in accordance with the ordinance, the rank of the person with a common surname who was awarded the title was reduced to that of a prince. The person who was awarded the title was the founder of Sanyo County, and 600 households in Shokui were affected.

古文：元表曰： 臣以天安之初，奉律总戎，廓宁淮右，海内既平，仍忝徐岳。
现代文：尉元上表说： 臣于天安初年，奉命总领军事，开拓安定淮北，如今海内已经平定，仍旧忝任徐州刺史。
English: Lt. Yuan said at the top table: In the first year of Tiananmen, he was ordered by the commander-in-chief of the military to explore and stabilize Huaibei. Now that the sea has been pacified, he is still in charge of the history of Xuzhou.

古文：素餐尸禄，积有年岁，彼土安危，窃所具悉。
现代文：素餐尸禄，已有多年，那个地方的安危，我全都了解。
English: I have been a vegetarian for many years, and I know all about the safety of that place.

古文：每惟彭城水陆之要，江南用兵，莫不因之威陵诸夏。
现代文：经常考虑彭城是水陆交通的要地，长江南部用兵作战，莫不凭仗它而威逼各方。
English: It is often considered that Pengcheng is an important place for land and water transportation. In the south of the Yangtze River, soldiers are used to fight, and it is necessary to use it to threaten all parties.

古文：夫国之大计，豫备为先。
现代文：国家之大计，都要预谋在前。
English: The country's grand plans must be planned in advance.

古文：且臣初克徐方，青齐未定，从河以南，犹怀彼此。
现代文：况且臣刚刚占据徐州之地，青、齐地区尚未平定，黄河以南的百姓仍心怀杂念。
English: Moreover, the minister has just occupied the land of Xuzhou, the Qing and Qi regions have not yet been pacified, and the people south of the Yellow River are still nostalgic.

古文：时刘彧遣张永、沈攸之、陈显达、萧顺之等前后数度，规取彭城，势连青衮。
现代文：刘彧派张永、沈攸之、陈显达、萧顺之等人先后多次企图攻取彭城，以连接青、兖。
English: Liu Bei sent Zhang Yong, Shen Youzhi, Chen Xianda, Xiao Shun and others to repeatedly attempt to capture Pengcheng in order to connect Qing and Han.

古文：唯以彭城既固，而永等摧屈。
现代文：只是由于彭城已经巩固，张永等人都被摧垮。
English: But because Pengcheng has been consolidated, Zhang Yong and others have been destroyed.

古文：今计彼戍兵，多是胡人，臣前镇徐州之日，胡人子都将呼延笼达因于负罪，便尔叛乱，鸠引胡类，一时扇动。
现代文：现在计议，那里的戍兵，多是胡人，臣先前镇守徐州的时候，胡人子都将呼延笼达由于犯了罪，就发动叛乱，纠集胡人，一时间人情蠢蠢欲动。
English: Now it is estimated that the soldiers there are mostly Hu people. When the minister was previously in charge of Xuzhou, the sons of Hu people would all be incarcerated. Because they committed a crime, they would launch a rebellion, gather Hu people, and for a while, people's feelings would fluctuate.

古文：赖威灵遐被，罪人斯戮。
现代文：幸赖朝廷威灵远布，罪人得以诛戮。
English: Thanks to the benevolence of the imperial court, criminals could be killed.

古文：又围城子都将胡人王敕勤负衅南叛，每惧奸图，狡诱同党。
现代文：又有团城子都将胡人王敕鉞负罪南叛，常怀奸邪之图，狡猾地引诱同党。
English: In addition, some regimental commanders accused Hu Ren Wang Yao of treason against the south, always harboring treacherous plans, and cunningly luring fellow party members.

古文：愚诚所见，宜以彭城胡军换取南豫州徙民之兵，转戍彭城；又以中州鲜卑增实兵数，于事为宜。 
现代文：依我愚诚的看法，应当以彭城的胡人军队换取南豫州迁徙来的兵卒，让其转到彭城戍守；又以中州的鲜卑人增补充实兵员人数。这样做最为适宜。 
English: In my humble opinion, it is most appropriate to exchange the Hu army in Pengcheng for the soldiers who migrated from South Henan Province, and let them stay in Pengcheng; and supplement the number of soldiers with fresh troops from Central Henan Province.

古文：诏曰： 公之所陈，甚合事机。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 你所陈述的事，非常符合时宜。 
English: The emperor issued a decree saying, "What you have stated is very timely.

古文：其年，频表以老乞身。
现代文：这一年，尉元因为年老频频上表请求告老退休。
English: This year, because of his old age, Lieutenant Yuan frequently requested to retire.

古文：八月，诏曰： 元年尊识远，屡表告退。
现代文：八月，皇帝下诏说： 尉元年迈位尊，见识深远，屡次上表告退。
English: In August, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "He is a venerable man who has reached the first year of his reign. He is far-sighted and has repeatedly submitted his resignation.

古文：朕以公秉德清挹，体怀平隐，仁雅渊广，谋猷是仗，方委之民政，用康亿兆，故频文累札，仍违冲志。
现代文：我因为尉元公秉持道德，清廉谦虚，胸怀公正隐忍，仁慈雅爱之心深广，计谋高深可以依仗，方才委付以治民之政，任用他安抚百姓，他多次上书告退，还是违背他的宿愿。
English: It was only because I trusted the former general to uphold morality, to be honest and modest, to be fair-minded and tolerant, to have a broad heart of benevolence and gentleness, and to be able to rely on high-level stratagems, that I entrusted him to govern the people, and appointed him to pacify the people. He repeatedly resigned in writing, but it was still against his long-cherished wish.

古文：而谦光逾固，三请弥切，若不屈从高谟，复何以成其美德也。
现代文：但他谦虚的光辉愈加坚固，再三请求情意深切，倘若不屈从其崇高的愿望，又何以成全他的美德呢。
English: But the light of his modesty grew stronger and stronger, and he repeatedly and earnestly entreated that if he did not yield to his lofty aspirations, how could his virtue be perfected?

古文：已许其致仕，主者可出表付外，如礼申遂。 
现代文：我已经准许他辞官退休，主管者可以下表到州里，按照礼制满足他的心愿。 
English: I have allowed him to retire as a magistrate, and the superintendent can go down to the state and fulfill his wishes in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：元诣阙谢老，引见于庭，命升殿劳宴，赐玄冠素服。
现代文：尉元于是来到朝廷辞谢，高祖在殿庭接见他，命在殿前设宴慰劳他，赐给他玄冠素服。
English: He then came to the imperial court to express his thanks. Emperor Gaozong received him in the palace courtyard, ordered a banquet to be held in front of the palace to console him, and gave him a crown and plain clothes.

古文：又诏曰： 夫大道凝虚，至德冲挹，故后王法玄猷以御世，圣人崇谦光而降美。
现代文：皇帝又下诏说： 大道者凝虚，至德者谦让，所以后王效法幽深的义理用来统御天下，圣人崇尚谦虚的光辉而降下美德。
English: The emperor also issued the following edict: "The virtuous are dignified, and the virtuous are humble. Therefore, the empress emulated the profound principles of righteousness to rule the world, and the saints revered the brilliance of modesty and lowered virtue.

古文：是以天子父事三老，兄事五更，所以明孝悌于万国，垂教本于天下。
现代文：所以天子尊养年老致仕的人，像对父亲一样对待三老，像对兄长一样对待五更，用以明孝悌于万国，垂教化于天下。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven respects those who have reached the age of retirement, treats the three old men as if they were his father, and treats the five younger men as if they were his elder brothers, and uses them to spread filial piety to all nations and to spread enlightenment throughout the world.

古文：自非道高识博，孰能处之？
现代文：若非道德高尚知识渊博的人，谁能处于三老五更的地位？
English: Who can be in a better position than the three old men and five young men if they are not moral, noble and knowledgeable?

古文：是故五帝宪德，三王乞言，若求备一人，同之古哲，叔世之老，孰能克堪？
现代文：所以五帝崇尚德望，三王求讨诤言，如若求得一人，相同于古之贤哲，衰乱时代的群老，有谁能够胜任？
English: Therefore, the five emperors advocated virtue, and the three kings asked for advice. If you ask for one person, who is the same as the ancient sages and sages, and the elders in the era of decline, who is competent?

古文：师上圣则难为其举，傅中庸则易为其选。
现代文：德才与圣哲相近的人就难以推举，靠近中等的人才就容易挑选。
English: It is difficult to promote those whose virtues are close to those of sages, and it is easy to select those whose virtues are close to those of middling talents.

古文：朕既虚寡，德谢曩哲，更、老之选，差可有之。
现代文：朕虽见识虚寡，德行也不及先哲，五更三老的选拔，尚可以挑选到这样的人。
English: Although I have little knowledge, I am not as virtuous as the sages. Through the selection of the five sages and three elders, I can still select such people.

古文：前司徒、山阳郡开国公尉元，前大鸿胪卿、新泰伯游明根并元亨利贞，明允诚素，少著英风，老敷雅迹，位显台宿，归终私第。
现代文：前任司徒、山阳郡开国公尉元，前任大鸿胪卿、新泰伯游明根都是功臣元老，明智公正忠诚朴素，年轻时显露英风，老年时铺展雅迹，官位显赫于台省，告老归终于私第。
English: The former Sito, the former Shanyang County Founding Public Officer Yuan, the former Dahong Yongqing, and the new Tai Bo You are all meritorious veterans, wise, fair, loyal and simple, showing their talents when they are young, and spreading their good deeds when they are old. Their official positions are prominent in Taiwan Province, and they finally return to their private lives when they are old.

古文：可谓知始知卒，希世之贤也。
现代文：可算得是善始善终，真乃旷世之贤人。
English: He can be counted as a man with a good beginning and a good end. He is truly a sage of ages.

古文：公以八十之年，宜处三老之重；卿以七十之龄，可充五更之选。 
现代文：尉元八十岁，应处于三老之重；游明根以七十之龄，可充任五更之选。 
English: The eighty-year-old lieutenant general should be the most important of the three elders; Yu Minggen, at the age of seventy, can serve as the choice of the five elders.

古文：于是养三老五更于明堂、国老庶老于阶下。
现代文：于是皇帝养三老五更于明堂，国老庶老于阶下。
English: As a result, the emperor raised the three old men and five younger ones in the Ming hall, and the elders and their children in the lower ranks.

古文：高祖再拜三老，亲袒割牲，执爵而馈；于五更行肃拜之礼，赐要老、庶老衣服有差。
现代文：高祖对三老再拜，亲自袒衣、切割牲肉，执爵进酒，进送食物；对五更行直身肃拜之礼，赐给国老、庶老不等的衣服。
English: Gao Zu paid homage to the three elders, personally knitting clothes, cutting meat, serving wine, and delivering food; he paid homage to the five elders, and gave clothes to the elders of the country and the elders of the family.

古文：既而元言曰： 自天地分判，五行施则，人之所崇，莫重于孝顺。
现代文：接着尉元进言说： 自从天地初开，五行施则，人之所崇尚的，莫重于孝顺。
English: Then Lt. Gen. Jin said, "Since the beginning of the world, the Five Elements have been worshipped, and there is nothing more important than filial piety.

古文：然五孝六顺，天下之所先，愿陛下重之，以化四方。
现代文：然而五孝六顺，是天下之所先，望陛下重视此道，用以教化四方。
English: However, five filial piety and six obedience are the first in the world. I hope that His Majesty will attach importance to this way and use it to enlighten the four directions.

古文：臣既衰老，不究远趣，心耳所及，敢不尽诚。 
现代文：臣已经衰老，不能走动很远，但耳闻心想所及之事，不敢不竭尽我一片诚心。 
English: I am old and cannot walk very far, but I dare not not exhaust my sincerity by hearing what I want to hear.

古文：高祖曰： 孝顺之道，天地之经，今承三老明言，铭之于怀。 
现代文：高祖说道： 孝顺之道，是天地之根本，现在三老对我所说的话，我当铭记在心里。 
English: Gaozu said, "The way of filial piety is the foundation of heaven and earth. I should keep in mind what the three elders have said to me.

古文：明根言曰： 夫至孝通灵，至顺感幽，故《诗》云：孝悌之至，通于神明，光于四海。
现代文：游明根进言说： 至孝可以通达神灵，至顺能够感动幽冥，所以《孝经》里说：孝悌之至，通于神明，光于四海。
English: Yu Minggen said, "The most filial can reach the gods, and the most obedient can move the darkness. Therefore, in the "Book of Filial Piety," it says, "The most filial can reach the gods, and the light can reach the four seas."

古文：如此则孝顺之道，无所不格。
现代文：这样则孝顺之道，无所不通。
English: In this way, the path of filial piety is all-pervasive.

古文：愿陛下念之，以济黎庶。
现代文：望陛下记取此道，用以帮助黎民百姓。
English: I hope His Majesty will remember this and use it to help the people of Lebanon.

古文：臣年志朽弊，识见昧然，在于心虑，不敢不尽。 
现代文：臣年老志朽，见识昏昧，存于心中的思虑，不敢不尽言。 
English: The minister is old and decrepit, his vision is dim, and the thoughts in his heart dare not be expressed.

古文：高祖曰： 五更助三老以言至范，敷展德音，当克己复礼，以行来授。 
现代文：高祖说道： 五更帮助三老说明重要的规范，铺展盛德之音，朕应当克制自己遵循礼教，以便来日授之于民。 
English: Gao Zu said: The Five Elders help the Three Elders to explain important norms and spread the sound of virtue. I should restrain myself from following the etiquette so that I can teach it to the people in the future.

古文：礼毕，乃赐步挽一乘。
现代文：典礼完毕，就赐予他们步挽一乘。
English: At the end of the ceremony, they were given a ride.

古文：诏曰： 夫尊老尚更，列圣同致；钦年敬德，绵哲齐轨。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 尊尚三老五更，古今圣主都是一样；钦佩年高者尊敬有德者，明哲之人都共同遵循。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "Respecting the elderly is more important than respecting the young. The same applies to the saints of the past and the present. Those who admire the aged respect the virtuous, and those who are wise follow the same path.

古文：朕虽道谢玄风，识昧睿则，仰禀先诲，企遵猷旨。
现代文：朕虽然不崇尚玄风，见识并不睿智，但要秉承先哲的教诲，遵循礼法的意旨。
English: Although I do not worship the occult, and my insight is not wise, I must uphold the teachings of the ancient philosophers and follow the meaning of etiquette.

古文：故推老以德，立更以元，父焉斯彰，兄焉斯显矣。
现代文：所以以德推崇三老，以善敬立五更，使三老如父得以昭彰，五更如兄得以显露。
English: Therefore, the Three Elders should be respected for their virtue, and the Five Elders should be respected for their kindness, so that the Three Elders can be honored as a father, and the Five Elders can be revealed as a brother.

古文：前司徒公元、前鸿胪卿明根并以冲德悬车，懿量归老，故尊公以三，事更以五。
现代文：前任司徒公尉元、前任鸿胪卿游明根都以其谦冲之德告退，以其美好气量归老，所以尊司徒公为三老，事鸿胪卿为五更。
English: Both the former Sidu Public Lieutenant Yuan and the former Hongyu Sir You Minggen retired with their modesty and returned to old age with their beautiful temperament. Therefore, His Excellency Sidu Gong is the third elder and Hongyu Sir Zhi is the fifth elder.

古文：虽更、老非官，耄耋罔禄，然况事既高，宜加殊养。
现代文：虽然三老五更不是官职，耄耋之年没有俸禄，但其实际地位已经极为尊贵，应当给以特殊的供养。
English: Although Sanro-goko is not an official post, and there is no salary in the year of the rooster, its actual status is already extremely noble, and it should be given special support.

古文：三老可给上公之禄，五更可食元卿之俸，供食之味，亦同其例。 
现代文：三老可给予上公的俸禄，五更可给予元卿的俸禄，供食之待遇，也与其例相同。 
English: Three lords could be given the salary of a shogun, and five lords could be given the salary of a retired emperor, and the treatment of providing food was also the same as in their example.

古文：十七年七月，元疾笃，高祖亲幸省疾。
现代文：太和十七年七月，尉元病重，高祖亲自前往探视。
English: In July of the seventeenth year of the Taisho era, Ipgen fell seriously ill, and Gaozu went to visit him in person.

古文：八月，元薨，时年八十一。
现代文：八月，尉元去世，终年八十一岁。
English: In August, 尉元 passed away at the age of 81.

古文：诏曰： 元至行宽纯，仁风美福，内秉越群之武，外挺温懿之容。
现代文：高祖下诏说： 尉元一生高风亮节，为人宽和淳厚，仁爱之风显著，内怀超群的武略，外有和美的仪容。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict saying, "Fei Yuan's life was full of high spirits and bright festivals. He was a broad-minded and honest person, with a notable benevolent spirit, possessed superior military strategy, and had a gentle and beautiful appearance.

古文：自少暨长，勋勤备至，历奉五朝，美隆四叶。南曜河淮之功，北光燕然之效，鲁宋怀仁，中铉载德。
现代文：从少到老，功勋备至，历奉五朝，美誉四方，在南炫耀着河淮之功，在北光照着燕然的德业，鲁宋缅怀他的仁爱，中台记载他的道德。
English: From the youngest to the oldest, he has made great achievements, served five dynasties, and won fame in all directions. In the south, he flaunted his great achievements. In the north, he shined brightly with his virtuous deeds. In the Song Dynasty, his benevolence was remembered. In the Middle Kingdom, his morality was recorded.

古文：所谓立身备于本末，行道著于终始，勋书玉牒，惠结民志者也。
现代文：真可谓立身备于本末，行道著于始终，功勋书于玉牒，恩惠结于民心的人啊。
English: It can truly be said that those who stand ready at the beginning and at the end, whose career is written in the beginning and at the end, whose achievements are written in the annals, and whose favors are written in the hearts of the people.

古文：爰及五福攸集，悬车归老。
现代文：于是五福久集于身，辞官归老。
English: As a result, the five generals gathered together and retired.

古文：谦损既彰，远近流咏，陟兹父事，仪我万方。
现代文：谦让之德已经昭彰，远近之人流传歌咏，卒于三老之位，是我四方之典范。
English: The virtue of modesty has been well-known. Poems have been passed down by people near and far. He died at the age of three, and he is a model for all of us.

古文：谓极眉寿，弥赞王业。
现代文：原说他能更加长寿，能长久辅佐王业。
English: Originally, he said that he could live longer and could assist Wangye for a long time.

古文：天不遗老，奄尔薨逝。
现代文：谁料天不遗老，阖然长逝。
English: He who does not expect to grow old dies young.

古文：世宗时，为尚书左民郎中。
现代文：朕怀念他的功勋思念他的美德，心中无限悲痛伤感。
English: I miss his merits, think of his virtues, and feel infinite sorrow and sadness in my heart.

古文：卒，赠博陵太守，重赠镇军将军、洛州刺史，谥曰敬。
现代文：但由于戎事缠身，恨不能对他极尽礼节。可赐予布帛丝织物二千匹、棺木与葬器、朝衣一套，并替他营造坟茔墓地。 朝廷给尉元定谥号为景桓公。
English: However, since he was involved in military affairs, he wanted to be as polite as possible to him. He could be given two thousand pieces of cloth and silk fabric, a coffin and a funerary vessel, a set of imperial robes, and a grave and cemetery could be built for him. The Imperial Court originally gave the lieutenant the posthumous name of King Jinghuang.

古文：子祐之，通直散骑常侍、护军长史。
现代文：用特殊的礼仪厚葬尉元，赐给羽葆鼓吹、假黄钺、班剑四十人，赐帛一千匹。
English: Using a special etiquette, he gave a lavish funeral for the lieutenant, bestowing feathered trumpets, false yellow scepters, and swords on forty people, and a thousand donkeys.

古文：卒。慕容白曜，慕容元真之玄孙。
现代文：慕容白曜，是慕容元真的玄孙。
English: Murong Baiyou is the great-great-grandson of Murong Yuanxin.

古文：父琚，历官以廉清著称，赐爵高都侯。
现代文：父亲慕容琚，历任官职都以廉洁清白著称，朝廷赐给爵位为高都侯。
English: His father, Murong Yao, was known for his integrity when he was in office, and was given the title of Gaoduo.

古文：卒于冠军将军、尚书左丞，赠安南将军、并州刺史、高都公，谥曰简。
现代文：慕容琚卒于冠军将军、尚书左丞任上，朝廷追赠为安南将军、并州刺史、高都公，谥号为简。
English: Murong Qian died as a champion general, Shang Shuzang, and was posthumously awarded by the imperial court as General Annan, as well as Shuzhu Zhishi and Gaoduo, with the posthumous name Jian.

古文：白曜少为中书吏，以敦直给事东宫。
现代文：慕容白曜年轻时曾任中书吏，由于性情敦厚正直而在东宫供职。
English: When he was young, Murong Baiyou was a middle school librarian. Due to his strong and honest character, he worked at the East Palace.

古文：高宗即位，拜北部下大夫。
现代文：高宗即位以后，授予他北部下大夫之职。
English: After Gao Zong ascended the throne, he was given the post of the Northern Lower Doctor.

古文：袭爵，迁北部尚书。
现代文：慕容白曜袭承父亲的爵位，迁任北部尚书。
English: Murong Bai You inherited his father's title and was transferred to the Northern Shangshu.

古文：在职，执法无所阿纵，高宗厚待之。
现代文：他在职位上，执法甚严无所偏袒，高宗对他十分宠爱。
English: In his position, he enforced the law very strictly without favor, and Gaozong was very fond of him.

古文：高宗崩，与乙浑共秉朝政，迁尚书右仆射，进爵南乡公，加安南将军。
现代文：高宗驾崩之后，慕容白曜与乙诨共同辅佐朝廷政务，迁任尚书右仆射，晋爵为南乡公，加授安南将军。
English: After Gao Zong's death, Murong Baiyou and Acetylene jointly assisted the government affairs of the imperial court, and were transferred to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man, promoted to the rank of Nanxianggu, and promoted to the rank of Annan general.

古文：刘彧徐州刺史薛安都、兗州刺史毕众敬并以城内附，诏镇南大将军尉元、镇东将军孔伯恭率师赴之。
现代文：刘彧的徐州刺史薛安都、兖州刺史毕众敬同时以州城归附于朝廷，皇帝令镇南大将军尉元、镇东将军孔伯恭率领军队前往接应他们。
English: Liu Bei's Xuzhou governor Xue Andu and Zhangzhou governor Bi Zongjian were also attached to the imperial court in the city of Zhou. The emperor ordered the commander of the Southern Zhengtai Army, Lieutenant Yuan, and the commander of the Eastern Zhengtai Army, Kong Boqiang, to lead the army to meet them.

古文：而彧东平太守申纂屯无盐，并州刺史房崇吉屯升城，遏绝王使。
现代文：但刘彧的东平太守申纂屯军于无盐，并州刺史房崇吉屯军于升城，阻拦朝廷使者。
English: However, Liu Bei's Dongping governor Shen Zuotun's troops arrived in Wuxi, and the prefectural governor Chong Jitun's troops arrived in Shengcheng, blocking the imperial envoys.

古文：皇兴初，加白曜使持节、都督诸军事、征南大将军、上党公，屯于碻磝，以为诸军后继。
现代文：皇兴初年，朝廷加授慕容白曜为使持节、都督诸军事、征南大将军、上党公，屯军于石高石敖，作为各路军队的后继。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's enthronement, the Imperial Court awarded Murong Baiyang with the title of the Emissary, the military governor of the capital, the general of the Southern Expedition, the party leader, and the troops stationed in Shigao, Shizuoka, as the successors of the various armies.

古文：白曜攻纂于无盐城，拔其东郭。
现代文：慕容白曜率军在无盐城攻击申纂，占领了东边的外城。
English: Murong Peiyou led an army to attack Shenzang in Wuxi and occupied the eastern outskirts of the city.

古文：其夜纂遁，遣兵追执之，获其男女数千口。
现代文：当天夜晚申纂逃遁，慕容白曜派兵追击抓获了他，并俘获了城中男女数千口。
English: On the night of the same day, Shen Kung fled, and Murong Baiyang sent troops to chase and capture him, and captured thousands of men and women in the city.

古文：先是，刘彧青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固并遣使内附，既而彧遣招慰，复归于彧。
现代文：早先，刘彧的青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固同时派使者表示归附朝廷，不久刘彧派人对他们进行招安抚慰，他们又归顺刘彧。
English: Earlier, Liu Bei's Qingzhou aide Shen Wenshu and Jizhou aide Cui Daogu simultaneously sent envoys to express their allegiance to the imperial court, and soon Liu Bei sent people to appease and comfort them, and they also submitted to Liu Bei.

古文：白曜既拔无盐，回攻升城。
现代文：慕容白曜攻克无盐后，回军攻打升城。
English: After Murong Baiyou conquered Wansalt, the returning army attacked Shengcheng.

古文：肥城戍主闻军至，弃城遁走，获粟三十万斛。
现代文：肥城戍主听说魏军到来，弃城逃走，魏军缴获城中粮食三十万斛。
English: When the lord of Fucheng heard that the Wei army had arrived, he abandoned the city and fled. The Wei army seized 300,000 baht of grain in the city.

古文：既至升城，垣苗、麋沟二戍拒守不下。
现代文：慕容白曜到达升城之后，垣苗、麋沟二戍敌军拒守不降。
English: After Murong Baiyou arrived in the city of Shengcheng, the two enemy armies of Qianmiao and Qigou refused to surrender.

古文：白曜以千余骑袭麋沟，麋沟溃，自投济水死者千余人。
现代文：慕容白曜用一千多骑兵袭击麋沟，麋沟守敌溃败，跳入济水而死的有千余人。
English: Murong Baiyou attacked Gonggou with more than a thousand cavalrymen, defeated the enemy defending Gonggou, and more than a thousand people died jumping into the water.

古文：击垣苗，又破之，得粟十余万斛，由是军粮充足。
现代文：接着攻击垣苗，又攻破该戍，缴获粮食十余万斛，从此魏军军粮十分充足。
English: Next, they attacked the hedge, broke through the hedge, and captured more than one hundred thousand stalks of grain. From then on, the Wei army was well supplied with grain.

古文：先是，淮阳公皮豹子等再征垣苗不克，白曜以一旬之内，频拔四城，威震齐土。
现代文：先前，淮阳公皮豹子等人一再进攻垣苗未能取胜，而慕容白曜却在一旬之内，连续攻占四城，军威震慑齐地。
English: Previously, Huaiyang Gongpi Leopards and others repeatedly attacked Gakimiao and failed to win, but Murong Baiyou was able to capture four cities in succession within a short period of time, and the military deterrence was uniform.

古文：显祖嘉焉，诏曰： 卿总率戎旅，讨除不宾，霜戈所向，无不摧靡，旬日之内，克拔四城，韩白之功，何以加此？
现代文：显祖对他十分赞赏，下达诏书说： 你总领大军，讨除不肯降服之敌，矛戈所向，无不摧靡，旬日之内，连拔四城，韩信白起之功，怎能有过于此？
English: Emperor Xianzu highly appreciated him and issued an imperial edict saying, "You have led a large army to defeat an enemy that refused to surrender, and your spearhead is invincible. Within ten days, you have captured four cities. How can you surpass Han Xinbai's achievement?

古文：虽升城戍将房崇吉守远不顺，危亡已形，溃在旦夕。
现代文：虽然升城戍将房崇吉死守不降，但其危亡已定，溃在旦夕。
English: Although Shangcheng Xuan would defend Fang Chongji to the death, his death had already been determined, and he was defeated on the eve of the New Year.

古文：宜勉崇威略，务存长辔，不必穷兵极武，以为劳顿。
现代文：应当尽力推崇威略，务必保存我军实力，不要穷兵极武，以使将士劳顿。
English: We should do our best to promote wisdom and prudence, and preserve the strength of our army. We should not use extreme force to exhaust our soldiers.

古文：且伐罪吊民，国之令典，当招怀以德，使来苏之泽，加于百姓。 
现代文：况且讨伐罪人怜悯百姓，是国家的律令法典，应当以恩德进行招抚，以使重生的恩泽，加之于百姓。 
English: Moreover, to fight against sinners and to have mercy on the people is the code of laws and regulations of the country. It is necessary to appease them with benevolence, so that the grace of rebirth can be given to the people.

古文：升城不降，白曜忿之，纵兵陵城，杀数百人，崇吉夜遁。
现代文：升城不肯投降，慕容白曜非常气愤，于是纵兵登城，杀死敌军数百人，房崇吉连夜逃遁。
English: Shangcheng refused to surrender, Murong Baiyou was very angry, so he sent troops to the city, killed hundreds of enemy troops, and Fang Chongji fled overnight.

古文：白曜抚慰其民，无所杀戮，百姓怀之。
现代文：慕容白曜抚慰城中百姓，一个也不杀戮，百姓都很感激。
English: Murong Baiyou soothed the people in the city and did not kill anyone. The people were very grateful.

古文：获崇吉母妻，待之以礼。
现代文：俘获了房崇吉的母亲和妻子，慕容白曜对她们也以礼相待。
English: He captured Fang Chonggu's mother and wife and treated them with courtesy.

古文：刘彧遣其将吴憘公率众数万，欲寇彭城。
现代文：刘彧派他的部将吴忄喜公率领数万人马，想要侵犯彭城。
English: Liu Bei sent his subordinate Wu Gan Xi Gong to invade Pengcheng with tens of thousands of troops.

古文：镇南大将军尉元表请济师。
现代文：镇南大将军尉元上表请求增兵。
English: Lieutenant General Zhenan Yuan sent a request for additional troops.

古文：显祖诏白曜赴之。
现代文：显祖令慕容白曜率军前往。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered Murong Baiyang to lead the army.

古文：白曜到瑕丘，遇患。
现代文：他到达瑕丘时，身患疾病。
English: By the time he reached Koecheok, he was ill.

古文：时泗水暴竭，船不得进。
现代文：当时泗水忽然枯竭，船只不能前进。
English: At that time, the floodwaters suddenly dried up, and the ship could not move forward.

古文：憘公退，白曜因停瑕丘。
现代文：吴忄喜公只得退走，慕容白曜因而滞留在瑕丘。
English: Wu Shuxigong had to retreat, leaving Murong Baiyou stranded in Kejiu.

古文：会崇吉与从弟法寿盗彧盘阳城以赎母妻。
现代文：正好房崇吉与他的堂弟房法寿窃据刘彧所属的盘阳城，用来赎回他的母亲和妻子。
English: It just so happened that Fang Chongji and his cousin Fang Fashou stole the Panyang City that Liu Yao belonged to, and used it to redeem his mother and wife.

古文：白曜自瑕丘遣将军长孙观等率骑入自马耳关赴之。
现代文：慕容白曜从瑕丘派将军长孙观等人率骑兵入马耳关前往接应他们。
English: Murong Baiyang sent the general Sun Guan and other cavalrymen from Koecheok into Malta to meet them.

古文：观至盘阳，诸县悉降。
现代文：长孙观到达盘阳，各县全部归降。
English: When the eldest grandson saw Panyang, all counties came to surrender.

古文：平东将军长孙陵、宁东将军尉眷东讨青州，白曜自瑕丘进攻历城。
现代文：平东将军长孙陵、宁东将军尉眷率军东讨青州，慕容白曜率军从瑕丘进攻历城。
English: The general of Pingdong, Sun Ling, and the lieutenant of Ningdong led the army east to attack Qingzhou, and the general of Murongbai led the army to attack Licheng from Kejiu.

古文：白曜乃为书以喻之曰： 天弃刘彧，祸难滋兴，骨肉兄弟，自相诛戮，君臣上下，靡复纪纲。
现代文：慕容白曜给敌将写了一封信明申大义说： 上天抛弃刘彧，祸难滋生发展，骨肉兄弟，自相诛戮，君臣上下，不再有纲纪。
English: Murong Baiyou wrote a letter to the enemy general, saying: Heaven has abandoned Liu Bei, disaster breeds development, flesh and blood brothers fight each other, and there is no longer any hierarchy.

古文：徐州刺史薛安都、豫州刺史常珍奇、兗州刺史毕众敬等深睹存亡，翻然归义。
现代文：徐州刺史薛安都、豫州刺史常珍奇、兖州刺史毕众敬等人深察存亡之势，幡然归附仁义。
English: Xuzhou chief historian Xue Andu, Yuzhou chief historian Chang Zhenqi, and Zhangzhou chief historian Bi Zhongyi were among those who deeply observed the trend of survival and death, and suddenly adhered to benevolence.

古文：故朝廷纳其诚款，委以南蕃。
现代文：所以朝廷接纳其诚心，委任以南边的重任。
English: Therefore, the imperial court accepted his sincerity and appointed him to the important task of the southern side.

古文：皆目前之见事，东西所备闻也。
现代文：这都是眼前之所见，东西所俱闻的事。
English: It's all about what you see and hear.

古文：彼无盐戍主申纂敢纵奸慝，劫夺行人，官军始临，一时授首。
现代文：无盐戍主申纂竟敢放纵奸邪，劫夺朝廷使者，官军刚一来到，立刻束手就擒。
English: Unsalted lord Shenzang dared to indulge in treason and plunder the imperial envoys. As soon as the imperial army arrived, he was immediately arrested.

古文：房崇吉固守升城，寻即溃散。
现代文：房崇吉固守升城，不久也就溃散。
English: Fang Chongji held on to Shengcheng, but it soon fell apart.

古文：自襄阳以东，至于淮海，莫不风靡，服从正化。
现代文：从襄阳以东，至于淮海，莫不望风披靡，服从正化。
English: To the east of Xiangyang, as for the Huaihai Sea, the wind is expected to be overwhelming and subject to rectification.

古文：谓东阳、历城有识之士，上思安都之荣显，下念申纂之死亡，追悔前惑，改图后悟。
现代文：原说东阳、历城的有识之士，上思薛安都等人的荣显，下念申纂之灭亡，能够追悔前罪，幡然悔悟。
English: Originally, it was said that people of insight in Dongyang and Licheng would think about the glory of Xue Andu and other people, and then think about the destruction of Shen Cao. They would be able to repent their previous sins and suddenly repent.

古文：然执守愚迷，不能自革。
现代文：但他们执守愚迷，不能改过自新。
English: But they cling to their folly, unable to reform.

古文：猥总戎旅，扫定北方。
现代文：本人统领大军，扫定北方。
English: I myself am leading a large army, sweeping the north.

古文：济黄河知十二之虚说，临齐境想一变之清风，踟蹰周览，依然何极？
现代文：渡过黄河方知十二之虚说，来到齐境则想一变之清风，踟蹰四望，依旧何其遥远。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, Fang Zhizhong said that when he came to Qixing, he wanted a change of wind. Looking around, he was still far away.

古文：故先驰书，以喻成败。
现代文：故此事先投以书信，晓谕成败得失。
English: Therefore, a letter was sent in advance to explain the gains and losses.

古文：夫见机而动，《周易》所称；去危就安，人事常理。
现代文：见机而动，是《周易》中所称；去危就安，乃人情常理。
English: "Move at the right time" is what "Zhou Yi" calls it; it is human nature to seek safety when in danger.

古文：若以一介为高，不悛为美，则微子负嫌于时，纪李受讥于世。
现代文：倘若认为细小草介是高大，不思改悔是美德，那么微子就会受到时人的憎恶，纪季就会受到世人的讥讽。
English: If it is thought that small grasses are tall, and not thinking about repentance is a virtue, then the microbe will be hated by the people of the time, and Ji Ji will be ridiculed by the people of the world.

古文：我皇魏重光累叶，德怀无外，军威所拂，无不披靡。
现代文：我大魏功德累世，仁德无边，军威所向，无不披靡。
English: My great Wei meritorious deeds over the years, benevolence boundless, military prowess, all invincible.

古文：固非三吴弱卒所能拟抗。
现代文：当然不是三吴弱兵所能抗拒的。
English: Of course, it was not something that the weak soldiers of the Three Kingdoms could resist.

古文：况于今者，势已土崩。
现代文：况且事到如今，已成土崩瓦解之势。
English: What's more, the whole thing is now on the verge of collapse.

古文：刘彧威不制秣陵，政不出阃外，岂复能浮江越海，赴危救急？
现代文：刘彧的威势不能控制秣陵城，政令不能传达到在外的将领，又怎么能够浮江越海，赴危救急。
English: Liu Bei's power could not control Fuling City, his decrees could not be communicated to the outside generals, and how could he cross the river and go to the emergency.

古文：恃此为援，何异于蹄涔之鱼，冀拯江海？
现代文：依靠他来救援，何异于马蹄印积水中的鱼，想要到江海中去。
English: Relying on him to come to the rescue is no different from a fish swimming in the water with its hooves in the water, trying to get to the river.

古文：夫蝮蛇螫手则断手，螫足则断足，诚忍肌体以救性命。
现代文：蝮蛇螫手就砍断手，螫足就砍断足，实在是忍受肌体之痛以救性命。
English: When a viper bites the hand, the hand is cut off, and when it bites the foot, the foot is cut off. It is really to endure the pain of the body to save one's life.

古文：若推义而行之，无割身之痛也，而可以保家宁宗，长守安乐。
现代文：如若遵奉道义而行动，并无割身之痛，而且可以保家宁宗，长守安乐。
English: If you act in accordance with morality, there is no pain of cutting yourself, and you can keep your home rather than live, and keep your peace.

古文：此智士所宜深思重虑，自求多福。 
现代文：这是明智之人所应当深思熟虑的自求多福之举。 
English: This is a deliberate act of self-benefit for a wise man.

古文：道固固守不降，白曜筑长围以攻之。
现代文：崔道固固守不降，慕容白曜构筑很长的土围子用来攻城。
English: Cui Dao held firm and did not surrender, while Murong Bai You built a very long earthen wall to attack the city.

古文：长孙陵等既至青州，沈文秀遣使请降。
现代文：长孙陵等人率军到达青州之后，沈文秀派使者前来请求投降。
English: After the army led by Chosun Ling and others arrived in Qingzhou, Shen Wenshu sent an envoy to request surrender.

古文：军人人其西郛，颇有采掠，文秀悔之，遂婴城拒守。
现代文：魏军进入西边外城，士兵颇有抢掠的行为，沈文秀因此而反悔，于是固城拒守。
English: The Wei army entered the western outskirts of the city, the soldiers were quite looting behavior, Shen Wenshu therefore repented, so the fortified city refused to defend.

古文：二年，崔道固及兗州刺史梁邹守将刘休宾并面缚而降。
现代文：皇兴二年，崔道固和兖州刺史、梁邹守将刘休宾一起自缚前来归降。
English: In the second year of Wangxing, Cui Daogu and Liu Xubing, the guards of Zhangzhou Jishi Liangyao, surrendered together.

古文：白曜皆释而礼之。
现代文：慕容白曜都亲释其缚而待之以礼。
English: Murong Bai You personally released his shackles and thanked him.

古文：送道固、休宾及其僚属于京师。
现代文：慕容白曜把崔道固、刘休宾以及他们的僚属都送到京师。
English: Murong Baiyang sent Cui Daogu, Liu Xubing and their colleagues to Beijing.

古文：后乃徙二城民望于下馆，朝廷置平齐郡、怀宁、归安二县以居之。
现代文：后来就把这两城有民望的人迁徙到下馆，朝廷设置平齐郡，让他们居住在怀宁、归安两县。
English: Later, the people who were popular in these two cities were moved to the Lower Pavilion, and the imperial court set up Pingqi County to allow them to live in Huaining and Guian counties.

古文：自余悉为奴婢，分赐百官。
现代文：其余的人全都作为奴婢，分别赐给朝中百官。
English: The rest were distributed to the officials as male and female slaves.

古文：白曜虽在军旅，而接待人物，宽和有礼。
现代文：慕容白曜虽然是军旅中的人，但他接人待物，都能做到宽和有礼。
English: Although Murong Baiyou is a person on a military trip, he can be accommodating and courteous.

古文：获崇吉母妻、申纂妇女，皆别营安置，不令士卒喧杂。
现代文：魏军俘获房崇吉的母亲和妻子、申纂的妻子女儿，他都把她们安置在另外的军营中，不让士卒去骚扰。
English: The Wei army captured Fang Chongji's mother and wife, and Shen Zuo's wife and daughter. He placed them in another military camp and did not allow the soldiers to harass them.

古文：乃进讨东阳。
现代文：慕容白曜于是进讨东阳。
English: Murong Baiyou then went to discuss Dongyang.

古文：冬，入其西郭。
现代文：这一年冬，进入其西边外城。
English: In the winter of that year, it entered the western outskirts of the city.

古文：三年春，克东阳，擒沈文秀。
现代文：皇兴三年春，攻克东阳，生擒沈文秀。
English: In the spring of the third year of Emperor Xing, he conquered Dongyang, and Shen Wenxiu was born.

古文：凡获仓粟八十五万斛，米三千斛，弓九千张，箭十八万八千，刀二万二千四百，甲胄各三千三百，铜五千斤，钱十五万；城内户八千六百，口四万一千，吴蛮户三百余。
现代文：总共缴获粟八十五万斛，米三千斛，弓九千张，箭十八万八千支，刀二万二千四百把，甲胄各三千三百件，铜五千斤，钱十五万；俘获城内民户八千六百户，四万一千人，吴蛮户三百余。
English: A total of 8.50 million mu of millet, 3,000 mu of rice, 9,000 bows, 188,000 arrows, 22,400 swords, 3,300 pieces of armor, 5,000 catties of copper, and 150,000 coins were seized; 8,600 households in the city, 41,000 people, and more than 300 Wu barbarian households were captured.

古文：始末三年，筑围攻击，日日交兵，虽士卒死伤，无多怨叛。
现代文：前后共历三年，筑围攻击，日日交兵，虽士卒多有死伤，但并没有多少人埋怨叛逃。
English: After three years of siege and daily skirmishes, although many soldiers were killed and wounded, not many people complained about defection.

古文：督上土人租绢，以为军资，不至侵苦。
现代文：慕容日曜派人督催当地人的租税，用来作为军费，不至于侵扰百姓。
English: On Sunday, Murong sent someone to urge local people to pay taxes to be used for military expenses, so as not to disturb the people.

古文：三齐欣然，安堵乐业。
现代文：于是三齐之地欣然，人民安居乐业。
English: As a result, the three of them were overjoyed and lived happily ever after.

古文：克城之日，以沈文诱抗倨不为之拜，忿而棰挞，唯以此见讥。
现代文：攻占东阳城的那一天，由于沈文秀态度傲慢，拒不对他跪拜，慕容白曜气愤万分而对他加以鞭挞，惟因此受到人们讥刺。
English: On the day of the capture of Dongyang City, because of the arrogant attitude of Shen Wenshu and his refusal to kneel before him, Murong Baiyang was very angry and lashed him, but he was ridiculed for it.

古文：以功拜使持节、都督青齐东徐州诸军事、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、济南王，将军如故。
现代文：慕容白曜凭军功被授予使持节、都督青齐东徐州诸军事、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、济南王，将军称号照旧。
English: On the basis of his military achievements, Murong Peiyou was awarded the title of General of the Military, Governor of Qingqi East Xuzhou Military, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Qingzhou History, Jinan King, and the title of General as before.

古文：四年冬见诛。
现代文：皇兴四年冬，慕容白曜被杀。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the Emperor's reign, Murong Baiyang was killed.

古文：初乙浑专权，白曜颇所侠附，缘此追以为责。
现代文：起初乙浑在朝廷专权，慕容白曜对他颇有奉承趋附，据此来追究成为他的罪责。
English: At first, Yigong was in the exclusive power of the imperial court, and Murong Baiyou was quite flattering and attached to him, according to which he was investigated for his guilt.

古文：及将诛也，云谋反叛，时论冤之。
现代文：及至慕容白曜行将受诛的时候，又说他图谋反叛朝廷，当时的舆论都认为他受到冤屈。
English: When Murong Baiyou was arrested and accused of plotting to rebel against the imperial court, the public opinion at the time believed that he had been wronged.

古文：白曜少子真安，年十一，闻父被执，将自杀。
现代文：慕容白曜的幼子慕容真安，当时才只十一岁，听说父亲被逮捕，打算自杀。
English: Murong Baiyou's young son, Murong Zhen'an, who was only eleven years old at the time, heard that his father had been arrested and was planning to commit suicide.

古文：家人止之，曰： 轻重未可知。 
现代文：家中的人劝止他，说： 你父亲的罪到底是轻是重还未可知。 
English: His family tried to dissuade him, saying: "It's not clear whether your father's crime was minor or serious.

古文：真安曰： 王位高功重，若有小罪，终不至此。
现代文：慕容真安说： 父王位高功重，如果只是犯了小罪，终究不至于此。
English: Murong Zhen'an said, "My father's throne is highly meritorious. If he had only committed a minor crime, he would not have ended up like this.

古文：我何忍见父之死！ 
现代文：我怎么忍心看到父亲之死。 
English: I couldn't bear to see my father die.

古文：遂自缢焉。
现代文：于是自缢身亡。
English: He then hanged himself.

古文：白曜弟如意，亦从白曜平历下，与白曜同诛。
现代文：慕容白曜之弟慕容如意，也曾跟从慕容白曜讨伐平定历下，他与慕容白曜同时被诛。
English: Murong Baiyou's younger brother, Murong Ruyi, was also a follower of Murong Baiyou's crusade and was arrested at the same time as him.

古文：太和中，著作佐郎成淹上表理白曜曰：
现代文：太和年间，著作佐郎成淹向朝廷上表，为慕容白曜申辩说：
English: During the Taika era, the writer Saro Shigenobu wrote to the Imperial Court, pleading for Murong Baiyo, saying:

古文：臣闻经疆启宇，实良将之功；褒德酬庸，乃圣王之务。
现代文： 臣闻经略疆土开拓天下，实在是良将之功；褒奖仁德酬报功勋，则是圣王之务。
English: It is indeed the merit of a good general that his vassals should expand their territory and conquer the world; it is the duty of a saintly king to reward virtue and reward merit.

古文：昔姜公杖铽，开隆周之基；韩生秉旄，兴鸿汉之业。
现代文：昔日姜太公持仗斧铖，开创盛周之基；韩生秉持旌旄，振兴鸿汉之业。
English: In the past, Jiang Taigong held the battle axe and created the foundation for prosperity; Han Sheng held the battle axe and revitalized the industry of Honghan.

古文：故能赏超当时，名垂前史。
现代文：所以能够赏赐超越当时，英名流传前史。
English: Therefore, it was able to reward those who went beyond the time, and the fame spread to prehistory.

古文：若阃外功成，而流言内作，人主猜疑，良将怀惧，乐毅所以背燕，章邯所以奔楚。
现代文：假若在外之将功成，而朝内流言大作，人主猜疑，良将怀惧，则乐毅因此背叛于燕，章邯因此投奔于楚。
English: If the outside general succeeds, but inside the court rumors are rampant, people are suspicious, and the general is feared, then Le Yi will betray Yan, and Zhang Ye will run to Chu.

古文：至如邓艾怀忠，矫命宁国，赤心皎然，幽显同见，而横受屠戮，良可悲哀。
现代文：至于邓艾心怀忠义，受命宁国，赤诚之心皎然，幽暗与光明同现，而横遭诬陷受到屠戮，实在是可悲。
English: As for Deng Ai, his heart was loyal, he was ordered to Ningguo, his heart was sincere, and darkness and light were present at the same time, but he was framed and slaughtered, which was really sad.

古文：及士治伐吴，奋不顾命，万里浮江，应机直指，使孙皓君臣，舆榇入洛。
现代文：还有王氵睿伐吴，奋不顾身，顺万里长江而下，军锋直指建业，使得孙皓君臣，被执送到洛阳。
English: There is also Wang Qianrui, who went to Wu and walked along the Yangtze River for tens of thousands of miles. The military front pointed directly at Jianye, causing Sun Yat-sen to be detained and sent to Luoyang.

古文：大功亦举，谗书骤至，内外唱和，贝锦将成，微晋武之鉴，亦几于颠沛矣。
现代文：尽管建立大功，而谗书骤至朝廷，内外相互唱和，眼看冤案就要构成，若非晋武帝明察秋毫，大祸就要临头。
English: In spite of the great achievements of the establishment, the imperial edict suddenly reached the imperial court, and both inside and outside were in harmony with each other. An unjust case would be formed in the blink of an eye, and if Emperor Jinwu did not see it clearly, a great disaster would be imminent.

古文：每览其事，常为痛心，圣主明王，固宜深察。
现代文：每当览观其事，常常为之痛心，圣主明王，实宜深察。
English: Every time I look at it, I am often saddened by it. Heavenly Father, you should really look deeply into it.

古文：臣伏见故征南大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、济南王慕容白曜，祖父相资，世酋东裔，值皇运廓被，季节臣妾。
现代文： 臣谨查已故征南大将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史、济南王慕容白曜，祖先数代相继，为东部边地的部族首领，适逢皇魏扩充疆域，于是俯首称臣。
English: The late general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Qingzhou Shishi, Jinan King Murong Bai You, and the ancestors of several generations successively, were the tribal leaders of the eastern borderlands. When the Emperor Wei expanded the territory, he bowed down and called himself a minister.

古文：白曜生长王国，饮服道教，爵列上阶，位登帝伯。
现代文：慕容白曜生长在魏国，接受王道教化，官职列于上阶，爵位介于帝伯。
English: Murong Baiyou grew up in Wei, and was educated in the royal way. His official position was in the upper echelon, and his peerage was in the upper echelon.

古文：去天安初，江阴夷楚，敢拒王命，三方阻兵，连城岳峙。
现代文：过去在天安初年，长江北岸的夷楚，竟敢抗拒王命，在三个方向阻挡官军，倚山筑城相连。
English: In the past, in the first year of Tian'an, the Yizhu on the north bank of the Yangtze River dared to resist the king's order, blocked the official army in three directions, and built a city connected by mountains.

古文：海岱苍生，翘首拯援。
现代文：海岱之地的苍生，翘首等待拯救。
English: The creatures of the land of the seagulls are waiting for rescue.

古文：圣朝乃眷南顾，思救荒黎，大议庙堂，显举元将，百僚同音，佥曰惟允。
现代文：圣朝于是眷顾南方，想要拯救边境百姓，在庙堂之上举行朝议，公开推举主将，百官同音，都说同意。
English: The Holy Dynasty then visited the south, wanting to save the people on the border, held a court discussion on top of the temple, publicly nominated the captain, and all the officials agreed.

古文：遂推毂委诚，授以专征之任，握兵十万，杖钺一方。
现代文：推荐委任忠诚的人才，授予慕容白曜以专事征讨之任，拥兵十万，镇守一方。
English: He recommended the appointment of loyal talents and awarded Murong Baiyou with the task of recruiting 100,000 soldiers to defend the town.

古文：威陵河济则淮徐震惧，师出无盐而申纂授首。
现代文：其势威慑河、济而淮、徐震惧，其军出征无盐则申纂授首。
English: Its influence is deterrent, economical and powerful, and feared by Xu Zhen. If its army goes to war without salt, it will be sanctioned and awarded the head.

古文：济北、太原，同时消溃；麋沟、垣苗，相寻奔走。
现代文：济北、太原，同时崩溃；麋沟、垣苗，相继奔逃。
English: Jiubei and Taiyuan collapsed at the same time; Fengtou and Waki Miao fled one after another.

古文：及回麾东扫，道固衔璧，盘阳、梁邹，肉袒请命。
现代文：及至他回师东扫，崔道固衔璧归降，盘阳、梁邹，肉袒请降。
English: When he returned to his master, Dongswe, Cui Dao was demoted to the rank of Bi, and Panyang, Liang Yao, and Niku Yao were demoted.

古文：于时东阳未平，人怀去就。
现代文：当时东阳尚未平定，人心不稳。
English: At that time, Dongyang had not yet been pacified, and people's hearts were not stable.

古文：沈文静、高崇仁拥众不朝，扇扰边服。
现代文：沈文静、高崇仁拥兵不降，煽动侵扰已降的边地。
English: Shen Wenzhing and Gao Chongren urged soldiers not to surrender and incited them to invade the border areas that had already surrendered.

古文：崔僧祐、盖次阳、陈显达连兵淮海，水陆锋起，扬旌而至，规援青齐。
现代文：崔僧、盖次阳、陈显达连兵于淮海之地，水陆数路蜂拥，扬旌鼓噪而至，企图增援青、齐。
English: Cui Zeng, Gai Ziyang and Chen Xianda led a company of soldiers to the land of Huaihai. They swarmed over several land and water routes, making a lot of noise in an attempt to reinforce Qing and Qi.

古文：士民汹汹，莫不南顾。
现代文：当地百姓蠢蠢欲动，无不寄希望于南方。
English: The local people are eager to move, and are pinning their hopes on the south.

古文：时兵役既久，咸有归心，而白曜外宣皇风，内尽方略，身擐甲胄，与士卒同，安抚初附，示以恩厚。
现代文：当时兵卒服役时间已很久，都怀有归家之心，但慕容白曜对外宣扬皇魏之威风，对内极力策划谋略，亲自身穿甲胄，与部下士卒同甘苦，安抚初来归附之民，示以朝廷恩泽。
English: At that time, the soldiers had been in service for a long time, and they all harbored the desire to return home, but Murong Baiyou promoted the prestige of the Emperor Wei to the outside world, and tried his best to plan and strategize for the inside, personally wearing armor, and working hard with his subordinates and subordinates, to appease the people who first came to attach themselves, and to show the favor of the imperial court.

古文：三军怀挟纩之温，新民欣来苏之泽。
现代文：三军心怀如披棉衣之温暖，新民欣喜得到重生的恩泽。
English: The three armies were as warm-hearted as if they were wearing cotton coats, and the new people rejoiced at the grace of rebirth.

古文：遂使僧祐拥徒弭旆，效顺军门；文静、崇仁弃城窜海；次阳、显达望尘南奔。
现代文：于是使得崔僧率部掩旗，归顺于军门；沈文静、高崇仁弃城逃窜入海；盖次阳、陈显达望尘向南而逃。
English: As a result, Choe Son and his entourage hid their banners and surrendered to the army; Shen Wenjing and Gao Chongren abandoned the city and fled to the sea; and Gai Jiyang and Chen Xianda fled southward.

古文：声震江吴，风偃荆汉。
现代文：慕容白曜声震江、吴，风靡荆、江。
English: Murong Baiyosheng Zhenjiang, Wu, Jing, Jiang are all the rage.

古文：及青州克平，文秀面缚，海波清静，三齐克定，逖彼东南，永为国有。
现代文：及至青州平定，沈文秀自缚归降，于是海波清静，三齐得以安定，远至东南地区，永远为魏国所有。
English: As Qingzhou was pacified and Shen Wenshu was forced to abdicate, the sea became calm and Sanzhi was stabilized, extending as far as the southeastern region, forever owned by Wei.

古文：使天府纳六州之贡，济泗息烽警之虞，开岱宗封禅之略，辟山川望秩之序。
现代文：使朝廷容纳六州之贡，济、泗停息战乱之患，开岱宗封禅之略，辟山川郡望之序。
English: He made the imperial court accept the tribute of six states, the economy and finance stopped the danger of war, the founding of the Jurchen Sect of Buddhism was aborted, and the order of Yamakawa County was set aside.

古文：斯诚宗庙之灵，神算所授，然抑亦白曜与有力矣。
现代文：这实在是朝廷宗庙之灵，神明妙算所授，然而也有慕容白曜的一分功劳啊。
English: This is truly the spirit of the imperial ancestral temple, bestowed by the divine calculation, but there is also a point of merit for Murong Baiyang.

古文：及氛翳既静，爵命亦隆，荣烛当时，声誉日远。
现代文： 到了昏暗的瘴气已经清静，慕容白曜的爵位也更显贵，荣耀烛照当时，声誉日益远播。
English: By that time, the gloomy atmosphere had calmed down, and Murong Baiyang's title had become more prominent. At that time, the glory candle was lit, and his reputation spread further and further.

古文：而民恶其上，妄生尤隙，因其功高，流言惑听。
现代文：但有人憎恶他的官位，凭空产生嫌隙，由于他的功高，就散布流言蛊惑视听。
English: However, some people detest his official position, create hatred out of thin air, and spread rumors because of his high achievements.

古文：巧伪乱真，朱紫难辨，伤夷未瘳，合门屠戮。
现代文：巧言虚构以假乱真，致使朱紫难以分辨，他一身伤病还未痊愈，满门就遭屠戮。
English: Zhu Zi was unable to distinguish between truth and falsehood, and his wounds and illness had not yet healed, and he was slaughtered.

古文：鸿勋盛德，蔑尔无闻。
现代文：其鸿勋盛德，全都被埋没抹煞。
English: His great merits and virtues have all been buried and erased.

古文：有识之徒，能不凄怆？
现代文：凡是有识之士，怎不为此而凄怆。
English: How can anyone with insight not be appalled by this?

古文：臣谓白曜策名王庭，累荷荣授，历司出内，世载忠美。
现代文： 臣以为慕容白曜为官朝廷，接连蒙受荣显的封授，历任朝廷内外要职，一生胸怀忠诚美善。
English: His courtiers thought that Murong Baiyao was an official of the imperial court, successively received honorable awards, held important positions inside and outside the imperial court, and was loyal and virtuous throughout his life.

古文：秉钺启蕃，折冲敌国，开疆千里，拔城十二，辛勤于戎旅之际，契阔于矢石之间，登锋履危，志存静乱。
现代文：掌握兵权开辟边地，屡次挫败敌国之军，开疆千里，拔城十二，辛勤于军旅之际，奔驰于矢石之间，登锋锐而履危难，一心只为肃清动乱。
English: Mastering the military power, opening up the frontier, repeatedly defeating the enemy's army, opening up thousands of miles of territory, pulling out twelve cities, working hard in the military journey, rushing between the arrow stones, climbing the front line sharply and facing difficulties, one-minded only to clear up the turmoil.

古文：及方难既夷，身膺高赏，受胙河山，与国升降，六十之年，宠灵已极。
现代文：及至一方之难已经平夷，身受崇高的奖赏，得到疆土的封赐，命运与国家同升降，才以六十岁花甲之年，承蒙极大的荣宠。
English: When one side's difficulties have been leveled, he has received a lofty reward, has been given a territory, and his fate has risen and fallen with the country, only at the age of sixty has he received great honor.

古文：观其立功，足明机运，岂容侥幸，更邀非望者乎？
现代文：综观他所建立的功勋，就足以看清他的机谋运筹，难道会希图侥幸，又去谋求非分之望吗？
English: A comprehensive view of the merits he has established is enough to see his cunning operation and planning. Will he hope for a fluke and seek a non-point hope?

古文：且于时，国家士马，屯积京南，跨州连镇，势侔云岳。
现代文：况且在当时，国家的兵马，屯驻在京都之南，跨州连镇，势同云岳。
English: Moreover, at that time, the country's soldiers and horses were stationed in the south of Kyoto, across the state, and the situation was the same as Yundake.

古文：主将骁雄，按钾在所，莫不殉忠死难，效节奉时。
现代文：主将全都骁勇雄武，各自镇守其所在之地，无不准备殉忠死难，以尽其节操遵奉时命。
English: The generals were all brave and valiant, each of them guarding his own place. They were all ready to die for the cause, and they did their best to abide by the order of the day.

古文：此之不可生心，白曜足知之矣。
现代文：这样使任何人都不敢滋生异心，慕容白曜是全然知道的。
English: In this way, no one dares to breed heresy, and Murong Baiyou is fully aware of this.

古文：况潜逆阻兵，营岱厌乱，加以王师仍举，州郡屠裂，齐民劳止，神胆俱丧，亡烬之众不可与图存，离败之民不可与语勇哉！
现代文：更何况暗藏的逆贼阻挡官军，营、岱的百姓不满战乱，加以王师接连征伐，州郡屠戮，平民劳苦，神胆俱丧，逃亡失散之众不能与他们图存，离散疲败之民不可同他们谈勇呢！
English: Not to mention the hidden traitors who block the official army, the people in the camps and barracks who are dissatisfied with the turmoil of war, the successive conquests of the king's army, the slaughter of the states and counties, the hardships of the civilians, and the loss of courage. The fleeing and dispersed people cannot survive with them, and the dispersed and exhausted people cannot talk about courage with them!

古文：白曜果毅习戎，体闲兵势，宁不知士民之不可藉，将士之不同己，据强兵之势，因涂炭之民，而欲立非常之事，此愚夫之所弗为也？
现代文：慕容白曜果敢刚毅，熟谙军事，善于体察用兵之势，难道就不懂得兵民不可以凭靠，将士不与自己同心，竟然会依仗强兵之势，凭借涂炭之民，而想要谋求颠覆朝廷，这是愚笨的人也不会去做的。
English: Murong Peiyou is bold and courageous, familiar with military affairs, and good at observing the situation of using soldiers. Does he not understand that soldiers and civilians cannot be relied on, and soldiers are not of the same mind with themselves, and that he would rely on the situation of strong soldiers, on the basis of the people, and seek to subvert the imperial court? This is something that stupid people would not do.

古文：料此推之，事可知矣。
现代文：据此推断，事情也就十分明显了。
English: From this deduction, the matter is quite clear.

古文：伏惟陛下圣鉴自天，仁孝宰世，风冠宇宙，道超百王。
现代文： 陛下圣鉴来自上天，以仁义孝德主宰当世，风度冠于天下，道德超过百王。
English: His majesty's holy book comes from heaven, dominates the world with benevolence, righteousness and filial piety, has the best manners in the world, and has the highest moral standards.

古文：开国以来，诸有罪犯极刑，不得骸骨者，悉听收葬。
现代文：自大魏开国以来，多有罪犯被处极刑，不能得到完整尸身的人，全都听任其收葬。
English: Since the founding of the Great Wei Dynasty, many criminals were sentenced to capital punishment, and those who could not get a complete corpse were all allowed to be buried.

古文：大造之恩，振古未有。
现代文：宽容之恩，自古未有。
English: The grace of tolerance, unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：而白曜人旧功高，婴祸沦覆，名灭国除，爵命无绍。天下众庶，咸共哀怜，方之余流，应有差异。
现代文：而慕容白曜人老功高，遭遇祸害而沉沦湮没，声名败灭身受诛戮，其爵位也无以继承，天下百姓，都共同哀伤怜惜，慕容白曜的待遇比起那些无名之辈来，应有差异。
English: However, Murong Baiyou was a man of great merit, who met with disaster and sank into oblivion. His reputation was ruined and he was killed. His title could not be inherited. People all over the world are saddened and pitied. The treatment of Murong Baiyou should be different from that of those nameless generations.

古文：愿陛下扬日月之光，明勋臣之绩，垂天地之施，慰僵尸之魂。
现代文：愿陛下扬日月之光，明勋臣之绩，垂天地之恩，慰僵尸之魂。
English: May the light of the sun and the moon shine upon Your Majesty, may the feats of Your honored servants, the bounties of the heavens and the earth, and the souls of the dead be comforted.

古文：使合棺定谥，殁有余称。
现代文：让其遗体合棺安葬，给予谥号，让其死后留下名号。
English: Let his body be buried in a coffin, give him a nickname, and let him leave a name after his death.

古文：选其宗近，才堪驱策，锡以微爵，继其绝世。
现代文：再挑选他宗族近亲中才能可以任用的人，赐给低微的爵位，以继承其断绝的香火。
English: Then he selects those who can be appointed from his clan's close relatives and gives them a low rank to inherit his severed incense.

古文：进可以奖劝将来，退可以显国恩泽。
现代文：如此，进可以奖劝将来之人，退可以显示国家恩泽。
English: In this way, entering can reward and persuade future people, and leaving can show the country's favor.

古文：使存者荷莫大之恩，死者受骨肉之惠，岂不美哉！
现代文：使生者蒙莫大之恩，死者受骨肉之惠，难道不是两全其美吗！
English: Isn't it the best of both worlds when the living receive great grace and the dead benefit from their bones and flesh?

古文：仰惟圣明，霈然昭览，狂瞽之言，伏待刑宪。
现代文：臣仰奉陛下圣明，赐恩昭览，我为所陈述的狂妄愚昧之言，恭谨地听候刑宪予以裁决。 
English: Your Excellency, I humbly submit to the sanction of the Constitution for the insolence and stupidity I have uttered.

古文：高祖览表，嘉愍之。白曜弟子契，轻薄无检。
现代文：高祖阅览成淹的表章，十分赞赏，为慕容白曜的事十分悯怜痛惜。
English: Gao Zu read the inscribed seal and was very appreciative. He was very sorry for what happened to Murong Baiyou.

