古文：古之大化者，乃与无形俱生。
现代文：从古到今，天地间万事万物的生成变化，都是与无形而又无处不在的大道一起共生的。
English: From ancient times to the present, the formation and change of all things in heaven and earth have coexisted with the invisible and ubiquitous avenue.

古文：反以观往，覆以验来；反以知古，覆以知今；反以知彼，覆以知己。
现代文：通过对大道的掌握运用，我们可以回顾历史，展望未来；反观过去，检验现在；熟悉这类事物，了解那类事物。
English: Through the mastery and application of the avenue, we can review the history and look forward to the future; reflect on the past and examine the present; be familiar with this kind of thing and understand that kind of thing.

古文：动静虚实之理，不合来今，反古而求之。事有反而得覆者，圣人之意也，不可不察。
现代文：动静、虚实的原则，如果在未来和今天都得不到应用，那就要到过去的历史中去考察前人的经验。事有反而得覆者，圣人之意也，不可不察。
English: If the principles of movement and stillness, truth and falsity cannot be applied both in the future and today, then it is necessary to go to the past history to examine the experience of the predecessors.

古文：人言者，动也；己默者，静也。
现代文：别人在侃侃而谈，是动；自己沉默听辞，是静。
English: When others are chattering and talking, they are moving; when you are silent and listening, you are quiet.

古文：因其言，听其辞。
现代文：要根据别人的言谈来探听其中蕴含的深意。
English: According to the words of others, we should listen to the deep meaning of the songs.

古文：言有不合者，反而求之，其应必出。言有象，事有比。
现代文：如果发现对方言辞有矛盾之处，就要马上提出诘难探求其真意，对方的真情必然在应对中有所透露。语言有可以模拟的形态，事物有可以类比的规范。
English: If you find contradictions in the other party's words, you should immediately raise difficulties and explore their true meaning. The other party's true feelings will inevitably be revealed in the response. Language has a form that can be simulated, and things have a standard that can be compared.

古文：其有象比，以观其次。
现代文：既有 象 和 比 存在，就可以预见其下一步的言行。
English: As long as there is an image and a comparison, we can predict his next words and actions.

古文：象者象其事，比者比其辞也。
现代文：所谓 象 就是言辞中涉及的事物实质的外在表象，所谓 比 ，是言辞中事物可以类推出的同类事物。
English: The so-called "image" is the external representation of the essence of the thing involved in the rhetoric, the so-called "ratio" is the same kind of thing that the things in the rhetoric can be similar.

古文：以无形求有声，其钓语合事，得人实也。
现代文：然后以无形的规律来探求有声的言辞。引诱对方说出的言辞，如果与事实相一致，就可以刺探到对方的实情。
English: Then, with the invisible law to explore the spoken words. If the words that lure the other party to speak are consistent with the facts, they can probe the other party's truth.

古文：若张置网而取兽也，多张其会而司之。
现代文：这就像张开网捕野兽一样，要多设一些网来等待野兽落入。
English: It's like casting a net to catch a wild beast. You need to set up more nets to wait for the beast to fall in.

古文：道合其事，彼自出之，此钓人之网也。
现代文：如果把捕野兽的这个办法也能应用到人事上，那么对方也会自己出来的，这是钓人的 网 。
English: If this method of catching wild beasts can also be applied to personnel, then the other side will also come out on its own. This is a net for catching people.

古文：常持其网驱之，其言无比，乃为之变，以象动之，以报其心，见其情，随而牧之。
现代文：但是，如果经常拿着 网 去追逐对方，其言辞就不再有平常的规范，这时就要变换方法，用 法象 来使对手感动，进而考察对方的思想，使其暴露出实情，进而控制对手。
English: However, if you often chase the other side with a net, the rhetoric will no longer have the usual norms. At this time, it is necessary to change the method, use the method to move the opponent, and then examine the other side's thoughts, expose the truth, and then control the opponent.

古文：己反往，彼覆来，言有象比，因而定基。
现代文：自己返过去，使对手返回来，所说的话可以比较类推了，心里就有了底数。
English: If you go back and make your opponent go back, you can compare what you have said, and you will have a base number in your mind.

古文：重之袭之，反之覆之，万事不失其辞，圣人所诱愚智，事皆不疑。
现代文：向对手一再袭击，反反复复，所有的事情都可以通过说话反映出来，圣人可以诱惑愚者和智者，这些不必再怀疑。
English: Attack your opponent again and again and again and again, everything can be reflected through speech, the sage can seduce the fool and the wise, there is no need to doubt this.

古文：古善反听者，乃变鬼神以得其情。
现代文：古代善于从反面听别人言论的人，可以改变鬼神，从而刺探到实情。
English: In ancient times, people who were good at listening to others' speech from the other side could change ghosts and gods, thus probing the truth.

古文：其变当也，而牧之审也。
现代文：他们随机应变很得当，对对手的控制也很周到。
English: They adapted well to the situation and controlled their opponents well.

古文：牧之不审，得情不明；得情不明，定基不审。
现代文：如果控制不周到，得到的情况就不明了，得到的情况不明了，心里底数就不全面。
English: If the control is not thorough, the obtained situation is not clear, the obtained situation is not clear, and the mental foundation is not comprehensive.

古文：变象比，必有反辞，以还听之。
现代文：要把模仿和类比灵活运用，就要说反话，以便观察对方的反映。
English: To use parody and analogy flexibly, it is necessary to say the opposite in order to observe the other person's reaction.

古文：欲闻其声反默，欲张反敛，欲高反下，欲取反与。
现代文：想要讲话，反而先沉默；想要敞开，反而先收敛；想要升高，反而先下降；想要获取，反而先给予。
English: If you want to speak, you should first be silent; if you want to be open, you should first be restrained; if you want to be elevated, you should first be lowered; if you want to obtain, you should first give.

古文：欲开情者，象而比之，以牧其辞，同声相呼，实理同归。
现代文：要想了解对方的内情，就要善于运用模仿和类比的方法，以便把握对方的言辞。同类的声音可以彼此响应，合乎实际的道理会有共同的结果。
English: If you want to understand the other side, you must be good at using imitation and analogy to grasp the other side's words. The same kind of voice can respond to each other, and the realistic way will have a common result.

古文：或因此，或因彼，或以事上，或以牧下，此听真伪、知同异，得其情诈也。
现代文：或者由于这个原因，或者由于那个原因；或者用来侍奉君主，或者用来管理下属。这就要分辨真伪，了解异同，以分辨对手的真实情报或诡诈之术。
English: Or for this reason, or for that reason; or to serve the sovereign, or to manage subordinates. It is necessary to distinguish the true from the false, to understand the differences and similarities, to distinguish the true intelligence or deception of the opponent.

古文：动作言默，与此出入，喜怒由此以见其式，皆以先定为之法则。
现代文：活动、停止，应该说、沉默都要通过这些表现出来，喜怒哀乐也都要借助这些模式，都要事先确定法则。
English: Activity, cessation, and, it should be said, silence are all expressed through these patterns, and emotions are also expressed through these patterns, and the rules must be determined in advance.

古文：以反求复，观其所托。
现代文：用逆反心理来追索其过去的精神寄托。
English: With a rebellious mentality to seek its past spiritual sustenance.

古文：故用此者，己欲平静，以听其辞，察其事，论万物，别雄雌。虽非其事，见微知类。
现代文：所以就用这种反听的方法。自己要想平静，以便听取对方的言辞，考察事理，论说万物，辨别雄雌虽然这不是事情本身，但是可以根据轻微的征兆，探索出同类的大事。
English: Therefore, use this anti-listening method. You want to be calm, so that you can listen to the other person's words, examine the facts, discuss everything, and distinguish between males and females. Although this is not the thing itself, you can explore the same kind of big things based on slight signs.

古文：若探人而居其内，量其能射其意也。符应不失，如腾蛇之所指，若羿之引矢。
现代文：就像刺探敌情而深居敌境一般，要首先估计敌人的能力，其次再摸清敌人的意图，像验合符契一样可靠，像螣蛇一样迅速，像后羿张弓射箭一样准确。
English: It is like probing the enemy's situation and staying deep in the enemy's territory. We must first estimate the enemy's ability, and then find out the enemy's intention. It is as reliable as a match, as fast as a python, and as accurate as a bow and arrow.

古文：故知之始己，自知而后知人也。
现代文：若要了解外界的人或事物，最好的方法就是从了解自己开始。只有先了解自己，然后才能够去了解别人。
English: If you want to understand people or things in the outside world, the best way is to start with understanding yourself. You can only understand yourself before you can understand others.

古文：其相知也，若比目之鱼。其伺言也，若声之与响；见其形也，若光之与影也；其察言也，不失若磁石之取针，舌之取燔骨。
现代文：这样，我们了解别人，就像比目鱼相并而行那样一丝不差；我们窥探别人的言辞，就像声音与回响那样应声而得；别人自己现出形意，就像光和影子那样光一亮影子就出现。用这种方法去探查别人的言辞，就会像磁石吸取铁针那样可以不失厘毫地掌握到他的真情实意，又像舌头舔取烤烂了的骨头肉那样可以轻易地一探即得。
English: In this way, we understand others, like flounder walking side by side; we spy on the words of others, like sound and reverberation; others themselves show the shape, like light and shadow, and the shadow appears as soon as the light shines. Using this method to explore the words of others, it will be like a magnet sucking an iron needle to grasp his true feelings and intentions, and like a tongue licking roasted bone meat.

古文：其与人也微，其见情也疾。
现代文：自己暴露给对方的微乎其微，而侦察对手的行动十分迅速。
English: There's very little to expose yourself to, and you're able to spot your opponent very quickly.

古文：如阴与阳，如阳与阴；如圆与方，如方与圆。
现代文：就像阴变阳，又像阳转阴、像圆变方，又像方转圆一样自如。
English: Just like yin changes to yang, and yang changes to yin, like a circle changes to a square, and a square changes to a circle.

古文：未见形圆以道之，既见形方以事之。
现代文：在情况还未明朗以前就圆略来诱惑对手，在情况明朗以后就要用方略来战胜对方。
English: Before the situation is not clear, it is necessary to use strategy to tempt the opponent, and after the situation is clear, it is necessary to use strategy to defeat the opponent.

古文：进退左右，以是司之。
现代文：无论是向前，还是向后，无论是向左，还是向右，都可用这个方法来对待。
English: Whether it is forward or backward, whether it is to the left or to the right, it can be treated with this method.

古文：己不先定，牧人不正，事用不巧，是谓 忘情失道 ；己审先定以牧人，策而无形容，莫见其门，是谓 天神 。
现代文：如果自己不事先确定策略，统帅别人就没有规范，做事没有智术，就是忘情失道了。我们运用这种方法，按照预先制定的考察别人的准则去考察其决策、计划，就会无形无容，让对方摸不透、抓不着我们的门路，而觉得我们像天神那样已经达到难测难知的至高境界。
English: If we do not determine the strategy in advance, there will be no standard for commanding others, and there will be no wisdom in doing things, that is, we will lose our way. If we use this method to examine the decisions and plans of others according to the pre-established criteria for examining others, we will be invisible and impermeable, making the other party impenetrable and unable to grasp our doorway, and feel that we have reached the highest level of difficult to measure and difficult to know, like the gods.

