古文：凡敌人远来，粮食不继，敌饥我饱，可坚壁不战，持久以敝之，绝其粮道。
现代文：凡是敌人远来作战，往往粮食是会供应不足的。在敌人缺粮忍饥挨饿，而我军粮足将士得到饱食的情况下，应当坚守壁垒而不出战，以持久战法来使敌人疲惫，并截断敌人的粮食运输。
English: When the enemy is short of food and starving, while our soldiers are well fed with sufficient food, we should hold fast to the barriers and not go to war, exhaust the enemy with protracted warfare, and cut off the enemy's grain transportation.

古文：彼退走，密遣奇兵，邀其归路，纵兵追击，破之必矣。
现代文：等到敌人消耗已尽而退走之时，一面暗派奇兵在前截断其退路，一面出动大军于后迅猛追击。这样，打败敌人就是必定无疑的。
English: When the enemy is exhausted and retreating, while secretly dispatching a special soldier in front to cut off his escape route, while dispatching a large army behind to swiftly pursue. In this way, there is no doubt that the enemy will be defeated.

古文：法曰： 饱待饥。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 用自己饱食的部队去对付处于饥饿状态下的敌人。 
English: As the art of war says: Use your well-fed troops to deal with the enemy in a state of starvation.

古文：唐武德初，刘武周据太原，使其将宋金刚屯于河东。
现代文：唐高祖武德初年，刘武周占据太原而称雄割据一方，他派遣部将宋金刚率军南下驻屯于河东，企图夺取天下。
English: In the first year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Liu Wuzhou occupied Taiyuan and claimed to be the winner. On the other hand, he dispatched Song Jingang to lead the army south and stationed in Hedong in an attempt to conquer the world.

古文：太宗往征之，谓诸将曰： 金刚垂军千里入吾地，精兵骁将皆在于此。
现代文：秦王李世民奉高祖之命率兵前往征讨，他对诸位将领说： 宋金刚率军行军千里侵入我河东地区，其精兵猛将都集中在这里。
English: Qin King Li Shimin led the troops to go to the conquest according to the order of Gao Zu. He said to the generals: Song King Gang led the army to march thousands of miles to invade the eastern part of our river, and his elite soldiers are concentrated here.

古文：武周自据太原，专寄金刚以为捍蔽。
现代文：刘武周自己盘距于太原，专门给宋金刚做好后方工作。
English: Liu Wuzhou himself was stationed in Taiyuan, specifically to do the rear work for Song King Kong.

古文：金刚虽众，内实空虚，虏掠为资，意在速战。
现代文：宋金刚所部人数虽然众多，但其内部十分空虚。军需供应无法保障，只能到处劫掠维持部队生存，所以企图速战速决。
English: Although the number of people in the Song King Kong Research Station is large, its interior is very empty. The supply of military supplies cannot be guaranteed, and it can only be looted everywhere to maintain the survival of the troops, so they try to fight quickly.

古文：我当坚营待其饥，未宜速战。 
现代文：对此，我应坚守阵营，等待敌人饥饿，不应马上出战。 
English: In this regard, I should stick to the camp, wait for the enemy to be hungry, and should not go to war immediately.

古文：于是，遣刘洪等绝其粮道，其众遂馁，金刚乃遁。
现代文：于是，李世民派遣刘洪等将率兵切断了宋金刚的运粮道路，迫使宋金刚部队缺粮饥饿而向北逃走了。
English: As a result, Li Shimin dispatched Liu Hong and other generals to cut off Song King Kong's grain transportation route, forcing Song King Kong's troops to starve and flee north.

