古文：诸子者，入道见志之书。
现代文：《诸子》这种著作，是阐述理论、表达主张的书籍。
English: Works such as "All Sons" are books that expound theories and express propositions.

古文：太上立德，其次立言。
现代文：古人所谓 不朽 ，第一是树立品德，其次是著书立说。
English: The ancients called immortality, the first is to establish character, followed by writing.

古文：百姓之群居，苦纷杂而莫显；君子之处世，疾名德之不章。
现代文：一般人民群居生活，苦于周围事物纷坛杂乱而不明白其中的道理；而士大夫立身处世，又担心自己的声名和德行不能流传广远。
English: Ordinary people live in groups and suffer from the clutter of things around them without understanding the reason for it; while the scholar-bureaucrat lives in the world and worries that his reputation and virtue cannot spread far and wide.

古文：唯英才特达，则炳曜垂文，腾其姓氏，悬诸日月焉。
现代文：所以只有才华突出的人，方能光辉地遗留下自己的著作，传布开自己的姓名，像太阳、月亮般地为人人所共见。
English: Therefore, only people with outstanding talents can brilliantly leave behind their works, spread their names, and be seen by everyone like the sun and the moon.

古文：昔风后、力牧、伊尹，咸其流也。
现代文：从前黄帝时的风后、力牧和商朝的伊尹等人的书，都属于这一类。
English: The books of former empress Dowager Cixi of the Yellow Emperor, Li Mu and Yi Yin of the Shang Dynasty all belong to this category.

古文：篇述者，盖上古遗语，而战代所记者也。
现代文：不过这些作品，大概是古代相传的话语，到战国时才记录下来的。
English: However, these works, which are probably words handed down from ancient times, were only recorded during the Warring States period.

古文：至鬻熊知道，而文王谘询，馀文遗事，录为《鬻子》。
现代文：后来楚国的祖先鬻熊通晓哲理，周文王曾向他请教；他留下的文辞和事迹，编为《鬻子》。
English: Later, the ancestor of Chu, Raccoon, was well versed in philosophy, and King Chouwen once asked him for advice; the words and deeds he left behind were compiled into "The Cripple."

古文：子目肇始，莫先于兹。
现代文：在子书著作中，这是最早的开始者。
English: In children's books, this is the earliest starter.

古文：及伯阳识礼，而仲尼访问，爰序道德，以冠百氏。
现代文：到了老子，因为懂得古礼，孔子曾向他请教；于是写成《道德经》，成为诸子中较早的书。
English: When he came to Laozi, because he knew the ancient etiquette, Confucius asked him for advice; so he wrote "The Tao Te Ching," which became the earliest book among the sons.

古文：然则鬻惟文友，李实孔师，圣贤并世，而经子异流矣。
现代文：但是，鬻熊仅仅是文王的朋友，老子却是孔子的老师；两位圣人和两位贤人同时，而所写的书或成为经，或成为子，俨然是两类不同的著作了。
English: However, Raccoon is merely the friend of King Wen, while Lao Tzu is the teacher of Confucius; two saints and two sages at the same time, and the books they write either become scripture or become children, are two different types of writings.

古文：逮及七国力政，俊乂蜂起。
现代文：到战国的时候，在互相用武力征伐中，出现了许多杰出的人才。
English: By the time of the Warring States period, many outstanding talents emerged in the mutual use of force.

古文：孟轲膺儒以磬折，庄周述道以翱翔。墨翟执俭确之教，尹文课名实之符，野老治国于地利，驺子养政于天文，申商刀锯以制理，鬼谷唇吻以策勋，尸佼兼总于杂术，青史曲缀于街谈。
现代文：孟轲信奉儒家的学说，谦恭地和王侯们周旋；庄周阐述道家的理论，任意驰骋；墨翟采用俭朴节约的学说；尹文研究名义和实际是否相合；野老讲究从地利的角度治理国家；邹衍谈论阴阳五行来配合政治；申不害和商鞅用刑罚来安定秩序；鬼谷靠着口才来立功；尸佼综合各家学说；青史详记民间的谈论。
English: Meng Qian believed in the Confucian doctrine and courteously negotiated with princes; Zhuang Zhou expounded the theory of Taoism and rode at will; Mo Xuan adopted the doctrine of frugality and economy; Yin Wen studied whether the name and reality were compatible; the barbarians paid attention to the governance of the country from the perspective of geography; Zou Yan talked about the yin and yang five elements to cooperate with politics; Shen Bozhong and the negotiators used punishment to stabilize the order; the ghost valley relied on eloquence to make merit; the corpse integrated the doctrines of various families; the youth history recorded the folk talk in detail.

古文：承流而枝附者，不可胜算，并飞辩以驰术，餍禄而馀荣矣。
现代文：以后继承他们的流波而如枝之附干者，不知道有多少。这些人大都能够通过雄辩来传布自己的学说，并且饱享了厚禄高官。
English: They were succeeded by an unknown number of vagabond hangers-on, most of whom were able to spread their doctrines through eloquence and enjoyed the luxuries of high office.

古文：暨于暴秦烈火，势炎昆冈，而烟燎之毒，不及诸子。
现代文：到残暴的秦始皇焚烧书籍，几有一网打尽之势，可是《诸子》并未受到其害。
English: When the tyrannical Qin Shi Huang burned books, there was almost no way out, but "All the Sons" was not harmed.

古文：逮汉成留思，子政雠校，于是《七略》芬菲，九流鳞萃。杀青所编，百有八十馀家矣。
现代文：后来汉成帝重视古书，命令刘向整理校勘，于是写成《七略》，记载各种有价值的书籍，九种学派的杰作都被搜集；到书目编成时，共有一百八十多家了。
English: Later, Emperor Han Cheng attached importance to ancient books and ordered Liu Xiang to sort out the proofs. He then wrote the "Seven Summaries," recording all kinds of valuable books. The masterpieces of nine schools were collected; by the time the bibliography was compiled, there were more than 180 in total.

古文：迄至魏晋，作者间出，谰言兼存，璅语必录，类聚而求，亦充箱照轸矣。
现代文：魏晋以后，有时仍然有人写作子书，其中夹杂一些不可信的言论，也记录了一些琐言碎语；如果把这些依类收集起来，也得要装满几大车了。
English: After the Wei and Jin Dynasties, people still sometimes wrote sub-books, in which some implausible statements were mixed, and some trivialities were recorded; if these were collected according to categories, they would have to fill several large cars.

古文：然繁辞虽积，而本体易总，述道言治，枝条五经。
现代文：但是著作虽然堆积得很多，其主要的情况还是容易掌握的。
English: However, despite the large number of works, the main situation is easy to grasp.

古文：其纯粹者入矩，踳驳者出规。《礼记·月令》，取乎吕氏之纪；三年问丧，写乎《荀子》之书：此纯粹之类也。
现代文：无论它们阐述道理或议论政事，都是从经书发展下来的；其中内容纯正的，便符合于经书的规则；内容杂乱的，便违背经书的法度。《礼记》中的《月令》，是采用《吕氏春秋》的《十二纪》；而《礼记·三年问》的内容，也写进了《荀子》中的《礼论》。这些都是内容纯正的例子。
English: Whether they expound the truth or discuss political affairs, they are all developed from the scriptures; if the content is pure, it conforms to the rules of the scriptures; if the content is chaotic, it violates the laws of the scriptures. The "Lunar Calendar" in the "Rituals" is based on the "Twelve Dynasties" of "Lu Shi Chunqiu"; and the content of the "Rituals - Three Years' Questions" is also written into the "Rituals" in the "Shuzi." These are examples of pure content.

古文：若乃汤之问棘，云蚊睫有雷霆之声；惠施对梁王，云蜗角有伏尸之战；《列子》有移山跨海之谈，《淮南》有倾天折地之说，此踳驳之类也。
现代文：至于商汤问夏革，夏革说黄帝能听到蚊子的眼毛上有小虫发出像打雷一样的声音；惠施推荐戴晋人对梁惠王说，在蜗牛角上曾发生过一场战死数万的大仗；《列子·汤问》中有愚公移山和龙伯国巨人跨海的奇谈；《淮南子·天文训》中有共工碰得天倾地斜的怪说：这些都是内容杂乱的例子。
English: As for Shang Tang's questions to Xia Ge, Xia Ge said that the Yellow Emperor could hear the sound of thunder emitted by small insects on the eyelashes of mosquitoes; Hui Shi recommended Dai Jin to tell Liang Hui Wang that a great battle with tens of thousands of battle deaths had taken place on Snail's Horn; "Liezi·Tang Qian" has the strange story of Gu Gong moving mountains and Long Bo's giants crossing the sea; "Hua Nanzi·Astronomical Training" has the strange story of the co-worker touching the sky: these are examples of content disorder.

古文：是以世疾诸子，混洞虚诞。
现代文：所以一般人都不喜欢《诸子》的罗嗦而荒唐。
English: That's why ordinary people don't like the wordy absurdity of "All Sons."

古文：按《归藏》之经，大明迂怪，乃称羿毙十日，嫦娥奔月。殷《易》如兹，况诸子乎！
现代文：不过商代的《归藏经》里面，也大谈奇怪的事，如说后羿射日、嫦娥奔月之类；商汤时的书尚且如此，何况诸子百家呢！
English: However, the Shang Dynasty's "Collection of Classics" also talks about strange things, such as the afterglow of the sun, Chang'e's flight to the moon, and so on; the Shang Dynasty's book is still like this, not to mention the hundreds of descendants!

古文：至如商韩，六虱五蠹，弃孝废仁，轘药之祸，非虚至也。
现代文：此外，如《商君书》中说有六种害国的虱子，《韩非子》中说有五种害国的蛀虫，这就是反对仁义道德；后来商秧被车裂，韩非被毒死，那不是没有原因的。
English: In addition, as mentioned in "The Book of Merchants," there are six kinds of lice that are harmful to the country, and in "Hanfeizi," there are five kinds of maggots that are harmful to the country, which is against the morality of benevolence and righteousness; later, Shangqi was cracked by a car, and Hanfei was poisoned to death, which is not without reason.

古文：公孙之白马、孤犊，辞巧理拙，魏牟比之号鸟，非妄贬也。
现代文：还有公孙龙的 白马不是马、孤犊没有娘 之类诡辩，话虽说得巧妙，但道理却很笨拙；魏公子牟把公孙龙比作井底之蛙，并不是随便指责他。
English: There are also the sophistries of Gongsunlong, such as the white horse is not a horse, and the lone donkey does not have a daughter. Although the words are clever, the reason is very clumsy; Wei Gongzimu compared Gongsunlong to the frog at the bottom of the well, and did not arbitrarily accuse him.

古文：昔东平求诸子、《史记》，而汉朝不与。盖以《史记》多兵谋，而诸子杂诡术也。
现代文：从前东平王刘宇向汉成帝要求《诸子》和《史记》，成帝不肯给，就因为《史记》里常常讲到军事上的谋略，而《诸子》中又往往杂有怪异的东西。
English: Former Dongping King Liu Yu once asked Han Chengdi for "All the Sons" and "History." Chengdi refused to give it, because "History" often talks about military strategies, and "All the Sons" is often mixed with strange things.

古文：然洽闻之士，宜撮纲要，览华而食实，弃邪而采正，极睇参差，亦学家之壮观也。
现代文：但是，对于博学的人来说，就应该抓住其主要的，要撷取它们的花朵，而咀嚼其果实；抛开错误的部分，而采取正确的意见。细看这些不同的学派，确也是学术界的大观。
English: But for the erudite, it is necessary to grasp its main points, to pluck its flowers and chew its fruit; to discard the erroneous parts and adopt the correct opinions.

古文：研夫孟荀所述，理懿而辞雅；管、晏属篇，事核而言练；列御寇之书，气伟而采奇；邹子之说，心奢而辞壮；墨翟、随巢，意显而语质；尸佼尉缭，术通而文钝；鹖冠绵绵，亟发深言；鬼谷眇眇，每环奥义；情辨以泽，文子擅其能；辞约而精，尹文得其要；慎到析密理之巧，韩非著博喻之富；吕氏鉴远而体周，淮南泛采而文丽：斯则得百氏之华采，而辞气之大略也。
现代文：考查诸子中孟轲、荀况的论述，理论完美而辞句雅正；管仲、晏婴的著作，事实可信而语言简练；列御寇的书，文气宏伟而辞采奇丽；邹衍的议论，构思夸张而辞句有力；墨翟和他的学生随巢的著作，意思明显而语句朴质；尸佼和尉缭的书，学说通达而文辞笨拙；《鹖冠子》议论深长，所以常发深刻的言论；《鬼谷子》说理玄远，常阐述奥妙的意见；感情明显而丰富，是《文子》所独具的优点；辞句简练而精当，《尹文子》掌握到这种要点；《慎子》巧于分析精密的道理；《韩非子》中的譬喻广博而丰富；《吕氏春秋》见识远大而风格周密；《淮南子》多方面吸取材料而文辞华丽。这些可说已经包括了诸子百家的精华，也就是他们作品的主要特点。
English: Examining the writings of Meng Xuan and Zhou Quanzhong among the sons, the theory is perfect and the words are elegant; the works of Guanzhong and Zhou Ying, the facts are credible and the language is concise; the books of Li Guoco, the tone is magnificent and the words are beautiful; the discussions of Zhou Yan, the ideas are exaggerated and the words are powerful; the works of Mo Xuan and his students, the meaning is obvious and the sentences are simple; the books of Zhi Jiao and Fei Zhai, the theory is clear but the words are clumsy; the "Crown of Thorns" has a long discussion, so

古文：若夫陆贾《新语》，贾谊《新书》，扬雄《法言》，刘向《说苑》，王符《潜夫》，崔实《政论》，仲长《昌言》，杜夷《幽求》，或叙经典，或明政术，虽标论名，归乎诸子。
现代文：此外还有陆贾的《新语》、贾谊的《新书》、扬雄的《法言》、刘向的《说苑》、王符的《潜夫论》、崔寔的《政论》、仲长统的《昌言》、杜夷的《幽求子》等等。它们有的阐述儒家经典，有的说明政治方略；虽然常用 论 字做书名，但事实上属于诸子。
English: In addition, there are Lu Jia's "New Language," Jia Yi's "New Book," Yang Xiong's "Dictionary," Liu Xiang's "Talking Yard," Wang Fu's "Theory of the Submerged Man," Cui Wei's "Political Theory," Zhong Changtong's "Changyan," Du Yi's "Yugouzi" and so on. Some of them explain Confucian classics, and some explain political strategies; although the word "discussion" is commonly used as a book title, it actually belongs to all of them.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：博明万事为子，适辨一理为论，彼皆蔓延杂说，故入诸子之流。
现代文：因为广泛阐明各种事物的叫做 子 ，只辨别一种道理的叫做 论 ；它们既然牵涉到各方面的问题，所以应该属于诸子的范围了。
English: For the things that are widely expounded are called sons, and those that distinguish only one kind of truth are called theories; since they involve all aspects of the problem, they should belong to the scope of sons.

古文：夫自六国以前，去圣未远，故能越世高谈，自开户牖。
现代文：在战国以前，上距古代圣人还不算太远，因而能够超越一代地高谈阔论，自成一家。
English: Before the Warring States period, it was not too far from the ancient sages, so it was able to talk about it for more than one generation and become a family.

古文：两汉以后，体势浸弱，虽明乎坦途，而类多依采，此远近之渐变也。
现代文：到两汉以后，文风散漫衰落；作者虽然熟悉儒家学说，但常常依傍前人，采用旧说。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the literary style gradually declined. Although the author was familiar with the Confucian doctrine, he often followed his predecessors and adopted the old theory.

古文：嗟夫！身与时舛，志共道申，标心于万古之上，而送怀于千载之下，金石靡矣，声其销乎！
现代文：这就是古代和近世子书的不同。
English: This is the difference between ancient and modern children's books.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：唉！
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：丈夫处世，怀宝挺秀。
现代文：诸子百家本身常常和当时人合不来，而自己的志趣却靠着理论而获得陈述。
English: The various schools of thought themselves often did not fit in with the people of the time, but their own interests were represented by means of theory.

古文：辨雕万物，智周宇宙。
现代文：他们的心怀一方面联系到远古以前，一方面又交付给千载之后。
English: On the one hand, their hearts are connected to the distant past, and on the other hand, they are committed to a thousand years later.

古文：立德何隐，含道必授。
现代文：金石会毁灭，难道声名也会消逝吗！总结：
English: The precious stone will be destroyed, but will the fame also disappear?

古文：条流殊述，若有区囿。
现代文：士大夫生在世上，应有超人的才德；能够论述一切事物，其智慧可认识整个世界。
English: Born into the world, a scholar should have superhuman talent; able to discuss all things, his wisdom can know the whole world.

