古文：十五日晨起，天色如洗，亟饭而行。
现代文：十五日早晨起床，天色晴朗如洗，急忙吃了饭上路。
English: On the morning of the 15th, I got up, the sky was as clear as day, and I hurriedly ate dinner and went on my way.

古文：刘君来送，复往谢之，遂同杜实徵同至其岳陈处候之。
现代文：刘君来送行，又前去谢过他，于是同杜实微一起到他岳父陈梦熊处等他。
English: Liu Jun came to see him off, and went to thank him, so he and Du Shiyi went to his father-in-law Chen Meng Xiong's place to wait for him.

古文：出北门，即西向行。
现代文：出了北门，立即向西行。
English: Go out of the north gate and immediately head west.

古文：涉一涧，七里，过羊角山之北，候换夫于西村，竟不至。
现代文：涉过一条山涧，七里，经过羊角山的北麓，在西村等候换夫，居然不来。
English: Waded through a mountain pass, seven miles, passed the northern foot of the mountain, waited for a husband in the West Village, and did not come.

古文：久之遂南逾土冈，望西峰环转处，有洞在山巅，东南向，其门甚巨，疑即所谓新岩者。
现代文：很久后终于往南越过土冈，远望西峰环绕转折之处，有洞在山顶，面向东南，洞口非常巨大，怀疑就是所谓的新岩了。
English: After a long time, I finally crossed the earth mound to the south, looking at the west peak around the turning point. There was a hole on the top of the mountain, facing southeast. The hole was very large, and I suspected that it was the so-called new rock.

古文：土冈之南，山又分东西二方，由其坞中南向行，五里，渐见路左小水唧唧行，已而有小水从西北石山下来合，涉北来水循之，又南二里，为都街村，有数家在西山之麓。
现代文：土冈的南面，山又分为东西两列。由两山间的山坞中向南行，五里，渐渐见路左有小溪哗哗流淌，随后有小溪从西北方的石山下流来会合，涉过北面流来的溪水顺着它走，又向南二里，是都街村，有几家人在西山山麓。
English: On the south side of the hill, the mountain is divided into two rows, east and west. From the dock between the two mountains, travel south for five miles, and gradually see a small stream gurgling on the left side of the road, followed by a stream flowing from the northwest under the stone mountain, wading through the north-flowing stream and following it, and two miles south, is the capital village, with several families at the foot of the West Mountain.

古文：至此皆为僮贼之窟，所称 西巢 也，始不得夫。又南二里，循溪入土山峡中，其峡甚逼。又一里半，转而东，又一里半，溪乃南去，路西逾土坳，始出险，所谓都街陇也。
现代文：又往南行二里，沿溪流走入土山峡谷中，此峡十分狭窄。又走一里半，转向东，又走一里半，溪水便往南流去，路向西越过土山坳，开始走出险途，是所谓的都街陇了。
English: Another two miles to the south, along the stream into the Tushan canyon, this canyon is very narrow. Another mile and a half, turn to the east, another mile and a half, the stream will flow to the south, the road west over the Tushan fold, began to get out of the dangerous path, is the so-called capital city fold.

古文：陇之中，草木亏蔽，为盗贼薮。
现代文：土陇之中，草木荫蔽，是盗贼的聚集地。
English: In the middle of the mound, shaded by grass and trees, is a gathering place for thieves.

古文：其西一里即为落索村，都街之流又西转至此，由村南人峡去，路从村从北陟山。
现代文：几天前还在其中抢过人，我能够擦肩而过，非常幸运呀！下了山坳往西行三里，有一间茅屋在山北，是税司。它西面一里处就是落索村，都街村的溪流又转向西流到此处，由村子南边流入峡中去，路从村北登山。
English: A few days ago, I was among them, and I was able to pass by, I was very lucky! I went down the mountain and went west for three miles. There was a cottage in the north of the mountain, it was the tax office. One mile west of it was the village of Lasso. The stream in the village of Du Jie turned to the west and flowed here. It flowed into the gorge from the south of the village and climbed the mountain from the north of the village.

古文：都街、落索皆盗贼薮。西北二里半，过石下，有巨石蹲路北，上有榕缘络之。
现代文：住西北行二里半，走过岩石下，有块巨石蹲在路北，上边有榕树沿着石头缠绕。
English: I live two and a half miles northwest, walking under a rock. There is a boulder squatting on the north side of the road, and there are eucalyptus trees winding along the stone.

古文：又西一里，有巨洞在路右山之半，其门东南向，而高悬殊甚，望之神飞。
现代文：又向西一里，有个巨大的山洞在路右的山腰上，洞口朝向东南，但特别高悬，远望它神魂飞舞。
English: Another mile to the west, there is a huge cave on the mountainside to the right of the road. The mouth of the cave faces south-east, but it is particularly high, and you can see it dancing in the distance.

古文：适担夫停担于下，余急贾勇北向攀崖，茅塞无路。
现代文：适好挑夫在山下停下担子，我急忙鼓足勇气向北攀登山崖，茅草堵塞无路可走。
English: When the porter stopped his load at the foot of the mountain, I hurried to muster the courage to climb the cliff to the north. The thatch blocked the way.

古文：诸人呼于下，余益奋而上，遂凌藤棘，抵其下。前亦多棕竹，颇巨。
现代文：众人在山下呼叫，我越加奋发向上登，终于越过藤枝荆棘，抵达洞下，洞前也有许多棕竹，相当大。
English: Many people were calling at the bottom of the mountain. I pushed myself harder and harder to climb up, and finally overcame the vines and thorns to reach the bottom of the cave. In front of the cave, there were also many large brown bamboo.

古文：洞门甚高，内甚爽豁，深十丈而止。
现代文：洞口非常高，洞内十分爽朗开阔，深十丈就到了头。
English: The mouth of the cave is very high, the cave is very open and spacious, and the depth reaches the top.

古文：右有小窦，甚隘而中空，不识可蛇伏而入否？
现代文：右边有个小洞，十分狭窄但中间是空的，不知能否像蛇一样爬进去？
English: On the right there is a small hole, very narrow but empty in the middle, I wonder if I can crawl into it like a snake?

古文：洞前有石，分两岐倒垂其顶。
现代文：洞前有岩石，分为两岔倒垂在洞顶。
English: There is a rock in front of the cave, which is divided into two halves and hangs upside down at the top of the cave.

古文：余方独憩，以陈君候余于下，遂返。
现代文：我正想独自一人休息一下，由于陈君在山下等着我，于是返回来。
English: I just wanted to take a break by myself, but since Chen Jun was waiting for me at the bottom of the mountain, I came back.

古文：又西二里，宿于马草塘之北村。
现代文：又向西二里，住在马章塘的北村。
English: Another two miles to the west, he lived in the northern village of Ma Zhangtang.

古文：其村在北峰之麓，村西有江自北峡来，穿西峡而去，即东江之上流也。
现代文：此村在北峰的山麓，村西有条江自北面峡中流来，穿过西面的峡谷流去，就是东江的上游了。
English: This village is at the foot of the North Peak. To the west of the village, there is a river that flows from the middle of the North Face Gorge and flows through the canyon to the west, which is the upper reaches of the East River.

古文：村氓茅栏甚巨，而下俱板铺，前架竹为台。
现代文：村民的茅草楼十分巨大，但下边全用木板铺，前边用竹子架为高台。
English: The villagers' thatched-roof house is very large, but the lower side is completely covered with wooden planks, and the front side is made of bamboo.

古文：主人出茅滤酒劝客。
现代文：主人拿出茅滤酒来劝客人饮。
English: The host took out a bottle of thatch filtered wine to persuade the guests to drink it.

古文：陈君曰： 此皆贼子也。 
现代文：陈君说： 这些都是贼人。 
English: Chen Jun said: These are all thieves.

古文：是夜，月从东山出，明洁如洗。
现代文：这天夜里，月亮从东山升起，明洁如洗。
English: On this night, the moon rises from the eastern mountain, clear as if washed.

古文：自入春来，晓旭宵轮，竟晨夕无纤翳，惟此日见之。
现代文：自从入春以来，没有见过拂晓旭日夜里明月，整天从早到晚没有丝毫浮云遮蔽，唯有这天见到明月。
English: Since the beginning of spring, I have not seen the dawn of the rising sun, the bright moon in the night, and the whole day from morning to night without the slightest cloud cover, only this day I saw the bright moon.

古文：十六日晨起，微云薄翳，已不如昨宵之明彻矣。
现代文：十六日早晨起床，薄云微微蔽日，已不如昨天夜里那样明澈了。
English: On the morning of the 16th, I got up and the sun was covered by thin clouds. It was not as clear as it had been the night before.

古文：饭后，南逾土阜而下，是为马草塘。
现代文：饭后，往南越过土山下来，这是马草塘。
English: After dinner, head south over the hill and down. This is Horse Grass Pond.

古文：东西俱有峰夹之，塘独低而洼，真萑苻ｈｕáｎｆú湖泽之名，意为盗贼出没之处之薮也。二里，越而南，又西三里，有江自北而南，深嵌危崖间，所谓东江也。
现代文：东西都有山峰夹住它，只有水塘低洼下去，真是盗贼出没的聚集地呀！二里，向南翻越，又向西三里，有条江自北流向南，深嵌在危崖之间，就是所谓的东江了。
English: Everything has a mountain peak clamped to it, only the pond is low-lying, it is really a gathering place for thieves to haunt! Two miles, to the south, and three miles to the west, there is a river flowing from north to south, deeply embedded between the cliffs, is the so-called East River.

古文：其南有数家在冈坞间，泊舟于下，呼之不为渡，乃自取其舟渡而西。
现代文：江南有数家人在冈峦山坞之间，船停在岸下，呼唤村人渡江不愿意，只得自己取了他们的船渡往西岸。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, several families in the vicinity of the Gangwu Mountain Dock, with their boats anchored off the shore, called out to the villagers that they did not want to cross the river, so they had to take their boats to the west coast.

古文：其江大数丈，而深不测，再南下数里，即与金城江合而入石穴中，透出永泰里，而下怀远镇为南江者也。
现代文：此江宽数丈，但深不可测，再往南下流数里，就与金城江合流后流入石山洞穴中，在永泰里钻出地面，而后下流到怀远镇成为南江。
English: This river is wide and deep, but unfathomable. A few miles further south, it joins the Jincheng River and flows into the Shishan Cave, drills out of the ground in Yongtaili, and then flows down to Huaiyuan Town to become the Nanjiang River.

古文：由江西岸北行半里，转而西下又四里半，为界牌村，是为宜山县、河池州界。
现代文：由江西岸往北行半里，转向西又下走四里半，是界牌村，这是宜山县、河池州的分界处。
English: Half a mile north from the west bank of the Yangtze River and four and a half miles down to the west is Jiepai Village, which marks the border between Yishan County and Hechizhou.

古文：村之东南有山中悬，即东江西北岸之山也。
现代文：村子的东南有座山悬在中央，就是东江西北岸上的山了。
English: To the southeast of the village, there is a mountain hanging in the middle, which is the mountain on the northwest bank of the East River.

古文：山之南，有坞豁然东南去，则金城之江已在南山之北，向此隙东注而下，与东江合者，第此处犹未之见耳。
现代文：山的南边，有个山坞豁然向东南伸展开去，就见金城江已在南山的北面，流向此处缺口往东流注下去，与东江合流，只是在此处还未能见到它罢了。
English: On the south side of the mountain, there is a dock that suddenly extends to the southeast, and you can see that the Jincheng River is already on the north side of the Nanshan, flowing eastward through the gap here, and merging with the East River, but you can't see it here.

古文：又西二里，有山在路北，峭崖屏削，上多纹理，虬干缘之，掩映间有若兜胄，有若戈矛，土人指为南丹莫氏之祖挂盔甲所成者，乃附会形似而言也。
现代文：又往西二里，有座山在路北，陡峭的山崖像屏风一样陡削，上面有很多纹路，拳曲的树干沿着山崖生长，掩映之间有的好像盔甲，有的好似戈矛，当地人说是南丹州莫家的祖先挂盔甲变成的，这是因形状相似附会的话。
English: Another two miles to the west, there is a mountain to the north of the road. The steep cliff is as steep as a screen, and there are many lines on it. Boxing tree trunks grow along the cliff. Some of them look like armor, and some look like spears. Locals say that the ancestors of the Mo family in Nantan Province wore armor to transform themselves. This is because of the similar shape.

古文：又西一里，路北有石耸出峰头，薄若片云擎空，上有歧角之物，土人指为犀牛，而不知犀乃独角也。
现代文：又向西一里，路北有岩石耸出峰头，薄得如一片云彩高擎在空中，上边有角一样忿出的东西，当地人说是犀牛，却不知犀牛是独角。
English: Another mile to the west, north of the road, there is a rock peak, thin as a cloud, high in the air, with something like a horn on top. The locals say it is a rhinoceros, but they do not know that the rhinoceros is a unicorn.

古文：又西一里为大湾村，村在北山之麓。
现代文：又往西行一里是大湾村，村子在北山的山麓。
English: Another mile to the west is Dawan Village, which is at the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：村东有洼岩，有水自北山石穴南出，流宕底三丈余，复南入地穴而注于江。
现代文：村东有下洼的岩石，有水从北山的石洞中向南流出，流过坑底三丈多，再向南流入地洞然后注入江中。
English: In the east of the village, there are low-lying rocks. Water flows southward from the stone cave in the north mountain, flows through the bottom of the pit, and then flows southward into the cave and then into the river.

古文：又西则路出临江北岸，溯之西行一里，其江自西南来，北流至此，折而东去。
现代文：又向西走就见路通到临江的北岸，溯江往西行一里，这条江自西南流来，向北流到此地，折向东流去。
English: Going west again, the road leads to the north bank of the river, and the river flows westward for one mile. This river flows from the southwest, flows northward to this place, and flows eastward.

古文：路从折处直西行，一里，过一小石梁，其下乱石嵯峨，而涸无滴水。
现代文：路从江流转折处一直往西走，一里，走过一座小石桥，桥下乱石高峻，但干涸得没有一滴水。
English: The road from the turning point of the river flow all the way to the west, one mile, walked over a small stone bridge, under the bridge the rocks are high and steep, but dry without a drop of water.

古文：其南有村在南山之麓，为桥步村。
现代文：桥南有个村庄在南山的山麓，是桥步村。
English: There is a village south of the bridge at the foot of Nanshan Mountain. It is Qiaobu village.

古文：又西三里，有江自北而南，其绸十丈余，其深与东江并，乃自荔波来者，其源当亦出于黔南，是为金城渡今作金城江。
现代文：又向西三里，有江流自北流向南，江宽十丈多，它的深处与东江相同，是从荔波流来的，它的源头应该也是出自于贵州南部，这里是金城渡。
English: Another three miles to the west, there is a river flowing from north to south, the river is more than ten meters wide, its depth is the same as the East River, it flows from Libo, and its source should also come from the south of Guizhou, here is Jinchengdu.

古文：渡北之西岸，有水悬崖，平泻一二丈，声轰如雷，东注大江，则官村南来之水也。
现代文：渡口北面的西岸上，有水流悬在山崖上，平铺直泻一二丈，水声轰鸣如雷，向东注入大江，是从官村往南流来的水流。
English: On the west bank north of the ferry port, there is a stream of water hanging over the cliff, the tiles are a couple of meters high, the water roars like thunder, and flows into the river to the east. It is a stream of water flowing south from the government village.

古文：大江南去，转而东过大湾，与东江合，又南抵南巢，贼窟也，在永顺北。而捣入石穴数里，而出于永泰里以下怀远者也。
现代文：大江向南流去，转向东流过大湾村，与东江合流，又往南流抵南巢，而后捣入石山洞穴中潜流数里，在永泰里流出地表下流到怀远镇。
English: The Yangtze River flows south, turns east and flows through Dawan Village, merges with the East River, flows south to Nanxiao, and then flows into the cave of Shishan for several miles, and flows out of Yongtaili under the surface to Huaiyuan Town.

古文：时渡舟在江西岸，候久之，乃至。
现代文：此时渡船在江西岸，等了很久，这才到来。
English: At this time, the ferry was on the west bank of the river, waiting for a long time before it arrived.

古文：登西岸，复西向行，则山回壑转，始为峒而不为峡。
现代文：登上西岸，再向西行，就见山峰回绕壑谷回转，开始成为炯而不是峡了。
English: Climbing up the west coast, and then heading west, you can see the mountain peaks circling around the valley, beginning to become ridges rather than gorges.

古文：三里，有小溪自南而北，溯溪南行半里，有梁跨其上，甚高整，是为南桥。
现代文：三里，有小溪自南流向北，溯溪往南行半里，有石桥跨在溪上，十分高大整齐，这是南桥。
English: For three miles, there is a stream flowing from the south to the north, tracing the stream to the south for half a mile. There is a stone bridge across the stream, very tall and neat. This is the South Bridge.

古文：越桥西半里，其坞乃西南转，有村在路右，是为垒街。
现代文：越过桥往西走半里，这里山坞于是向西南转去，有个村庄在路右，这是垒街。
English: Cross the bridge and walk half a mile to the west. Here, the dock then turns to the southwest. There is a village on the right side of the road. This is Yiwu Street.

古文：又西南三里，山帏转拓，有村在西南山麓，曰官村。
现代文：又往西南行三里，筛慢状的山峦变开阔了，有个村庄在西南山麓，叫官村。
English: Another three miles to the south-west, the slow-moving mountains become wider. There is a village at the foot of the south-west mountains, called Guanzhong.

古文：路折而南，溯溪西一里，过官村前。
现代文：路折向南，溯溪流往西走一里，走过官村前。
English: The road turns south, follows the stream to the west for one mile, and passes in front of the official village.

古文：又南一里，循西山南嘴转入西峡，半里，有巨石峙北山之麓，老榕偃盖其上，为行者憩息之所。
现代文：又向南一里，沿西山南边的山嘴转入西面山峡中，半里，有巨石矗立在北山的山麓，老榕树倒卧覆盖在石上，是走路的人歇息的场所。
English: Another mile to the south, along the promontory on the south side of the West Mountain into the western mountain gorge, half a mile, there are boulders standing at the foot of the North Mountain, old eucalyptus trees lying upside down covered on the stone, is a place for pedestrians to rest.

古文：又西半里，有村在北山麓，是为鬼岩村，入登其栏而憩焉，于是村始见瓦栏。
现代文：又往西一里，北山中重又突起石山崖，石色黄白相间光彩焕发，与前边经过的群山不同。又向西走半里，有村庄在北山山麓，这是鬼岩村，进村登上村中的竹楼休息，在这里村中才见有瓦盖顶的竹楼。
English: Another mile to the west, in the middle of the North Mountain, the stone cliff rises again, the stone color yellow and white shines brightly, different from the mountains passing in front. Another half mile to the west, there is a village at the foot of the North Mountain, this is the ghost rock village, enter the village and climb the bamboo tower in the village to rest, here you can only see the bamboo tower with a tile roof in the village.

古文：盖德胜间用瓦而非栏，河池所无栏而皆茅覆，河池以西则诸栏无非茅覆者，独此村用瓦。
现代文：大体上德胜镇一带用瓦盖顶但不是竹楼，河池所没有竹楼但都是茅草盖顶，河池所以西诸地的竹楼无非都是茅草盖的顶，独有此村用瓦。
English: Generally speaking, in the Desheng Town area, the roofs are made of tiles, but they are not made of bamboo. In Hechi Town, there are no bamboo roofs, but they are all thatched roofs. In Hechi, therefore, the bamboo roofs in the western provinces are nothing more than the roofs of thatched roofs, which are unique to this village.

古文：主人韦姓，其老者已醉，而少者颇贤，出醇醪醉客，以糟芹为案下酒菜。
现代文：房主人姓韦，他家的老人已经喝醉，而年轻的十分贤德，拿出醇酒醉客，用腌芹菜进餐。
English: The owner of the house surnamed Wei, the old man of his family has been drunk, and the young very virtuous, take out the alcoholic drunk, with pickled celery for dinner.

古文：山家清供，不意诸蛮中得之，亦一奇也。
现代文：想不到在荒野群蛮之中得到这种山乡农家清淡的饭食，也是一件奇事。
English: It is also a miracle to get such a light meal from a mountain farmhouse in the middle of the wilderness.

古文：是日昼阴，而夜月甚皎。
现代文：这天白天天阴，夜里月光十分皎洁。
English: On this day, it was cloudy during the day, and the moonlight was very bright at night.

古文：十七日及明而饭，南向行。
现代文：十七日到天明后吃饭，向南行。
English: On the 17th, we went to dinner after daybreak and headed south.

古文：半里，得东来大路，有坞直南而去，墟当其中，是为鬼岩墟。
现代文：半里，走上东来的大路，有个山坞一直往南延去，有个集市正当坞中，这是鬼岩墟。
English: Half a mile up the main road to the east, there is a dock stretching all the way south, with a market right in the middle of the dock. This is the Ghost Rock Market.

古文：复西向循南山北麓行，又西里余，有岩在南山之半，其门西北向，即鬼岩矣。
现代文：再向西沿南山的北麓行，又向西一里多，有个岩洞在南山的半山腰，洞口朝向西北，就是鬼岩了。
English: Further west along the northern foot of Nanshan, and more than a mile to the west, there is a cave in the mid-mountain of Nanshan, the mouth of the cave faces northwest, which is the ghost rock.

古文：洞中遥望杳黑，土人祀神像于其间，故谓之 鬼 。
现代文：远望过去洞中深黑，当地人在洞中祭祀神像，所以把它称为 鬼 。
English: Looking far and wide into the darkness of the cave, the locals worship a statue of a god in the cave, so they call it a ghost.

古文：从其下西登坳，石级颇整。
现代文：从它下边向西登山坳，石阶相当整齐。
English: From below it climbs westward, the stone steps are quite tidy.

古文：共一里，逾坳西下，自是石土二山交错，而石亦有土矣。
现代文：共一里，越过山坳向西下行，从这里起石山土山两种山交错，而且石山中也有土了。
English: A total of one mile, over the ridge to the west down. From here, the stone mountain and the earth mountain are intertwined, and there is also soil in the stone mountain.

古文：西界山又南北成坞，有细流虢虢流坞中，南向而去，即东回北转而绕于官村之前者也。
现代文：两面的山又形成南北向的山坞，有细流涓涓流淌在坞中，向南流去，就是向东回绕转向北方后绕到官村之前的水流了。
English: The mountains on both sides also form a north-south dock, with a trickle of water flowing in the dock and flowing south, that is, the water flows eastward, turns north, and then goes around to the official village.

古文：既下，溯细流北行坞中一里，则两界山又转为东西坞。
现代文：下山后，溯细流向北在坞中行一里，就见两面的山又转成东西向的山坞。
English: After descending the mountain, follow the stream north for one mile in the dock, and you will see the mountains on both sides turn into an east-west dock.

古文：仍溯细流西向行三里，有石堰细流之上，疑即所谓丁阑堰。
现代文：仍溯细流向西行三里，有石坝挡在细流之上，怀疑就是所谓的丁阑堰。
English: The trickle is still flowing westward for three miles, and there is a stone dam blocking the trickle, suspected to be the so-called Dingyao Weir.

古文：上潴流一方，泻堰隙东下，是为滥觞之始，而源实出于都明岭之东麓。
现代文：坝上蓄着一池水，泻过坝上的缝隙向东下流，这是发源起始之处，但源头实际出自于都明岭的东麓。
English: There is a pool of water on the dam, which flows eastward through a gap in the dam. This is where the source originates, but the source actually comes from the eastern foot of the Tu Mingling.

古文：渡堰而南，循南山麓西行，又二里，过卢塘村。
现代文：越过堤坝往南走，沿南山的山麓往西行，又走二里，路过卢塘村。
English: Cross the dam to the south, walk along the foot of Nanshan Mountain to the west, walk another two miles, and pass through Lutang Village.

古文：盖南北两界山夹持成坞，坞底平洼，旱则涸，涨则成塘，有村在北山下，路循塘南行。
现代文：大概是南北两列山夹峙成山坞，山坞底部平缓下洼，天旱就干涸，水涨就成水塘，有村庄在北山下，路顺着水塘南边走。
English: Presumably, the two rows of mountains from north to south form a dock, the bottom of the dock gently sinks, the drought dries up, the water rises and becomes a pond, there are villages under the north mountain, and the road goes along the south side of the pond.

古文：又一里，复有堰当上流，又越之西二里，乃复上土岭半里，逾岭坳而西下又半里，有泉一泓出路左石穴，西向汩汩，无涨涸，亦无停息，勺而饮之，甘冽殊甚，出穴即坠石穴而下，虢虢有声。
现代文：又走一里，又有坝挡在上游，又越过堤坝往西行二里，于是再上登土岭半里，越过岭坳后向西又下走半里，有泉水一乱从路左的石洞中流出，向西涓涓流淌，不涨不干，也不停息，舀来饮下，特别甘甜清冽，流出洞穴后立即坠下石穴之中，涂涂有声。
English: I walked another mile, and there was a dam upstream, and I crossed the levee to go west for two miles, so I went up to the half-mile ridge, and after crossing the ridge, I went west and down for another half-mile. There was a spring water flowing out of the stone cave on the left of the road, flowing to the west, not rising, not drying, not stopping, sipping, especially sweet and clear, and immediately falling into the stone cave after flowing out of the cave, painted and noisy.

古文：其处山犹东西成坞。
现代文：此处的山仍是形成东西向的山坞。
English: The mountains here still form an east-west ridge.

古文：循北界山随流东下三里，有村在南山下，曰都明村。
现代文：沿北面一列山顺流往东下行三里，有个村庄在南山下，叫都明村。
English: There is a village at the foot of Nanshan Mountain, called Tudouming Village, three miles to the east along a mountain stream in the north.

古文：村后南山既尽，有峡南去，则那地州道也；而河池之道，则西北行土陇间。
现代文：村后南山完后，有峡谷往南延去，是去那地州的路；而去河池州的路，则是向西北行走在土陇之间。
English: After finishing Nanshan behind the village, there is a canyon stretching to the south, which is the road to Nandi Prefecture; while the road to Hechizhou is to the northwest between the mounds.

古文：又二里，渡石梁而西，桥下水北流，当亦东北入金城上流者。
现代文：又行二里，越到石桥的西边，桥下的水往北流，应当也是向东北流入金城江上游的水流。
English: Another two miles to the west of the stone bridge, the northward flow of water under the bridge should also be the northeastward flow of water into the upper reaches of the Jincheng River.

古文：其源则一东自都明岭之石穴，一南自下河岭北来，二流合而成涧者也。
现代文：它的源头一是出自于东面都明岭的石穴中，一是自南面的下河岭往北流来，两条水流会合成山涧。
English: Its source is one from the stone caves of the Du Mingling Mountains in the east, and one from the Shimoga Ridge in the south to the north. The two streams will form a mountain stream.

古文：又西北四里，陟一土冈。
现代文：又向西北行四里，登上一座土冈。
English: Another four miles to the northwest, up a dirt mound.

古文：由冈上又西北二里，有两三家在北阜下，为乾照村，炊汤饭于其栏。
现代文：由冈上又向西北行二里，有两三家人在北面土阜下，是乾照村，在村中竹楼上烧水煮饭。
English: From the top of the hill and two miles to the northwest, there are two or three families under the earthen mound on the north side. It is the village of Qianzhao, cooking rice in the bamboo houses in the village.

古文：遂从村侧北上土岭，由岭畔北行共三里，下至西麓，有大溪自南而北，即所谓河池江也。
现代文：于是从村子侧边向北上登土岭，由岭畔向北共行三里，下到西麓，有条大溪自南流向北，就是所谓的河池江了。
English: As a result, from the side of the village to the north up to the ridge, from the ridge to the north for a total of three miles, down to the western foot, there is a large stream flowing from the south to the north, which is the so-called river.

古文：江底颇巨，皆碎石平铺，而无滴沥。
现代文：江底十分宽阔，全是平铺着的碎石，但无滴水。
English: The bottom of the river is very wide, it is all paved gravel, but there is no dripping water.

古文：横渡登西岸，北望则石峰回合，即有流亦无出处，不知此流涨时从何而出？
现代文：横渡江底登上西岸，望北方有石峰回绕闭合，即使有流水也没有出去的地方，不知此江水流上涨时从何处流出去？
English: Crossing the bottom of the river to the west bank, looking to the north, there are stone peaks winding around and closing, even if there is running water, there is no place to go out. I don't know where this river flows out from when it rises.

古文：盖北卓立之峰，其下有洞，门南向，当即江水透入之处也。
现代文：原来北面卓立的山峰，山下有洞，洞口向南，应该就是江水穿流进去之处了。
English: Originally, there was a towering mountain peak in the north, with a cave under the mountain, and the mouth of the cave to the south, which must have been where the river flowed through.

古文：其处南北两界又俱石山排列，江形西自河池州之南，东向至此，折而北捣入山。
现代文：此处南北两面又全是石山排列，江流的流向在西面源自河池州的南境，向东流到此地，折向北捣入山中。
English: Here, the north and south sides are all lined with stone mountains, and the river flows from the southern border of Hechizhou in the west, flows east to here, and turns north into the mountains.

古文：又西循枯江北岸行一里，则江底砂石，间有细流淙淙矣。
现代文：又往西沿干枯的江北岸行一里，就见江底的砂石间，有细流涂涂流淌了。
English: Another mile to the west along the dry northern bank of the river, I saw a thin stream flowing between the sand and stones at the bottom of the river.

古文：又西七里，入河池州之东门。
现代文：又向西七里，进入河池州的东门。
English: Another seven miles to the west, into the east gate of Hechizhou.

古文：州城乃土墙，上覆以茅，城中居民凋蔽，但草茅而无瓦舍。
现代文：州城是土墙，墙上覆盖着茅草，城中的居民困苦，全是茅草房而无瓦房。
English: The state capital is a mud wall, the walls are covered with thatch, the inhabitants of the city are poor, all are thatched houses and no tiled houses.

古文：其山南北对峙，中成东西坞，而大溪横其中，东至乾照后土山，亘截为前门溪，转而北，入石穴；西至大山岭石脊，为后钥水之所从发者也。
现代文：这里的山南北对峙，中间成为东西向的山坞，有大溪横在其中，东面到达乾照村后的土山，横截为前门溪，转向北，流入石穴中；西面到大山岭的石脊，是后钥水从此发源之处了。
English: The north-south confrontation of the mountains here, the middle becomes a dock facing east-west, with a large stream across it, the east reaches the earthen hill behind the village of Qianzhao, the cross-section is the Qianmen Creek, turning north, flowing into the stone cave; the west to the ridge of the large mountain ridge, is the place where the back key water originated from.

古文：抵州才过午，穿州出西门，寓茅舍中。
现代文：抵达州城才过中午，穿过州城走出西门，寓居在茅屋中。
English: He arrived in the state capital just after noon, walked out of the west gate through the state capital, and lived in a thatched cottage.

古文：以陆柬马符索骑于州尊萧。
现代文：拿了陆君的信函及调马的兵符去找州官萧公要马。
English: He took Lu Jun's letter and the military badge of the horse to go to the state official Xiao Gong to ask for a horse.

古文：来凤，东粤人。萧公即为发票，取夫骑各二，不少羁ī停留焉。
现代文：萧公当即发给马票，要来脚夫马夫各二名，没有少时的滞留。
English: Xiao Gong immediately issued horse tickets, and asked two grooms and two grooms to come. They did not stay for a short time.

古文：十八日晨餐后得二骑差役，即以马夫二名作挑夫影射。
现代文：十八日早餐后得到两个骑马的差役，就把两名马夫作为挑夫来使唤。
English: On the eighteenth day, after breakfast, having obtained two horsemen, he sent for two grooms to act as porters.

古文：既而萧公复以腆仪来贶ｋｕｎｇ赠与，余受其笋脯，而尽壁其余避而不受。
现代文：随即萧公又拿丰厚的礼物来相赠，我接受了其中的笋干，而其余的全部完璧归赵。
English: Immediately after that, Xiao Gong gave me another generous gift. I accepted a small part of it, and the rest of it was completely Zhao's.

古文：入城买帖作谢柬，久乃得之，行已上午矣。
现代文：进城去买贴子写了答谢的柬贴，很久才买到贴子，动身已是上午了。
English: I went into the city to buy a postcard and wrote a thank you postcard. It took me a long time to buy the postcard, and it was already morning when I left.

古文：西向山坞行三里，有溪自北山南流，合于西来大溪。
现代文：向西在山坞中行三里，有溪水自北山往南流，会合到西面流来的大溪中。
English: Three miles to the west in the middle of the dock, there is a stream flowing south from the North Mountain, meeting in the large stream flowing west.

古文：杨姓者有巨力，能保护此村。循北山麓行，又二里，有飞石覆空而出，平压行人之上。
现代文：于是渡过北来的溪水溯大溪北岸行，又走七里，有个村庄在南山下的山坞中，村中有瓦房，名叫杨村。沿北山山麓行，又是二里，有飞石覆在空中突出来，平平地压在过路人的头上。
English: So he crossed the stream coming from the north, followed the north bank of the stream, and walked another seven miles. There was a village in the dock under the Nanshan Mountain, and there was a tile house in the village, named Yangcun. Walking along the foot of the North Mountain, it was another two miles, with flying rocks protruding in the air and pressing flatly on the heads of passers-by.

古文：已而上危级，见级外倚深坑，内有悬穴，中空下陷，洪流溢其底焉。
现代文：不久上登高峻的石阶，见石阶外斜靠着深坑，坑内有高悬的洞穴，中间空阔向下深陷，洪流从洞底溢出来。
English: Soon I climbed the steep stone steps. I saw that the outside of the stone steps leaned against a deep pit. Inside the pit there was a high-hanging cave, with a wide space in the middle that sank downwards, and a torrent overflowed from the bottom of the cave.

古文：既上，从山半行，遂循崖北转，又成南北之峡，山凑而为东西两界矣。
现代文：上去后，从山腰上前行，于是沿着山崖向北转，又形成南北向的山峡，山挤拢来成为东西两列了。
English: After going up, I moved forward from the mountainside, so I turned north along the cliff and formed a north-south canyon. The mountains were crowded into two rows.

古文：循东崖溯流上，升陟三里，渡溪而北，逾一坡而下，见东峡石壁危削，上有穹岩，下有骈峡，但闻水声喧甚，以为自堕峡而下也，而旁眺不见影。
现代文：沿东面的山崖溯流上走，爬升了三里，渡到溪北，越过一道山坡下走，见东面峡谷的石壁高峻陡削，上方有弯隆的岩洞，下边有并列的山峡，只听到水声十分喧腾，以为是从峡中坠落而下的，但向四旁眺望不见影响。
English: Walked upstream along the eastern cliff, climbed three miles, crossed to the north of the creek, crossed a mountain slope and walked down. I saw the steep and steep rock walls of the eastern canyon. There were curved caves above and parallel gorges below. I only heard the very loud sound of the water and thought it was falling down from the canyon, but there was no effect on my peripheral vision.

古文：稍前，则溪水犹自北来，复渡之。
现代文：稍前走，就见溪水还是自北边流来，又渡过溪水。
English: If you walk a little ahead, you will see that the stream still flows from the north, and you will cross the stream again.

古文：循溪东行峡中，三里，水穷峡尽。
现代文：沿溪流东岸行走在峡中，三里。水穷峡尽。
English: Walking along the east bank of the stream in the canyon, three miles. Water exhausted canyon.

古文：北上岭一里，又从岭头行一里，出两山坳间，有石垣两重，属连接两峰之左右，是为大山岭，河池、南丹之界也。
现代文：往北上岭一里，又从岭头行一里，走到两座山间的山坳，有两层石墙，连接着左右的两座山峰，这是大山岭，是河池州、南丹州的分界。
English: Go one mile north to Shangling, and another mile from Lingtou, and walk to the ridge between two mountains. There are two layers of stone walls, connecting the two peaks on the right and left. This is the Great Mountain Range, and it is the border between Hechizhou and Nantan.

古文：逾岭北下，遂为丹州境。
现代文：越过岭向北下行，就是南丹州的境内。
English: Crossing the ridge and heading north is the territory of Nantan.

古文：转而西二里，渡小水，其水南去。
现代文：转向西走二里，渡过小溪，这条溪水往南流去。
English: Turn west for two miles and cross a stream that flows south.

古文：复西南逾一岭，复与水遇，随之西北行，共三里，复渡水，水汇于石壁下，遂就之而饭。
现代文：再向西南越过一座岭，再次与溪水相遇，顺流往西北行，共三里，再次渡水，水汇积在石壁下，于是靠着石壁吃饭。
English: Then we crossed a ridge to the southwest, met the stream again, followed the stream to the northwest, a total of three miles, crossed the water again, the water accumulated under the stone wall, so we ate by the stone wall.

古文：又随水出峡，西二里，山势渐开，近山皆变石为土，南山下有茅一二楹矣。
现代文：又顺水流走出山峡，向西二里，山势渐渐开阔起来，近处的山都由石山变为土山，南山下有一两间茅屋。
English: The water flowed out of the gorge, two miles to the west, and the mountains gradually widened. The nearby mountains changed from stone to earth, and there were one or two huts at the bottom of the south mountain.

古文：随小水西行三里，渐转而北，土山坞尽，西山陇间有数十家倚之，是为土寨关，则南丹土税之钥也。
现代文：顺小溪往西行三里，渐渐转向北，土山山坞完了，西面山陇间有数十家人家，这是土寨关，是南丹州土司征税的关口。
English: Shun creek to the west for three miles, gradually turning to the north, Tsuchiyama dock is completed, there are dozens of families between the mountains on the west side, this is the Tozai Pass, which is the Nantan County Toji tax gate.

古文：路在东山之麓，遂北上土岭。
现代文：路在东山的山麓，于是向北上登土岭。
English: The road is at the foot of Higashiyama, so we head north up the mound.

古文：其东来之水，似无北流之隙，惟西北有巨山悬削，想亦从其下入穴以注大江，而下金城、东江者，未亲晰ｘī搞清楚，弄明白也。
现代文：这里从东面流来的水流，似乎没有缝隙往北流去，唯有西北方有座巨大的山峰悬绝陡削，推想也是从山下流入洞穴后注入大江，而后流下金城江、东江的，未亲自弄清楚。
English: Here, the water flowing from the east seems to have no gap to flow northward, except that there is a huge mountain in the northwest that hangs steeply. It is speculated that it also flows from the mountain into the cave and then into the big river, and then flows down the Jincheng River and the East River, but I have not figured it out myself.

古文：北下土岭，其坞中小水亦自东而注西南，似亦逼悬削巨山而去。
现代文：向北走下土岭，这里坞中的小溪也是自东流注到西南，似乎也是逼近悬绝陡削的巨大山峰而去。
English: Walking north down the mound, the creek in the dock here also flows from the east to the southwest, and it seems to be approaching the huge steep-sided peak.

古文：于是复西北上岭，升陟共五里，转出岭头，始有巨坞西北去，路从其西山岭半行，又五里曰百步村今作八步。
现代文：于是又向西北上岭，共爬升了五里，转出到岭头，开始有巨大的山坞向西北伸展而去，路从山坞西边的山岭半中腰上走，又行五里叫百步村。
English: So he went to Shangling in the northwest, climbed a total of five miles, turned out to the head of the ridge, and began to have a huge dock stretching to the northwest. The road was halfway up from the ridge on the west side of the dock, and another five miles called Hyakubo Village.

古文：茅舍数家在西山陇上，皆江右人，为行李居停者。
现代文：有茅屋数家在西边山陇上，都是江西人，是行路人歇脚的地方。
English: There are several huts on the western ridge, all of which are owned by people from Jiangxi Province. They are places for pedestrians to rest.

古文：时锡贾担夫三百余人，占室已满，无可托足，遂北向下陇前西北坞中。
现代文：此时锡商挑夫三百多人，已占满房间，无处可容身，便向北下到山陇前西北方的坞中。
English: At this time, more than three hundred people were picked up by the tin merchants, who had already occupied all the rooms and had nowhere to stay, so they went north to the docks in the northwest of Yamazaki.

古文：水至是转而西南去，有木梁架其上，覆以亭，亦此中所仅见者。
现代文：水流到这里转向西南流去，有木桥架在水上，用亭子覆盖着，也是这一带所仅见的。
English: The water flow here turns to the southwest, and there is a wooden bridge over the water, covered with a pavilion, which is the only one seen in this area.

古文：度梁而上陇，其坞遂转东西。
现代文：越过桥后上登土陇，这里的山坞于是转为东西向。
English: After crossing the bridge, we went up to the mound, and the dock here turned into an east-west direction.

古文：于是西向行五里，有四五家在南山陇间，曰岩田村。
现代文：于是向西行五里，有四五家在南面山陇间，叫岩田村。
English: As a result, five miles to the west, there are four or five houses in the mountains to the south, called Iwata village.

古文：中有瓦栏三楹颇巨，亟投之，则老妪幼孩，室如悬磬已所有，而上瓦下板，俱多破孔裂痕。
现代文：村中有三间瓦盖的竹楼相当大，急忙到那里去投宿，就见老妇幼童，室中空无一物，而且上面的瓦下边的地板，全有很多破孔裂痕。
English: In the village, there are three very large tile-roofed bamboo houses. When I hurried there to stay, I saw old women and small children. There was nothing in the rooms, and the floors above and below the tiles all had many holes and cracks.

古文：盖此乃巨目家，前州乱时，为贼所攻掠而破，遗此老稚，久避他乡，而始归故土者。
现代文：原来这是大头目的家，去年州中动乱时，被盗贼攻破掳掠，遗下这些老幼，长期避难他乡，是这才归回故土的人。
English: Originally, this was the leader's home. During last year's unrest in Zhouzhuang, it was invaded and plundered by thieves, leaving behind these old and young people, who had long taken refuge in other towns. These are the people who have just returned to their native land.

古文：久之觅得一锅，仅炊粥为餐，遂席板而卧。
现代文：很长时间才找到一口锅，仅煮了稀粥当饭，于是在地板上睡下。
English: It took him a long time to find a pot, and he only cooked gruel for dinner, so he fell asleep on the floor.

古文：十九日平明起，炊饭而行。细雨霏霏。
现代文：十九日黎明起床，煮饭吃后上路，细雨霏霏。
English: On the 19th, I got up at dawn. After cooking and eating, I went on the road. It was drizzling.

古文：西向行土山间，三上三下共十里。
现代文：向西行走在土山间，三次上山三次下山共走十里。
English: Walking westward between the soil and mountains, three times up the mountain and three times down the mountain, a total of ten miles.

古文：有水自东北注西南，深不及膝，阔约五六丈，是为大江即刁江也。
现代文：有水流自东北流注到西南，水深不到膝盖，宽约五六丈，这是大江。
English: There is water flowing from the northeast stream to the southwest, the water depth is less than knee-deep, and the width is about five or six feet. This is a large river.

古文：其源发于西北丛山壑中，南流东转而至永顺界，合东江下流者也。
现代文：它的源头发源于西北的重山壑谷中，往南流后向东转到永顺司境内，是会合于东江下游的水流。
English: Its source originates in the northwest of the heavy mountains and valleys, flows southward and turns eastward to the territory of Yongshun. It is a water flow that meets in the lower reaches of the East River.

古文：渡江，又西逾一岭，共五里，转下一坞。
现代文：渡过江，又向西越过一座岭，共五里，转下一个山坞。
English: Crossed the river, and westward over a ridge, a total of five miles, turning a dock.

古文：其坞中有一水东南去，溯之行，其水曲折坞中，屡涉之，俄顷数十次。
现代文：这个山坞中有一条水往东南流去，逆流而行，这条水流在坞中曲曲折折流淌，屡次涉过它，俄顷涉过数十次。
English: In this dock, there is a stream of water flowing to the southeast, going against the current. This stream meanders through the dock, repeatedly wading through it, and has waded dozens of times.

古文：共三里，有水一支自西北来，一支自正西来，遂转而向西溯之。
现代文：共走三里、有一条支流自西北流来，一条支流自正西流来，于是转而向西溯流走。
English: A total of three miles away, there is a tributary from the northwest flow, a tributary from the due west flow, so turn to the west to follow the flow.

古文：又半里，有村在北山之麓，其名曰金村，乃是站之当钥者。
现代文：又走半里，有个村庄在北山的山麓，它的名字叫金村，是这一站路正当交通要道的地方。
English: Half a mile further on, there is a village at the foot of Mount Kitayama. Its name is Kinmura, and it is a place where this station road is a legitimate traffic route.

古文：入其栏，头目方往百步墟，乃坐而待之。
现代文：此地往西去锡矿只有十五里，西北距南丹州有五十里。进入村中的竹楼，头目正好去了百步墟，就坐着等他。
English: It is only fifteen miles west of here to the tin mine, and fifty miles northwest of Nantan. Entering the bamboo building in the village, the leader just went to the hundred-step market and sat down to wait for him.

古文：雨时洒时止。
现代文：雨时洒时停。
English: When it rains, it rains.

古文：陈梦熊从此入锡坑，遂别去。
现代文：陈梦熊从此地到锡矿去，于是告别走了。
English: Chen Meng Xiong went to the tin mine from here, so he said goodbye and left.

古文：余候头目，抵晚始归。
现代文：我等候头目，到晚上才归来。
English: I waited for the leader and did not return until evening.

古文：二十日晨起，雨霏霏。
现代文：二十日早晨起床，淫雨霏霏。
English: I woke up on the morning of the 20th, and it was pouring rain.

古文：饭而候夫，久之乃扎竹为舆，止得其一，而少其一，上午始行。
现代文：饭后等着派夫，很久才用竹子扎成轿子，只得到其中一乘，却少了一乘，上午才上路。
English: After the meal, I waited for the porter, and it took a long time to tie the bamboo into a palanquin. I only got one of the rides, but it was one less ride, and I didn't get on the road until the morning.

古文：雨中遂东北逾土山，一里余，越其脊，乃西北下，深茅没径。
现代文：于是在雨中向东北翻越土山，一里多，越过山脊，就往西北下走，深深的茅草隐没了小径。
English: So, in the rain, I climbed over the dirt mountain to the northeast, more than a mile, over the ridge, and went down to the northwest. The deep thatch obscured the path.

古文：又里许，穿翳而降至坞底，则有小水自南而北，大路亦自南随之，则锡坑道也。
现代文：又走一里左右，穿过遮蔽道路的茅草下到山坞底，就有小溪自南流向北，大路也从南面来顺着溪流走，是去锡矿的路。
English: After walking another mile or so, through the thatch that covers the road, down to the bottom of the dock, there is a stream flowing from south to north, and the main road also follows the stream from the south, which is the way to the tin mine.

古文：从之北一里，又有一水自西南来，二水合而东北去，水东有村在东山下，是曰雷家村，山峡稍开。
现代文：顺着大路向北一里，又有一条小溪自西南流来，两条流水合流后往东北流去，溪水东边有个村庄在东山下，这叫雷家村，山峡稍稍开阔了一些。
English: One mile north along the highway, there is another stream flowing from the southwest. After the confluence of the two streams, it flows to the northeast. On the east side of the stream, there is a village under the east mountain, which is called Lei Jia Village. The mountain gorge is slightly wider.

古文：又一里，遂转而为东西坞，有大溪自西而来，合南来小溪，东去即南转而为大江者也。
现代文：又走一里，于是转向变为东西向的山坞，有条大溪自西面流来，会合南边来的小溪，向东流去立即往南转去成为大江。
English: After walking another mile, I turned to the east-west direction of the dock. There was a large stream coming from the west, meeting a small stream coming from the south, flowing east and immediately turning south to become a large river.

古文：于是溯溪南上山北麓行，西向升陟共十里，有茅数楹在南山之半，曰灰罗厂，皆出锡之所也。
现代文：从这里起溯流在溪南的土山北麓前行，向西爬升共十里，有数间茅屋在南山的半中腰，叫灰罗厂，都是出锡的处所了。
English: From here, the stream follows the northern foothills of the Tushan Mountains in South China and climbs westward for a total of ten miles. There are several huts in the middle of the Nanshan Mountains, called the gray factory, all of which are tin places.

古文：由其下又西一里，其坞西尽，有土山横其中，一小水自西北，一大水自西南，二水合于横岭之下。
现代文：由它下边又向西一里，这里山坞到了西面的尽头，有土山横在坞中，一条小溪自西北来，一条大溪自西南来，两条溪水在横亘的山岭之下合流。
English: From the bottom of it, another mile to the west, here the dock reaches the end of the west side, there are hills in the dock, a stream from the northwest, a large stream from the southwest, two streams meet under the mountains.

古文：于是涉小水西上横岭，岭东路旁有眢井种种，深数丈，而圆仅如井大，似凿掘而成者，即锡穴也。
现代文：于是涉过小溪向西上登横亘的山岭，山岭东面的路旁有种种形状的枯井，深数丈，但圆圆的仅同井一样大，似乎是挖掘而成的，就是锡矿坑了。
English: So I waded across the stream to the west to climb the mountain range. On the eastern side of the mountain range, there are dead wells of various shapes next to the road. They are several meters deep, but the round ones are only as big as the wells. They seem to have been excavated. They are tin mines.

古文：逾岭西下共四里，又与前西南来大溪遇。
现代文：越岭往西共下行四里，又与先前从西南流来的大溪相遇。
English: After crossing the ridge and traveling four miles to the west, it met up with the large stream that had previously flowed from the southwest.

古文：其溪方北曲而南，遂绝流而西，其峡复东西开。
现代文：此溪正由北曲向南，于是横渡溪流往西走，这里的山峡再又呈东西向展开。
English: The stream is flowing south from the north bend, so the cross-stream flows to the west, and the canyon here extends east-west.

古文：溯溪行其中，屡左右涉之，四里为西楞村，又一水自西北来入，路从大溪南岸行。
现代文：溯澳流行走在峡中，屡次向左向右地涉过溪流，四里后是西楞村，又有一条溪水自西北流来注入，路从大溪南岸行。
English: Walking in the gorge, repeatedly wading through the stream from left to right, four miles later is Xidi, and another stream is injected from the northwest stream, and the road goes from the south bank of the big stream.

古文：又一里，路左有岐逾岭而南，想往锡坑道也。
现代文：又走一里，路左有条岔道越过山岭往南走，猜想是去锡矿的路。
English: After walking for another mile, there was a fork in the road on the left, heading south over the mountains. I assumed it was the road to the tin mine.

古文：又西，有溪自南峡来合，其溪亦巨，与西来之溪等。于是又横涉南溪口，仍溯西来溪南岸行。
现代文：又向西，有溪水自南面的峡中流来会合，此溪也很大，与西来的溪流相等，于是又横向涉过南面的溪口，仍溯西来的澳流南岸行。
English: And to the west, there is a stream flowing from the middle of the gorge in the south to meet, this stream is also large, equal to the stream coming from the west, so it also waded across the mouth of the stream in the south, still tracing the south bank of the westbound Ao stream.

古文：又五里，有村在南山，曰大徐村。
现代文：又走五里，有个村庄在南山，叫大徐村。
English: Another five miles away, there is a village in Nanshan, called Daxu Village.

古文：村之西，其峡复开，田始连塍，水盘折其中。
现代文：村子的西面，山峡又开阔起来，田地开始连成片，水流盘绕曲折在其中。
English: To the west of the village, the gorge widens again, the fields begin to stretch out, and the water meanders through them.

古文：又屡涉之，四里，直抵西山下。
现代文：又多次涉过溪流，四里，直达西山下。
English: I waded through the stream several times, four miles, all the way to the west down the mountain.

古文：溯流转而北，一里，乃涉水上西山。
现代文：溯流转向北，一里，就涉过溪水上登西山。
English: The backwash turned to the north, and I waded through the stream for one mile to climb the West Mountain.

古文：初上甚峻，望北坞山环壑尽，瀑流从山腋悬空直喷，界群碧间，如玉龙百丈。
现代文：起初上走非常陡峻，望北面的山坞群山环绕壑谷到了头，瀑布从山侧悬空直泻，隔在碧绿的群山间，如百丈玉龙。
English: At first, the ascent was very steep. Looking north, the mountains surrounding Shibuya Valley came to a head. The waterfall hung straight down from the mountain side, separated by the green mountains, like Baizhang Jade Dragon.

古文：粤西皆石山森幻，惟此景独见。
现代文：粤西都是森立奇幻的石山，所以水流悬空最为困难，只有此景是唯一见到的。
English: Both Guangdong and Western China are made up of fantastical stone mountains, so the water flow hanging in the air is the most difficult, and only this scene is the only one to see.

古文：忆前自全之打狗岭亦北望见之，至此已迂回数千里，涉历经年，忽于此得睹，亦汗漫漫无边际中一奇遇也。
现代文：想起从前从全州的打狗岭上也从北面望见过它，到此时已迂回了数千里，经过一年的涉历，忽然在此地得以见到，也是漫无边际之中的一次奇遇。
English: I remembered that in the past, I had seen it from the north from the Taigu Ridge in Quanzhou. By this time, I had traveled thousands of miles. After a year of travel, I was suddenly able to see it here. It was also a chance encounter in the middle of nowhere.

古文：西向援土级而上，瞻顾一里而不能释，已而渐逾岭南，始不复见。
现代文：向西攀援土台阶上登，回头瞻望了一里路也不能舍弃，不久渐渐越到岭南，这才不再看得见。
English: Climbing up the steps to the west, I could not give up looking back for a mile, and soon I gradually moved to the south of Lingnan, which was no longer visible.

古文：又迤逦循北峰而西上者二里，逾一脊，脊北路隅是为打锡关，乃锡贾自锡坑而来者。昔于此征税，有居舍，自去年乱后被燹，遂无居人。
现代文：又沿着北峰通逸向西上登二里，越过一条山脊，山脊北面的路旁是打锡关，是锡商从锡矿来的路，从前在此地征税，有居民的房屋，自从去年战乱后遭兵火破坏，便没有居民了。
English: He also climbed two miles westward along the north peak of Tongyi, crossing a ridge. The road on the north side of the ridge is the road to tin, the road for tin merchants to come from tin mines. In the past, taxes were levied here, and there were houses with residents. Since last year's war, they have been destroyed by fire, and there are no residents.

古文：由此西下半里，即有壑当峡之西，遂转而北，山夹成峡。
现代文：由此往西下行半里，立即有壑谷挡在山峡的西头，于是转向北，山相夹成峡。
English: From there, half a mile down to the west, there was immediately a valley blocking the western end of the gorge, so I turned north, and the mountains were sandwiched into a gorge.

古文：又下半里，水始成涧北去，随之又半里，渡涧西，缘崖北行一里半，出峡。
现代文：又下走半里，水开始形成山涧向北流去，顺山涧又走半里，渡到山涧西边，沿着山崖往北行一里半，走出山峡。
English: Another half-mile down, the water began to form a ridge and flow northward, and another half-mile along the ridge, to the west of the ridge, along the cliff to the north for a mile and a half, and out of the gorge.

古文：前峡又自东北向西南，乃循崖转而西南行，雨大至。
现代文：前方山峡又自东北延向西南，就沿着山崖转向西南行，雨暴降。
English: The Qianfang Gorge also extends from the northeast to the southwest, and it turns to the southwest along the cliff, and rainstorms fall.

古文：既而复屡涉此涧，涧乃南去，路乃西逾山坳。
现代文：随后再次屡屡涉过这条山涧，山涧这才往南流去，路就向西越过山坳。
English: After that, I repeatedly waded through this ridge again. The ridge then flowed south, and the road crossed the ridge to the west.

古文：共二里，复行坞间，半里，循北山之崖，前涧复自南来，涉之。
现代文：共二里，又行走在山坞间，半里，沿北山的山崖行，先前的那条山涧又从南边流来，涉过它。
English: A total of two miles, and walking between the docks, half a mile, along the cliffs of the North Mountain, the previous ridge flowed from the south and waded through it.

古文：西北行又半里，又一溪自南峡来，其水颇大，与前涧合而北，横堰而潴之。
现代文：又往西北行半里，又有一条溪流自南面峡中流来，溪水很大，与先前的山涧会合后往北流，横筑了堤坝蓄水。
English: Another half-mile to the northwest, there is another stream flowing from the middle of Nanmen Gorge. The stream is very large, and after meeting with the previous mountain stream, it flows north, and a dike is built to store water.

古文：从堰西向北行，又一里而渡南丹之南桥，暮雨如注，雷电交作，急觅逆旅而税驾焉。
现代文：从堤坝西边向北行，又走一里后走过南丹州的南桥，暮雨如注，雷电交加，急忙找旅店往宿下来。
English: From the west side of the dike to the north, after walking one mile, I walked across the South Bridge of Nantan State. It was dusk, thunder and lightning, and I was in a hurry to find a hotel to stay.

古文：南丹之水北流经州治东。
现代文：南丹州的水流往北流经州治东面。
English: The northward flow of water in Nantan flows through the eastern part of the prefecture.

古文：其山东西分界，州治在西山下。
现代文：这里的山分为东西两列，州治在西山下。
English: The mountains here are divided into two columns, east and west, with the state capital at the foot of the west mountain.

古文：其东有街，南北依溪而列。
现代文：它的东面有街道，呈南北向依傍着溪流排列。
English: To the east of it there are streets, arranged in a north-south direction alongside the stream.

古文：中有一街西入，大石坊跨其前，曰： 摅ｓｈū舒展，意即敞开胸怀忠报国，崇整精微。 粤省所未见者。
现代文：当中有一条街向西进去，一座大石牌坊跨在街前，写着： 抒忠报国，崇整精微。 是广西省内所未见过的。
English: Among them, there is a street to the west, and a large stone arch in front of the street, which reads: "Be loyal to the country, respect the fine." It is unprecedented in Guangxi Province.

古文：由坊下进街西行，街尽，又入一石卷门。门内有关帝庙，西向，前亦有坊。
现代文：由牌坊下进街后往西行，街完后，又进入一道石拱门，门内有关帝庙，面向西方，庙前也有牌坊。
English: After entering the street from under the archway, go west. After the street is finished, enter a stone archway. The gate is related to the imperial temple and faces west. There is also a archway in front of the temple.

古文：其西即巨塘汇水，南北各有峰，自西山环臂而前，塘水直浸其麓。
现代文：庙西就是巨大的水塘积着水，南北各有山峰，自西山似手臂一样环绕到前方，塘中的水一直浸到山麓。
English: To the west of the temple is a huge reservoir of water, with peaks to the north and south. From the West Mountain, it is surrounded like an arm to the front, and the water in the pond has been immersed to the foot of the mountain.

古文：塘中有堤，东西长亘数丈，两端各架木为桥，而亭其上。
现代文：塘中有堤，东西横贯长数丈，两端各自用木头架成桥，而且在桥上建了亭子。
English: There is a dike in the pond, the length of which is several meters from east to west, and both ends are bridged with wood, and a pavilion is built on the bridge.

古文：越西桥，又西过一废苑，则州治在西南小石峰下。
现代文：越过西边的桥，又向西走过一处废弃的花园，就见州治在西南的小石峰下。
English: After crossing the bridge on the west side and walking westward through an abandoned garden, you can see the prefecture under the small stone peak in the southwest.

古文：其门北向，前亦有石坊，而四围土墙不甚崇整，此下署也。
现代文：官署的大门向北，前边也有石牌坊，但四面的土墙不怎么高大整齐，这是下面的官署。
English: The gate of the government office faces north, and there is also a stone archway in front, but the earthen walls on all four sides are not very tall and neat. This is the government office below.

古文：州官所居，则在囤上。
现代文：州官居住的地方，却是在囤上。
English: Where state officials live, however, is on the map.

古文：囤上者，即署后小石峰之巅。路由署中登，乃莫公因家难后移此以避不测者。
现代文：囤上就在官署后面小石峰的峰顶，路由官署中上登，是莫公因家中发生灾难后迁到此处以躲避意外事件的。
English: It is located at the top of the peak of the small stone peak behind the government office, halfway up the route of the government office. It was because of a disaster in his home that he moved here to avoid accidents.

古文：盖西界群峰蜿蜒，其南北两支东突者，既若左右臂，又有一支中下特起为石峰，而下署倚之，囤结于上，三面峭削，惟南面有坳可登。
现代文：西面一列群峰蜿蜿蜒蜒，它南北两面向东突出来的支峰，既好像是左右臂，又有当中一条支脉下延独自耸起成为石峰，而下面的官署就紧靠着它，囤子建在上边，三面峻峭陡削，唯有南面有山坳可以上登。
English: To the west, a line of peaks meanders. Its north-south and east-facing protruding spurs seem to be the right and left arms, and one of the branches extends down and rises alone to become a stone peak, while the lower government office is close to it. The piers are built on the top, steep and steep on three sides, and only the south side has mountains that can be climbed.

古文：囤之后复起小峰，与囤中连若马鞍，其后与崇山并夹为深坑，其下有小水东南出而注于大溪，此署左第一层界水也。
现代文：囤子的后面又突起一座小峰，与囤子中间相连好似马鞍，小峰后边与高山并排相夹成深坑，山下有条小溪往东南流出去注入大溪，这是官署左边第一层分界的水流。
English: A small peak protrudes behind the braid. It is connected to the middle of the braid like a saddle. Behind the small peak, it is sandwiched side by side with the mountain into a deep pit. Under the mountain, there is a stream flowing southeast into the large stream. This is the water flow of the first layer of demarcation on the left side of the government office.

古文：囤山之北，其山西断，有洞裂山下。
现代文：囤山的北面，那里的山在西边断开，有洞裂开在山下。
English: To the north of Lushan, where the mountain breaks off to the west, there is a gaping hole under the mountain.

古文：其门东南向，正与囤山对。
现代文：洞口朝向东南，正好与囤山相对。
English: The mouth of the cave faces southeast, just opposite Mount Lushan.

古文：门顶甚平，亦有圆柱倒垂。
现代文：洞口顶上十分平整，也有圆形石柱倒垂。
English: The top of the cave mouth is very flat, and there is also a round stone pillar hanging upside down.

古文：门之中即有二巨石危踞，中开一峡仅尺许，北入三四丈，折而西，稍下，则西巨石之后也。
现代文：洞口的中央就有两块巨石高高盘踞着，中间分开一条峡谷仅有一尺左右宽，往北深入三四丈，折向西，稍下走，就在西面的巨石之后了。
English: In the center of the mouth of the cave, there are two boulders piled high, separated by a canyon that is only about a foot wide. Heading north, go three or four meters deep, turn west, and walk down a bit, you will be right behind the boulders on the west.

古文：与洞后壁北距丈余，西深二丈余，窅黑无可见，不识有旁窦否？
现代文：与北面的山洞后壁距离有一丈多，往西深二丈多，深黑得看不见东西，不知有没有旁洞？
English: The distance from the back wall of the cave to the north is more than a meter, to the west it is more than two meters deep, it is so dark that you can't see anything, I don't know if there is a side cave?

古文：西巨石之上，其面高下不一，皆若台榭可栖，第四壁悬绝，俱无级可登。
现代文：西边巨石之上，岩石表面高低不一，都好像是台榭一样可以居住，只是四面的石壁悬绝，全无台阶可登。
English: On top of the western boulder, the rock surface varies in height, and it seems to be habitable like a platform, but the stone walls on all sides are suspended, and there are no steps to climb.

古文：东石亦然，第后即联缀于洞壁，无后绕之隙，而石台之前，有石柱上耸接于洞顶，为异西石耳。
现代文：东面的巨石也是这样，只是后部连缀在洞壁上，没有向后面绕去的缝隙，而且石台之前，有石柱上耸接到洞顶，与西面的巨石不同而已。
English: The boulders on the east side are also like this, except that the back part is attached to the cave wall, there is no gap to go around to the back, and before the stone platform, there are stone pillars that rise to the top of the cave, which is different from the boulders on the west side.

古文：西石之西，又有小隙穹石，而北峡中架梯一两层，即可登石上，由西石跨石二尺，即可达东石之端，惜此中人不知点缀耳。
现代文：西面巨石的西边，又有条小缝隙在大石上，而且在北面的峡谷中架一两层梯子，就可登到石上，由西面岩石上跨二尺宽的石桥，马上可以到达东面岩石的前端，可惜这里的人不知道点缀景色罢了。
English: On the west side of the west boulder, there is a small gap on the boulder, and a ladder or two can be set up in the canyon on the north side to climb onto the stone. From the west rock, a two-foot-wide stone bridge can be crossed to immediately reach the front end of the east rock. Unfortunately, people here do not know the ornamental scenery.

古文：由岩前北向行半里，其山又开东西坞，循西山嘴转而西行，又有水自西峡来，东北向而入大溪，即清水塘之下流也。
现代文：由洞前向北行半里，这里的山又开拓成东西向的山坞，沿西面的山嘴转向西行，又有水流自西边峡中流来，流向东北注入大溪，就是清水塘的下游了。
English: Half a mile northward from the front of the cave, the mountain here has been developed into an east-west dock, turning westward along the western tip of the mountain, and water flows from the middle of the western gorge and flows to the northeast into the creek, which is the downstream of the clear pond.

古文：溯之西行，又半里，渡一桥亭。
现代文：逆流往西行，又走半里，走过一座桥亭。
English: Against the flow to the west, and walked half a mile, walked through a bridge pavilion.

古文：桥南有石崖障流，内汇水一池，昔水从桥下出，今捣崖根而东，不北由桥下矣。
现代文：桥南有石崖挡住水流，里面积有一池水，从前水从桥下流出去，如今冲捣石崖根部往东流，不从北边经由桥下了。
English: To the south of the bridge, there is a stone cliff blocking the flow of water. There is a pool of water in it. In the past, the water flowed out from under the bridge. Now, the water flows eastward from the base of the stone cliff, and does not pass under the bridge from the north.

古文：渡桥稍西，逾一冈，即清水塘。
现代文：过桥后稍向西走，越过一座山冈，就是清水塘。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk a little to the west, over a hill, to the Clear Water Pond.

古文：塘南北两山成夹，中开东西坞，西则大山屏其后，东即石崖所障水口也。
现代文：水塘南北两面的山相夹成谷，中间展开成东西向的山坞，西面就是大山屏风样矗立在它后面，东面就是石崖挡住的河口了。
English: The mountains on the north and south sides of the pond are sandwiched into a valley, the middle spreads out into an east-west dock, the west side is the mountain screen standing behind it, and the east side is the estuary blocked by the cliff.

古文：寺在其中，东向而立。
现代文：寺庙在两者之中，向东而立。
English: The temple is in the middle of the two, facing east.

古文：入门即为方塘，四周石砌，汇水于中，不深而甚澈。
现代文：进门就是个方形水塘，四周用石块砌成，积水在塘中，不深但非常清澈。
English: The entrance is a square pond, surrounded by stone blocks. The water in the pond is not deep, but very clear.

古文：前层架阁塘中，阁后越塘又中亘一亭，亭南北塘中，复供石于水，两旁各架阁于塘为左右厢。
现代文：前边一层在塘中架了楼阁，阁后越过水塘又在中央横着一座亭子，亭子南北的水塘中，又在水面上摆设了石头，两旁在水塘上各建有阁子作为左右厢房。
English: On the front side, there is a pavilion in the middle of the pond. After the pavilion, there is a pavilion across the pond in the center. In the north and south of the pavilion, there are stones on the surface of the water. On both sides of the pond, there are pavilions on the left and right.

古文：亭西则玉皇阁也，亦从塘中甃石为基，而中通水道者。
现代文：亭子西边就是玉皇阁，也是从塘中用石块砌成地基，但中间通有水道的。
English: On the west side of the pavilion is the Jade Emperor Pavilion, which is also built with stones from the pond, but there is a waterway in the middle.

古文：阁下位真武，上位玉皇，而真武之后，又从塘中架阁一层，下跨水上，为栖憩之所，上与玉皇阁联架为一，置三世佛焉。
现代文：阁中在下位的是真武大帝，在上位的是玉皇大帝，而真武大帝的后方，又从塘中架起一层阁子，下边跨在水上，是休息的场所，上边与玉皇阁架空联结为一体，放置了过去、现在、未来三世佛像在其中。
English: In the lower tier of the pavilion is Emperor Zhenwu, in the upper tier is the Jade Emperor, and in the rear of Emperor Zhenwu, a tier of pavilions is set up from the pond. The lower side straddles the water and is a place of rest. The upper side is connected to the upper level of the Jade Emperor Pavilion, and the past, present, and future Buddha statues of the third generation are placed in it.

古文：佛后有窗，可平眺西峰，下瞰塘水亹亹从地中溢起。
现代文：佛像后面有窗户，可以平眺西峰，下瞰塘水从地下源源不竭地溢起来。
English: There is a window at the back of the Buddha statue, from which you can see the west peak, and the pond water overflows inexhaustibly from the underground source.

古文：塘之外，皆有垣周之，层楼叠阁，俱架于水中，而佛像皆整丽，亦粤西所未见。
现代文：水塘之外，都有墙四周围着，层楼叠阁，全架在水中，而佛像都很整齐壮丽，也是粤西所未见过的。
English: Outside the pond, there are walls all around, the floors are stacked, the whole frame is in the water, and the Buddha statues are all neat and magnificent, which is also unprecedented in Guangdong and Western China.

古文：惜乎中无一僧，水空云冷，惟闻唧唧溪声而已。
现代文：可惜寺中没有一个僧人，水空云冷，只是听见涂涂的溪水声而已。
English: Unfortunately, there was not a single monk in the temple, the water and air were cold, and all I could hear was the murmur of the stream.

古文：寺为天启七年莫公伋ｊｉ所建，前年以潛，鞭杀僧，遂无居者。
现代文：寺庙是天启七年莫极公修建的，前年因为有人诬陷，用鞭子打死了僧人，便无僧人居住了。
English: The temple was built by King Mogi in the seventh year of the Apocalypse. The previous year, a monk was falsely accused and beaten to death with a whip, so there were no monks living there.

古文：寺南有溪自西南腋中来，即由寺前东去者。
现代文：寺南有溪水从西南的山侧流来，就是由寺前往东流去的溪流。
English: There is a stream in the south of the temple that flows from the southwest side of the mountain, which is the stream that flows from the temple to the east.

古文：寺北有大道西向逾岭去，是通巴鹅而达平洲者。
现代文：寺北有大道向西越岭而去，是通往巴鹅而后到达平洲的路。
English: There is a road in the north of the temple that goes to the west over the ridge. It is the road that leads to Bagoose and then to Pingzhou.

古文：寺前水东去，经石崖水口，又东出而注大溪，此署左第二重界水也。
现代文：寺前的溪水向东流去，流经石崖所在的河口，又向东出去注入大溪，这是官署左边第二层分界的水流了。
English: The stream in front of the temple flows to the east, flows through the estuary where the stone cliff is located, and then goes east into the creek. This is the second level of the boundary on the left of the government office.

古文：署右第一重界水，即前来所涉堰上南峡之流，第二重即打锡关东来之涧，二水合为大溪而经州前。
现代文：官署右边的第一层分界的水流，就是先前来时南面峡中涉过堤坝上的水流，第二层就是从东面打锡关流来的山涧，两条水流合流后成为大溪流经州治前。
English: The water flow of the first layer of demarcation on the right of the government office is the water flow that waded through the dike in the southern gorge when it previously came, and the second layer is the mountain stream flowing from the east of Taksiguan. After the two water flows merge, it becomes a large stream flowing through the prefecture.

