古文：十三日早饭，平明抵北门。
现代文：十三日早早吃饭，天亮到北门。
English: On the 13th, we had an early dinner and went to the north gate at dawn.

古文：从门外循旧城而西，一里，转而南。半里，其南则新城复拓而西出。
现代文：从门外沿旧城往西走，一里，转南，半里，是南面的新城又往西拓出。
English: From outside the gate, walk along the old city to the west, one mile, turn south, half a mile, and the new city in the south will open out to the west.

古文：随之又西半里，又循城南转半里，过西门，乃折而西向行。
现代文：顺新城又往西走半里，又沿城转南半里，经过西门，就折向西行。
English: From Shunxincheng, walk half a mile to the west, turn half a mile south along the city, pass the west gate, and turn west.

古文：度一桥，西三里，乃蹑坡，二里，逾坡西稍下。
现代文：过一座桥，往西走三里，于是上坡，二里，越过坡往西逐渐下。
English: Cross a bridge, walk west for three miles, then uphill, two miles, cross the slope to the west and gradually descend.

古文：其坡自西山东下，至此伏而再起，其南北俱有峰舒臂前抱，土人称为旗鼓山，而坡上冢累累，盖即郡城之来脉也。
现代文：这坡从西山向东伸下去，到这里低伏后又耸起来，坡南北都有山峰伸臂环抱，当地人称为旗鼓山，而且坡上坟墓很多，大概是府城的来脉。
English: This slope stretches from the west mountain to the east, and after lying low here, it rises again. There are peaks stretching from the north to the south of the slope. Locals call it Qigong Mountain, and there are many graves on the slope, which is probably the origin of the capital.

古文：土人言： 昔土官高氏之冢当此冈，国初谓其有王气，以大师挖断其后脉，即今之伏处也。 
现代文：当地人说： 从前高土官家的坟就在这座冈上，本朝初年认为这里有王者之气，派大军挖断山冈的后脉，就是现在低伏的地方。 
English: The local people said: The graves of the former high-ranking officials are on this hill. At the beginning of this reign, they thought that there was a king's spirit here, and sent a large army to dig out the back of the mountain, which is where it now lies.

古文：不知起伏乃龙脉之妙，果挖之，适成其胜耳，宜郡城之日盛也。
现代文：不知道起伏之地是龙脉的妙处，真的挖了，恰巧成风水之美，府城日益兴盛是有来由的。
English: I did not know that the undulating land is the beauty of the dragon vein. I really dug it, and it happened to be the beauty of feng shui. There is a reason for the growing prosperity of the capital city.

古文：由伏处即上蹑坡行，一里，至坡脊，南北俱坠坑成峡。
现代文：就从低伏处往上登坡，走一里，到坡脊，南北两面都坠为洼坑，形成峡谷。
English: He climbed up the slope from the low-lying place, walked one mile, and reached the ridge. Both the north and south sides fell into depressions, forming a canyon.

古文：又一里，南度西峡之上，从南坡蹑峡西登，二里稍平。
现代文：又走一里，往南越到西峡谷上面，顺南坡踩着陡峻的路往西攀登，二里渐渐平缓。
English: Walk another mile, go south to the top of the West Canyon, climb the steep road along the south slope to the west, and gradually level off for two miles.

古文：再缘南坡折而上，一里，复随峡西入，一里，抵西岭下，转而北向蹑峡中。
现代文：再沿南坡转往上走，一里，又随峡谷往西进，一里，到西岭下，转向北从峡谷中走。
English: Then go up along the south slope, one mile, and follow the canyon to the west, one mile, to the west ridge, turn north from the canyon.

古文：其峡乃坠水枯涧，巨石磊磊，而叠磴因之，中无滴沥，东西两崖，壁夹骈凑，石骨棱棱，密翳蒙蔽，路缘其中，白日为冷。
现代文：这道峡谷水坠落、涧干枯，巨石磊磊，因而层层台阶顺巨石走，枯涧中没有一滴水，东西两面的山崖，崖壁对峙、连接不断，石头棱角分明，把峡谷遮挡得很严密，道路从峡谷中延伸，白天都感到冷。
English: The water in this canyon is falling, the cliff is dry, and the boulders are piling up. As a result, you walk step by step along the boulders, and there is not a single drop of water in the dry cliff. The cliffs on both sides of the east and west, the cliff walls are facing each other and are constantly connected. The stones have sharp edges and corners, and they cover the canyon very tightly. The road extends from the canyon, and it feels cold during the day.

古文：二里余，有巨石突涧道中，若鷁首之浮空，又若蹲狮之当户。
现代文：走二里多，道路中突起巨石，像鹊鸟的头浮在空中，又像雄狮蹲在门口。
English: After walking for more than two miles, boulders protrude from the road, floating in the air like the head of an ostrich, and crouching at the door like a male lion.

古文：由其右崖横陟其上，遂循左崖上，其峻束愈甚。
现代文：从巨石右边的崖壁横穿于巨石上面，于是顺左边的崖壁而上，更加狭窄陡峻。
English: The cliff wall on the right side of the boulder cuts across the top of the boulder, so the cliff wall on the left side is narrower and steeper.

古文：二里始平，西行峡中。
现代文：二里才平缓，往西从峡谷中走。
English: It's only flat for two miles, and you have to walk west from the canyon.

古文：一里稍上，北崖峭壁耸起，如奋翅劈霄，而南崖亦崭削相逼，中凑如门，平行其中，仰天一线，余以为此南度之大脊也。
现代文：一里逐渐上，北崖耸起峭壁，如同振奋翅膀冲向云霄，而南崖也高峻陡削相逼，中间如门聚合，从其中平行，抬头是一线天，我认为这是往南延伸的主峰山脊。
English: One mile gradually up, the north cliff rises cliff, like a rousing wings rushing to the sky, and the south cliff is also high and steep, the middle is like a door aggregation, from which parallel, looking up is a line of sky, I think this is the main peak ridge extending southward.

古文：透其西，峰环壑转，分为二岐：一由脊门西下，循北山而西北；一由脊门直出，循南山而西南。
现代文：穿到峡谷西，山峰环绕壑谷转，分出两条岔路：一条从山脊口往西下，沿北山向西北延伸；一条从山脊口直出，沿南山往西南延伸。
English: Passing through to the west of the canyon, the mountain peaks revolve around the valley, separating two forked roads: one descends from the ridge mouth to the west and extends along the North Mountain to the northwest; one goes straight out from the ridge mouth and extends along the South Mountain to the southwest.

古文：奠定所适。
现代文：不能确定走哪条路。
English: I'm not sure which way to go.

古文：得牧者，遥呼而问之，知西北乃樵道也，遂从其西南行。
现代文：看到有放牧的人，远远地呼叫问路，知道往西北去的是砍柴的路，就顺往西南的路走。
English: If you see someone grazing, call out for directions from a distance. If you know that the way to the northwest is the way to cut firewood, follow the way to the southwest.

古文：半里，有峰中悬壑中，两三茅舍当其上，亦哨守者之居也。
现代文：半里，沟壑中悬立起山峰，峰上有两三间茅屋，也是守哨人的住房。
English: Half a mile away, in the middle of a gully, a mountain peak rises. On the peak, there are two or three huts, which are also the homes of the sentinels.

古文：从其南平行峡中，西望尖峰耸立，高出众顶，余疑路将出其西北。
现代文：从峰南在峡谷中平行，往西看到尖峰耸立，高出众山顶，我怀疑道路会从尖峰西北出去。
English: From the south peak parallel in the canyon, to the west to see the spikes towering, high mountain tops, I doubt the road will go out from the northwest peak.

古文：及西二里，稍下洼中，半里，抵尖峰东麓，其处洼而无水，西北、西南之峡，似俱中坠，始悟脊门西来平壑，至此皆中洼，而非外泄之峡矣。
现代文：等到往西走二里后，渐渐下到洼地中，走半里，抵达尖峰东麓，这里低洼而无水，西北、西南的峡谷，都似乎从中坠下去，于是省悟到从山脊口往西过来是平平的壑谷，到这里都为中洼之地，因而不是外泄的峡谷。
English: After waiting for two miles to the west, I gradually descended into the depression, walked half a mile, and arrived at the eastern foot of the peak. It is low-lying and waterless here, and the northwest and southwest canyons all seem to fall down from it. Then I realized that it is a flat valley from the ridge to the west, and it is a depression here, so it is not an outflowing canyon.

古文：从洼西南上，遂披尖峰东南峡而登，密树蒙茸，高峰倒影。
现代文：从洼地往西南上，于是穿越尖峰东南的峡谷而往上走，树木丛密蓬松，高峰倒影。
English: From the depression to the southwest, then through the canyon southeast of the peak and go up, the trees are dense and fluffy, and the peak is reflected.

古文：二里，循峰西转，遂逾其东度之脊。
现代文：二里，沿峰往西转，就翻越其往东延伸的山脊。
English: After two miles, turn west along the peak and climb over the ridge that extends to the east.

古文：西半里，盘尖峰之南，西北半里，又逾其南度之脊。
现代文：往西走半里，绕到尖峰南，往西北半里，又翻越其往南延伸的山脊。
English: Walk half a mile to the west, around the peak to the south, half a mile to the northwest, and then climb over the ridge that extends to the south.

古文：北脊高于东度者，然大脊所经，又似从东度者南转，而脊门犹非其度处也。
现代文：北面的山脊比往东延伸的山脊高，然而主脊的走向，又似乎顺东山脊往南转，而山脊口还不是主脊穿越之处。
English: The ridge on the north side is higher than the ridge extending to the east, but the direction of the main ridge seems to turn south along the east ridge, and the ridge mouth is not where the main ridge crosses.

古文：逾脊，遂北向而下，一里，已出尖峰之西，至此盖三面挟尖峰而行矣。
现代文：越过山脊，就向北下。一里，已经走出尖峰西，到此为止，原来是从三面绕着尖峰走。
English: After crossing the ridge, we headed north. One mile later, we had already walked west of the peak. Up to this point, we had walked around the peak from three sides.

古文：乃西向随峡下坠，一里，峡始开。
现代文：于是向西顺峡谷往下坠，走一里，峡谷才开阔。
English: So he plunged down to the Xishun Gorge. After walking for a mile, the canyon opened up.

古文：一里，转而西南，乃循南山之坡曲折西下，三里，抵盘壑中。
现代文：一里，转向西南走，沿着南山坡曲折西下，三里，到盘壑中。
English: One mile, turn to the southwest, and walk along the south slope of the mountain, zigzagging westward, three miles, to the middle of the plateau.

古文：其处东、北、西三面皆崇峰，西北、东南二面皆坠峡，惟西南一脊如堵垣。
现代文：这里东北西三面都是高峰，西北、东南两面都坠有峡谷，只有西南有一道如同墙垣的山脊。
English: Here, the three sides of the northeast and west are high peaks, the northwest and southeast both have canyons, and only the southwest has a ridge like a wall.

古文：平陟其上，共二里，逾前冈，有废舍踞冈头，是为汝南哨。
现代文：平缓地登上脊，一共走二里，往前翻越冈，冈头上有废弃的房屋，这是汝南哨。
English: We climbed gently up the ridge, walked a total of two miles, and climbed over the hill. There were abandoned houses at the top of the hill. This was Runan Sentinel.

古文：其东南坞中，有村倚东山，乃土官所居，土人又名为虞蜡播箕。
现代文：哨东南的山坞中，有村子傍靠着东山，是土官住的地方，当地人称为虞蜡播箕。
English: In the dockyard south-east of the watchtower, there is a village next to the east mountain, where the local officials live. The locals call it "Guzowax" (虞蜡播).

古文：由哨南下，行坞中一里余，遂南入峡。
现代文：从哨南下去，在山坞中走一里多，就往南进入峡谷。
English: From the south of the sentry post, walk more than a mile in the dockyard, then go south into the canyon.

古文：东西皆土峰逼夹，其下颇峻。
现代文：峡谷东西都是土峰，相隔很近，下去比较陡。
English: The canyon is made up of earth peaks from east to west, which are very close to each other and relatively steep.

古文：二里出峡，乃饭。
现代文：二里走出峡谷，于是吃饭。
English: Two miles out of the canyon, we ate.

古文：复见东南有坠壑，乃盘西峰之南，复西陟其坞。
现代文：又看到东南有沟壑下坠，就绕到西峰南面，又往西穿过山坞。
English: Seeing a gully to the southeast, he walked around to the south of the west peak, and then westward through the dockyard.

古文：一里余，复陟其西峰而南盘之，遂西向循坡下，北峰南壑，路从深树叠石间下，甚峻。
现代文：一里多，又登西峰而往南盘绕，于是向西沿着坡下，北面是山峰，南面是壑谷，道路从密密树林中的叠石间往下延伸，很陡。
English: After more than a mile, the road climbs the West Peak and winds around to the south, so it follows the slope down to the west, with the peak to the north and the valley to the south. The road extends down from the stacked stones in the dense forest, and it is very steep.

古文：四里，转峡度脊，其下稍平。
现代文：四里，转进峡谷，翻越山脊，往下比较平缓。
English: Four miles, turn into the canyon, climb over the ridge, and descend relatively smoothly.

古文：西南半里，有茅棚卖浆冈头，乃沽买以润枯肠。
现代文：往西南走半里，冈头有卖浆的草棚，于是买浆滋润枯肠。
English: Half a mile to the south-west, there is a grass shed at the end of the road that sells pulp, so people buy the pulp to moisten their stomachs.

古文：又西南半里，下至壑底，有水自南峡来，竟壑中，北透峡去，是为清水江。
现代文：又往西南走半里，下到壑谷底，有从南边峡谷流来的水，贯穿壑谷，往北穿过峡谷流去，这是清水江。
English: Another half-mile to the southwest, down to the bottom of Shibuya, there is water flowing from the south side of the canyon, running through Shibuya, flowing north through the canyon, this is the Shimizu River.

古文：始知壑西之山，反自大脊南度而北，其水犹滥觞细流，不足名溪，而乃以江名耶？
现代文：才知道壑谷西部的山，反而从主脊由南往北延伸，这股水还只是刚刚开始的细流，称为溪都不相副，却要用江命名？
English: Did you know that the mountain in the western part of Shibuya extends from the main ridge from the south to the north? This water is just the beginning of a trickle. It is not appropriate to call it a stream, but it should be named after the river?

古文：其下流北出，当西转南下，而合于剑川之上流，然则剑川之源，不第始于七和也。
现代文：江水下游往北流出去，应当转西往南流，然后和剑川上游会合，这样看来，剑川的源头，不仅从七和开始。
English: The lower reaches of the river flow northward, and should turn westward to flow southward, and then meet the upper reaches of the Jianchuan River. In this way, the source of the Jianchuan River does not only start from Qihe.

古文：清水江东岸，有数家居壑中，上有公馆，为中道。
现代文：清水江东岸，有数家人住在壑谷中，上面有公馆，是中道。
English: On the east bank of the Shimizu River, there are several families living in Shibuya, and there is a public house above, which is the middle road.

古文：涉水西，从西坡南向上，迤逦循西山而南，三里余，乃折而西南上，甚峻。
现代文：渡到水西边，沿西坡往南上，曲折连绵地沿西山往南走，三里多，才转向西南上，路十分陡峻。
English: After crossing to the west side of the water, I walked along the west slope to the south, and continued to walk along the west mountain to the south, more than three miles, before turning to the southwest. The road was very steep.

古文：一里，又折而西，半里，西逾岭脊，即南从东大脊西度北转者，当北尽于清水江西透之处者也。
现代文：一里，又转向西，半里，往西翻越岭脊，是往南沿东大脊向西延伸，往北转的山脊，北边应当在清水江往西穿过之处结束。
English: The one-mile and westward-turning and half-mile and westward-turning ridges are ridges that extend westward along the East Ridge to the south and turn northward. The north side should end where the Shimizu River crosses to the west.

古文：越脊西下峡中，二里，峡始豁而下愈峻，又一里余，始就夷平地。
现代文：越过岭脊往西下到峡谷中，行二里，峡谷开始开阔但往下走更陡，又走一里多，才走上平路。
English: Cross the ridge ridge to the west down to the canyon, walk two miles, the canyon began to open but go down more steeply, and walk more than a mile before walking on a flat road.

古文：行围壑间，又一里余，乃循南峰之西而南盘之。
现代文：从环形的壑谷中走，又一里多，于是沿南峰西面往南盘绕。
English: After walking more than a kilometer from the circular valley, I circled southward along the west face of the south peak.

古文：一里，出其口，始见其西群峰下伏，有峡下嵌甚深，南去稍辟，而东南峡中，似有水光掩映者，则剑川湖也；西南层峰高峙，雪色弥莹者，则老君山也。
现代文：一里，走出壑谷口，才看见西边群峰向下低伏，有往下嵌得很深的峡谷，往南去则渐渐开阔，而东南边的峡谷中，似乎有水光掩映，是剑川湖；西南边层层山峰高高峙立，雪色更加晶莹，是老君山。
English: After walking one mile from the mouth of Shibuya Valley, I saw that the peaks in the west slope downwards, and there is a deep canyon below. To the south, it gradually opens up. In the canyon in the southeast, there seems to be a reflection of water and light, which is Jianchuan Lake; in the southwest, there are high-rise peaks, and the snow is more crystal clear, which is Laojun Mountain.

古文：南盘二里，又见所盘之崖，其西石峰倒涌，突兀嵯峨，骈错趾下，其下深壑中，始见居庐环倚，似有楼阁瞻依之状，不辨其为公馆、为庙宇也。
现代文：往南绕二里，又看见所绕的山崖，西边石峰耸立，突兀嶙峨，在脚下错落相连，崖下面的深壑中，才看到房舍环绕、傍靠，似乎有楼阁相依的形状，分辨不出是公馆还是庙宇。
English: I walked two miles to the south, and saw the surrounding cliffs. To the west, the stone peaks were towering, jutting, staggered and connected at the foot. In the depths below the cliff, I saw the houses surrounding and leaning against each other. They seemed to have the shape of a castle, and I couldn't tell if it was a mansion or a temple.

古文：从其上南向，依东崖下，二里，西度峡脊，已出居庐之南，遂循西峰南下，一里，则东峡已南向，直趋剑湖矣。
现代文：从上面往南靠着东崖而下，二里，往西越过峡脊，已经走出到房舍南面，于是沿着西峰南下，一里，则东峡谷已经向南，直通剑湖了。
English: From above, I went south along the east cliff. After two miles, I crossed the ridge of the canyon to the west and walked out to the south of the house. Then I walked south along the west peak. After one mile, the east canyon had gone south, straight to Jianhu.

古文：于是南望湖光杳渺，当东山之麓，湖北带壑连青，环畦甚富，意州治已在其间，而随峡无路。
现代文：于是往南望湖光杳渺，湖位于东山麓，湖北面壑谷绿色不断，环绕着很多畦田，估计剑川州治就在其中，但没有路随峡谷延伸。
English: As a result, I looked to the south to see the lake in all its glory. The lake is located at the eastern foot of the mountain, and the green of the valley in the north of the lake is continuous, surrounded by many rice paddies. It is estimated that Jianchuan Shuzhi is among them, but there is no road extending along the canyon.

古文：路反从峰头透坳西去，一里稍下，又转西峰而盘其南。
现代文：道路反而从峰顶穿过山坳往西走，一里逐渐下，又绕西峰而转南走。
English: Instead, the road goes from the peak through the foothills to the west, gradually descends one mile, and then turns around the west peak to the south.

古文：又一里，于是南面豁然，其前无障，俯见南湖北坞，而州治倚西山，当其交接处，去此尚遥。
现代文：又一里，于是南面开阔，前面没有障碍，俯视南部的湖，北部的山坞，州治傍靠着西山，位于山、坞交接处，距离这里还很遥远。
English: Another mile, so the south side is open, there is no obstacle in front, overlooking the lake in the south, the dock in the north, the state government next to the West Mountain, located at the junction of the mountain and the dock, the distance is still very far from here.

古文：路盘坡西行，一里余，乃从坡西峡中南下。
现代文：道路绕坡往西行，一里多，就顺坡西的峡谷往南下。
English: The road went west around the slope for more than a mile, and then went south along the canyon on the west side of the slope.

古文：又一里，抵山麓，乃循崖西转。
现代文：又走一里，到达山麓，于是沿着山崖往西转。
English: After another mile, I reached the foot of the mountain, so I turned west along the cliff.

古文：半里，则村居倚山临坞，环堵甚盛，是为山塍塘。
现代文：半里，是靠山临坞的村舍，四周的围墙很大，这是山腿塘。
English: Half a mile away, there is a village house near the dock, surrounded by a large wall. This is the mountain pond.

古文：问距州尚十里，而担者倦于行。
现代文：问后知道距离州治还有十里，但挑夫懒得走。于是住宿。
English: After asking, he knew that it was still ten miles away from Shuzhu, but the porter was too lazy to walk. So he stayed.

古文：遂止。十四日昧爽，饭于山塍塘，平明乃行。
现代文：十四日拂晓，在山膛塘吃饭，天大亮才出发。
English: At dawn on the 14th, we had a meal at Yamrau-tang before setting off at first light.

古文：自是俱西南向平畴中行矣。
现代文：从这里都是往西南从平整的田地中走。
English: From here it's all south-westerly walking through flat fields.

古文：二里余，有一小山南突平川，路从其北西转而挟之。
现代文：二里多，有座小山在平川中往南突起，道路从小山西北绕转过去。
English: For more than two miles, there is a hill rising to the south in the middle of the Hirakawa River, and the road goes around the hill to the northwest.

古文：复西南行平畴中，雨霏霏至。
现代文：又往西南在平地中走，雨霏霏而下。
English: Further to the south-west, on flat ground, the rain began to fall.

古文：二里，有大溪自北而南，平流浅沙，汤汤声注湖中，然湖自下山塍，已不可见矣。
现代文：走二里，一条大溪从北向南，平缓地流过浅沙，浩浩荡荡往南注入湖中，然而自从下到山膛塘，湖就看不见了。
English: After walking for two miles, a large stream ran from north to south, flowing smoothly through the shallow sand and flowing south into the lake. However, the lake was no longer visible from the time I reached Yamrozhotang.

古文：随溪南行，又半里，大石梁西跨之，其溪流盖北自甸头来。
现代文：顺溪水往南走，又半里，大石桥横跨东西，溪流大概是从北部的甸头流来。
English: Walking south along the water of the stream, another half mile, the large stone bridge spans the east and west, and the stream probably comes from the north of Diankou.

古文：按志，州西北七十里山顶，有山顶泉，广可半亩，为剑川之源。
现代文：考查志书，剑川西北七十里的山顶上，有山顶泉，大约有半亩水面，是剑川的源头。
English: According to historical records, there is a mountaintop spring with about half a mu of water on the top of a mountain seventy miles northwest of Jianchuan, which is the source of Jianchuan.

古文：此山不知何名，今丽江南界七和后大脊，实此川发源之所，则此山即在大脊之南可知。
现代文：不知道这座山叫什么名字，现在丽江府南部边界九和背后的主脊，其实是剑川的发源地，那么这座山就在主脊之南是可以知道的。
English: I don't know what the name of this mountain is, but now the southern border of Lijiang Prefecture and the main ridge behind it are actually the birthplace of the Jianchuan River, so this mountain is south of the main ridge.

古文：更有东山清水江之流，亦合并之，其盘曲至此，亦不下七十里，则清水江亦其源可知。
现代文：另外有东山的清水江流，也合并入剑川，清水江曲折绕流到这里，也不下七十里，那么清水江也是剑川之源是可以知道的。
English: In addition, the Shimizu River flows from Higashiyama and merges into the Jianchuan River. The Shimizu River winds its way to this point, not less than seventy miles, so it is possible to know that the Shimizu River is also the source of the Jianchuan River.

古文：从桥北望，乃知水依西山南下，其东则山塍塘北之山盘夹之，山塍塘之东，山南坠而为川，又东，则东山乃南下而屏其东，与西界金华山为对。
现代文：从桥上往北看，就知道溪水沿着西山往南流，东边则是山滕塘北面环绕、挟持的山，山滕塘东部的山往南坠下去而形成平川，又往东，是东山往南延伸而屏障在东部，与西部的金华山相对。
English: Looking north from the bridge, you can see that the stream flows south along the West Mountain, the east side is the mountain surrounded and held by the north side of Shantentang Mountain, the mountain in the east of Shantentang Mountain falls south to form the Hirakawa River, and to the east, the East Mountain extends south and the barrier is in the east, opposite the west of Jinhua Mountain.

古文：是山塍塘者，实川之北尽处，其东南辟而为川以潴湖，其西北夹而为峡以出水者也。
现代文：因此山滕塘其实是平川北边的尽头处，其东南敞开平川让湖水聚集，其西北形成峡谷让水流出去。
English: Therefore, Shantentang is actually the end of the north side of the Pingchuan River. In the southeast, the Pingchuan River opens to let the lake water gather, and in the northwest, a canyon is formed to let the water flow out.

古文：过桥，风雨大至。
现代文：过石桥，大风大雨来临。
English: Over the stone bridge, the wind and rain are coming.

古文：随溪南行半里，避于坊下，久之稍止，乃西南复行塍间。
现代文：顺溪水往南行半里，在坊下躲雨，过了很久雨才渐渐停下，于是又往西南从田间走。
English: I followed the water of the stream for half a mile to the south, hiding from the rain under a tree. After a long time, the rain gradually stopped, so I walked from the fields to the southwest.

古文：一里余，有一小流西来，乃溯之西一里，抵剑川州。
现代文：一里多，有条小河从西边流来，就溯流往西走一里，来到剑川州。
English: More than a mile, there is a small river flowing from the west, it flows back to the west for a mile and comes to Jianchuan.

古文：州治无城，入其东街，抵州前，乃北行，税放行李于北街杨贡士家。
现代文：州治没有城墙，从东街进去，到州署前，就往北走，把行李放在北街杨贡士家。
English: There are no city walls in the prefecture. Enter from East Street, and before reaching the prefecture, walk north and leave your luggage at Yang Gongshi's house on North Street.

古文：乃买鱼于市。
现代文：于是到集市上买鱼。
English: So I went to the market to buy fish.

古文：见街北有祠，入谒之。乃祠死节段公者。
现代文：见街北有祠堂，进去拜祭，是祭祀气节高尚的段公。
English: To the north of the street, there is an ancestral hall, where people go to worship. It is the scene of a noble festival of sacrifice.

古文：段名高选，州人，万历末，以进士为重庆巴县令，阖家死奢酋之难，故奉诏立祠。
现代文：段公名高选，是剑川州人，万历末年，以进士身份担任重庆府巴县知县，全家死于奢崇明之难，所以当地奉命建祠堂。
English: Duan Gongnian Gaofeng, a native of Jianchuan County, was appointed as a prefectural official of Ba County, Chongqing Prefecture at the end of the Wanli era. His entire family died in a difficult time, so he was ordered to build a local ancestral hall.

古文：今其长子暄荫锦衣在都。
现代文：如今段公的长子段暄因其父的功勋被赐官，在首都锦衣卫。
English: Today, Duan Gong's eldest son, Duan Jie, has been given an official position because of his father's merits, and is stationed in Jinbei, the capital.

古文：祠中有一生授蒙童。
现代文：祠堂中有一个读书人教授幼童。
English: In the ancestral hall, there is a reader teaching a toddler.

古文：植盆中花颇盛，山茶小仅尺许，而花大如碗。
现代文：栽在盆中的花很茂盛，山茶只有一尺左右高，但花却有碗大。
English: The flowers planted in the pots are very lush. The camellia is only about a foot high, but the flowers are the size of bowls.

古文：出祠，东还寓，以鱼畀给顾仆，令守行囊，而余同主人之子，令担者挈饭一包，为金华之游。
现代文：走出祠堂，往东回到住处，把鱼交给顾仆，让他守着行李，而我和主人的儿子，让挑夫提一包饭，去游金华山。
English: I walked out of the ancestral hall, headed east back to my residence, handed the fish to my servant, and let him guard the luggage, while I and the owner's son, let the porter carry a pack of rice, and went to visit Jinhua Mountain.

古文：出西郊，天色大霁，先眺川中形势。
现代文：走出西郊，天气十分晴朗，首先眺望平川中的形势。
English: Coming out of the western suburbs, the weather is very clear. First of all, take a look at the situation in Hirakawa.

古文：盖东界即大脊南下分为湖东之山者，是为东山。
现代文：东部就是主脊往南延伸、分向剑川湖东边的山，这是东山。
English: The eastern part is the main ridge extending southward and branching off to the east of Jianchuan Lake. This is Dongshan.

古文：西界则金华山最高，北与崖场诸山，南与罗尤后岭，颉颃西峙，是为西山。
现代文：西部则金华山最高，和北边崖场的各座山，和南边罗尤背后的岭，不相上下地峙立在西部，这是西山。
English: In the west, Jinhua Mountain is the highest. It stands on the same level as the mountains in the cliff field on the north side and the ridge behind Luoyu on the south side. This is the West Mountain.

古文：其金华之脉，实西南从老君山来。
现代文：金华山脉，实际上是从西南的老君山伸来。
English: The Jinhua Mountains actually extend from Laojun Mountain in the southwest.

古文：老君山者，在州西南六十里杨村之北，其山最高，为丽江、兰州之界，出矿极盛，倍于他山者。
现代文：老君山在剑川州西南六十里的杨村北面，这座山最高，是丽江府、兰州的交界，矿产极为丰富，是其它山的两倍。
English: Laojun Mountain rises in the north of Yangcun, 60 miles southwest of Jianchuan. This mountain is the highest, and is the junction of Lijiang Prefecture and Lanzhou. It is extremely rich in minerals, twice as much as other mountains.

古文：土人言，昔亦剑川属，二十年前，土千户某姓者，受丽江贿，以甚山独畀丽红。
现代文：当地人说，这座山从前也属于剑川州，二十年前，一个不知姓什么的土千户，接受丽江府的贿赂，把这座山送给丽江府。
English: Locals said that this mountain once belonged to Jianchuan Prefecture. Twenty years ago, a local family, whose surname is unknown, accepted a bribe from Lijiang Prefecture and gave the mountain to Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：丽江以其为众山之脉，禁矿不采。
现代文：丽江府把它当作众山的命脉，禁止采矿。
English: Lijiang prefecture regards it as the lifeblood of the mountains and prohibits mining.

古文：然余按《一统志》，金华山脉自西番罗均山来，盖老君即罗均之讹，然谓之西番者，则《一统志》之讹也。
现代文：但是我查阅《一统志》，金华山脉从西番的罗均山伸来，大概老君就是罗均的误读，然而认为是从西番伸来，则是《一统志》错了。
English: However, I checked the "Historical Record" and found that the Jinhua Mountains extend from the western part of the Luo Mountains. It is probably a misreading of Luo Mountains. However, the "Historical Record" is wrong to think that they extend from the western part.

古文：其山犹在兰州之东，西番在兰州西衍沧江外，其山即非剑川属，赤丽江、兰州界内，胡以有西番之称？
现代文：金华山仍然位于兰州东边，西番则在兰州西边的澜沧江外，此山即使不属于剑川州，也是在丽江府、兰州界内，怎么会说来自西番呢？
English: Jinhua Mountain is still located in the east of Lanzhou, while Xifan is just outside the Lancang River in the west of Lanzhou. Even if this mountain does not belong to Jianchuan, it is within the boundaries of Lijiang Prefecture and Lanzhou. How can it be said to come from Xifan?

古文：然即此亦可知此山原不属剑川，土人贿畀之言，不是信也。
现代文：但从这里也能知道金华山原本就不属于剑川州，当地人所说的受贿、赠送一类话，不能够相信。
English: But from here, you can also know that Jinhua Mountain does not belong to Jianchuan originally. The local people's words of taking bribes and giving gifts cannot be believed.

古文：其北则山塍后岭，自东山北转，西亘而掉其尾。
现代文：平川北部是山膛塘后岭，从东山向北转，掉转尾端往西延伸。
English: The northern part of the Hirakawa River is the back ridge of the mountain rift, turning north from the east mountain, and extending westward at the end of the turn.

古文：其南则印鹤山，自东山南下，西顾而回其岭。
现代文：南部是印鹤山，从东山往南延伸，掉转其岭往西回旋。
English: To the south is Mount Inhe, which extends from the east to the south, turning its ridge to the west.

古文：中围平川，东西阔十里，南北长三十里，而湖汇其半。
现代文：中间围成平川，东西宽十里，南北长三十里，而湖水占掉了一半。
English: The middle is surrounded by the Hirakawa River, which is ten miles wide from east to west and thirty miles long from north to south, while the lake water accounts for half of it.

古文：湖源自西北来，向西南破峡去，而湖独衍于东南。
现代文：湖源从西北流来，向西南穿峡谷流去，而湖泊单独向东南扩展。
English: The source of the lake comes from the northwest and flows to the southwest through a canyon, while the lake itself expands to the southeast.

古文：此川中之概也。
现代文：这是平川的概貌。
English: This is a general view of Hirakawa.

古文：其地在鹤庆之西，而稍偏于南；在丽江之南，而稍偏于西；在兰州之东，而稍偏于北；在浪穹之北，而稍偏于西。
现代文：平川地处鹤庆府西，而稍微偏向南；在丽江府南，而稍微偏向西；在兰州东，而稍微偏向北；在浪弯县北，而稍微偏向西。
English: Hirakawa is located in the west of Heqing Prefecture, but slightly to the south; in the south of Lijiang Prefecture, but slightly to the west; in the east of Lanzhou, but slightly to the north; in the north of Namian County, but slightly to the west.

古文：此四境之准也。
现代文：这是平川四边的依傍。
English: This is the four sides of the Hirakawa River.

古文：州脉自金华北岭东环而下，由州治西行一里余，及其麓。
现代文：州治的山脉从金华山北岭往东绕下来，沿州治往西走一里多，到达金华山山麓。
English: The mountains of Shuzhuizhi wind down from the north ridge of Jinhua Mountain to the east, and go west along Shuzhuizhi for more than a mile to reach the foot of Jinhua Mountain.

古文：有二寺，并列而东向，俱不宏敞。
现代文：有两座寺庙，并列向东，都不宏大宽敞。
English: There are two temples, side by side to the east, both grand and spacious.

古文：寺后有亭有轩，在层崖盘磴之上，水泉飞洒，竹影桃花，罨映有致，为乡绅杨君之馆。
现代文：寺后有亭有廊，建在台阶盘绕的层崖上面，泉水飞洒，竹影桃花，掩映有致，是乡绅杨君的馆舍。
English: At the back of the temple, there is a pavilion and a gallery, built on the top of the step-coiled cliff, the spring water is flying, the bamboo shadow peach blossoms, and the reflection is impressive. It is the mansion of the squire Yang Jun.

古文：由其北蹑崖西上，有关帝庙，亦东向，而其处渐高，东俯一川甸，色湖光，及东山最高处雪痕层叠，甚为明媚。
现代文：从馆舍北登崖往西上，有关帝庙，也是向东，但位置较高，往东俯视平川中的湖光景色，以及东山最高处的层层雪迹，十分明媚。
English: From the northern pavilion, climb the cliff to the west, and the imperial temple is also to the east, but the location is higher. To the east, the lake scenery in Pingchuan, and the layers of snow at the highest point of Dongshan, are very bright.

古文：由庙后循大路又西上半里，北循坡而下，为桃花坞；南分岐而上，为万松庵；而直西大道，则西逾岭而抵莽歇岭者也。
现代文：从庙后顺大路又往西上半里，往北顺坡而下到桃花坞；从南边的岔路上去，到万松庵；而一直西去的大路，则往西越岭后抵达莽歇岭。
English: From Miao Hou Shun Road, go westward for the first half of a mile, and then go north downhill to Taohua Dock; from the south fork of the road, go to Wansong'an; and the road that goes all the way to the west, goes westward across the ridge and arrives at Meng Xie Ridge.

古文：乃随杨君导，遂从北坡下，数百步而桃花千树，深红浅晕，倏入锦绣丛中，穿其中，复西上大道，横过其南，其上即万松庵，其下为段氏墓，皆东向。
现代文：于是跟随杨君的引导从北坡下去，数百步间有近千棵桃村，满树繁花，深红的颜色放射出浅色的光环，使人觉得突然进入锦绣丛中。从桃花中穿过，又往西上大路，横穿到大路南，上面就是万松庵，下面是段氏墓，都朝东。
English: So I followed Yang Jun's guide down from the north slope. There were nearly a thousand peach trees between hundreds of steps. The trees were full of flowers. The deep red color radiated a light aura, making people feel that they had suddenly entered the beautiful bushes. I walked through the peach blossoms, went west on the main road, and crossed to the south of the main road. Above was Wansong's hermitage, and below was Duan's tomb, both facing east.

古文：段墓中悬坞中，万松高踞岭上，并桃花坞，其初皆为土官家山，墓为段氏所葬，而桃花、万松，犹其家者。
现代文：段氏墓正正地立在坞中，万松庵高高地坐落岭上，加上桃花坞，最初都是土官家的山，现今墓葬是段家的，而桃花坞、万松庵还是土官家的。
English: Duan's tomb stands squarely in the dock, Wansong's hermitage sits high up on the ridge, and together with Taohua's hermitage, they were originally the homes of local officials. Today, the tombs belong to Duan's family, while Taohua's hermitage and Wansong's hermitage are still the homes of local officials.

古文：万松昔为庵，闻今亦营为马鬣马栈，门扃英由入。
现代文：万松庵从前是庵，听说现在建造成马栈，门关着不能进去。
English: Banshoan used to be a hermitage, but it is said that it is now a stable. The door is closed and you cannot enter.

古文：遂仍从关庙侧，约一里下山。
现代文：于是仍然从关帝庙边走，大约一里下山。
English: So I still walked from the side of the Guandi Temple, about a mile down the mountain.

古文：山之北，有峡甚深，自后山环夹而出，涧流嵌其下，是为崖场。
现代文：山北面有很深的峡谷，从后山环夹而出，涧流嵌在底下，这是崖场。
English: There is a deep canyon on the north side of the mountain. It emerges from the back of the mountain ring. Turbulent flow is embedded at the bottom. This is a cliff field.

古文：两崖骈立，其口甚逼，自外遥望，不知山之中断也。
现代文：两边崖石对立，裂口处离得很近，从外面遥望，不知道山是从中断开的。
English: The cliff faces on both sides, and the crack is very close. Looking from afar, you wouldn't know the mountain had been broken off.

古文：余欲溯其流入，以急于金华，遂循山南行。
现代文：我想溯流进去，因为忙着去金华山，于是顺山往南行。
English: I wanted to go into the backwash, because I was busy going to Jinhua Mountain, so I went south along the mountain.

古文：一里余，有冈如堵墙，自西山而东亘州南，乃引水之冈也。
现代文：走一里多，有道像一堵墙一样的冈，从西山往东延伸到州南，是引水的冈。
English: After walking for more than a mile, there is a hill like a wall, stretching from the west mountain to the east to the south of the state, which is a water diversion hill.

古文：逾冈又南一里余，有道宫倚西山下，亦东向。
现代文：越过冈又往南走一里多，西山下傍靠有道宫，也是东向。
English: Cross the hill and walk south for more than a mile. At the foot of the west mountain, next to the Taoist Temple, also go east.

古文：其内左偏有何氏书馆，何乡绅之子读书其中。
现代文：道宫内左边是何氏书馆，何乡绅的儿子在书馆读书。
English: On the left side of the courtyard is the Ho's Library. The son of the Ho's squire is studying in the library.

古文：宫中焚修者，非黄冠，乃瞿昙一和尚名也。
现代文：宫中焚香设坛祭祷的，不是道士，而是和尚。
English: It is not the Taoists who burn incense and set up altars in the palace, but the monks.

古文：引余游馆中，观茶花，呼何公子出晤，而何不在，留余少憩。余急于登山，乃出。
现代文：和尚带我游书馆，观赏茶花，叫何公子出来见面，但何公子不在，留我稍作休息，我急着登山，于是出宫。
English: The monk took me on a tour of the library, to see the camellias, and asked He Gongzi to come out to meet him, but He Gongzi was not there, leaving me to rest for a while. I was in a hurry to climb the mountain, so I left the palace.

古文：从宫右折而西上坡，一里，有神庙当石坡上，为土主之宫。
现代文：沿宫右转西上坡，走一里，石坡上坐落有神庙，是土主庙。
English: Turn right along the palace to the west uphill, walk one mile, there is a temple on the stone slope, it is the local temple.

古文：余约以下山来叩。后询何以进士起家，乃名可及者，忆其以魏党削夺，后乃不往。
现代文：庙东向而前面有阁，阁后两棵古柏立在两边，虫龙般的藤子夭绕矫健，上下连络，泉水流淌，山石突立，左右错落，也是幽雅的胜地。和何公子相遇，他想拉我回书馆，而且说： 也请见一见家父。 
English: To the east of the temple, there is a pavilion in front, and two ancient cypress trees stand on both sides behind the pavilion. The dragon-like wisteria surrounds Jia Jian, and is connected up and down. The spring water flows, and the mountains and rocks jut out, staggering from side to side. It is also an elegant resort. When I met He Gongzi, he wanted to pull me back to the library, and said, "Please also meet my father."

古文：遂从庙右西上，于是崇攀仰陟，遵垂坡以登，三里，转突崖之上。
现代文：因为他的父亲喜好邀请奇人，所以他想请我去见面。我约好下山时去拜访。我从庙右往西上，于是抬着头往上攀高，顺着直坡而登，三里，转到突崖上面。
English: Because his father liked to invite strange people, he wanted to invite me to meet him. I made an appointment to visit him when I went down the mountain. I went west from the right side of the temple, so I climbed up with my head up, climbed up the straight slope, three miles, turned to the top of the cliff.

古文：其崖突兀坡右，下临深峡，峡自其上石门下坠甚深。
现代文：崖石突立在坡右，下临深峡，峡谷从突崖上面的石门坠下去，很深。
English: Cliff stones jut out on the right side of the slope, with a deep gorge below. The canyon plunges down from the stone gate above the cliff, and is very deep.

古文：从此上眺，双崖骈门，高倚峰头，其内环立罨翠，仿佛有云旌羽裳出没。
现代文：从这里往上眺望，两边的崖壁像门对立，高高地立在峰顶，门内岩石环立、翠色掩映，仿佛有云的羽旗和仙人出没。
English: Looking up from here, the cliff walls on both sides stand opposite each other like a door, high up on the peak, the rocks inside the door stand around, the emerald color hides, as if there are clouded flags and fairies.

古文：益鼓勇直上，路曲折悬陡，又一里而登门之左崖。
现代文：更加鼓足勇气直上，道路曲折陡悬，又登一里就到了像门扇一样的左崖。
English: With more courage, I went straight up, the road twists and turns steeply, and after climbing another mile, I reached the left cliff like a door.

古文：其上有小石塔，循崖西入，两崖中辟，上插云霄，而下甚平。
现代文：崖上有小石塔，沿崖往西进，两边崖壁从中辟开，上面直插云霄，而下面很平。
English: On the cliff there is a small stone tower, along the cliff to the west, on both sides of the cliff wall from which it breaks away, above it is straight into the clouds, and below it is flat.

古文：有佛宇三楹当其中，楹左右恰支两崖，而峡从其前下坠，路由左崖入，由右崖栈石壁而盘其前以登玉皇阁。
现代文：崖壁中有三间佛宇，左右的柱子恰好支撑在两边崖上，峡谷从佛宇前往下坠，道路沿左崖进去，从右崖石壁上的栈道绕向前而登玉皇阁。
English: There are three Buddha statues in the cliff wall. The right and left pillars are exactly supported on both sides of the cliff. The canyon descends from the Buddha statue, the road enters along the left cliff, and the path around the right cliff stone wall ascends to the Jade Emperor's Palace.

古文：佛宇之后，有池一方，引小水从后峡滴入，池上有飞岩嵌右崖间，一僧藉岩而栖。
现代文：佛宇之后，有个方形池塘，从后峡谷引小水进去，池边有飞岩嵌入右崖中，一个僧人傍靠飞岩居住。
English: After Foyu, there is a square pond. Small water is drawn in from the back canyon. There is a flying rock embedded in the right cliff at the edge of the pond. A monk lives next to the flying rock.

古文：当两崖夹立之底，停午不见日色，惟有空翠冷云，绸缪牖户而已。
现代文：位于两边崖壁相夹之中的底部，中午都看不见太阳，只有清澈碧蓝的天光和冷冷的云彩紧紧缠绕住石门石窗罢了。
English: Located at the bottom of the cliff between the cliffs on both sides, the sun can not be seen at noon, only the clear blue sky and cold clouds tightly wrapped around the stone door and stone window.

古文：由崖底坡坳而登内坞，有三清阁；由崖右历栈而蹑前崖，有玉虚亭，咫尺有幽旷之异。
现代文：沿崖底坡坳登内坞，有三清阁；从右岩踩着栈道攀登前崖，有玉虚亭，咫尺之间有幽深旷远的异趣。
English: Climbing along the cliff bottom slope to the inner dock, there are three clear pavilions; from the right rock to climb the cliff, there is a jade pavilion, and there is a deep and distant charm between the steps.

古文：余乃先其旷者，遂蹑栈盘右崖之前。
现代文：我于是先登旷远处，就踩着栈道绕到右崖前。
English: So I climbed up to the farthest point first, and walked around the path to the right before the cliff.

古文：栈高悬数丈，上下皆绝壁，端耸云外，脚插峡底，栈架空而横倚之。
现代文：栈道悬在数丈高的空中，上下都是绝壁，头上耸入云天，脚下直插峡底，栈道架在空中而横靠绝壁。
English: The boardwalk hangs in the air several feet high, with cliffs above and below, soaring into the clouds above, with the bottom of the canyon directly below, and the boardwalk is suspended in the air while leaning against the cliff.

古文：东度前崖，乃盘南崖，西转北上而凌其端，即峡门右崖之绝顶也。
现代文：往东越过前崖，于是盘绕南崖，往西转北上，然后登凌崖端，就是峡口右崖的绝顶。
English: Go east over the front cliff, then wind around the south cliff, turn north to the west, and then climb the edge of the cliff, which is the top of the right cliff at the mouth of the gorge.

古文：东向高悬，三面峭削，凌空无倚。
现代文：崖端向东高悬，三面峭削，凌空无靠。
English: The cliff edge hangs high to the east, craggy on three sides, and there is no reliable airflow.

古文：前俯平川，烟波村树，历历如画幅倒铺。
现代文：往前俯视平川，云雾笼罩湖面，村舍树影，历历在目，如同画卷倒铺。
English: Looking down the Hirakawa River ahead, clouds and fog shroud the lake surface, and the shadows of the village houses and trees are clearly visible, like a picture scroll turned upside down.

古文：后眺内峡，环碧中回，如蓉城蕊阙，互相掩映，窈蔼莫测。
现代文：往后眺望内峡谷，岩石环绕、翠色回旋，如同芙蓉城而花蕊为门阀，互相掩映，深远莫测。
English: Looking back at the inner canyon, surrounded by rocks, emerald swirls, like a hibiscus city and the stamens are the gate valves, hiding each other, unfathomable.

古文：峰头止容一阁，奉玉宸于上。
现代文：峰头上只容得下一座阁，阁中供奉着玉皇大帝神像。
English: At the top of the peak, there is only room for one pavilion, in which the statue of the Jade Emperor is enshrined.

古文：余凭揽久之，四顾无路，将由前道下栈，忽有一僧至，曰： 此间有小径，可入内峡，不必下行。 
现代文：我登高揽秀了很久，环顾四周没有路，准备由先前的路下到栈道，忽然有个僧人到来，说： 这里有小路，可以进入内峡谷，不必往下走。 
English: After I had been climbing for a long time, I looked around and saw that there was no path, so I prepared to descend to the path from the previous path. Suddenly, a monk arrived and said, "There is a path here, you can enter the inner canyon, you don't have to go down.

古文：余随之，从阁左危崖之端，挨空翻侧，践崖纹一线，盘之西入，下瞰即飞栈之上也，半里而抵内峡之中。
现代文：我跟随他走，从玉皇阁左的陡崖端，沿侧边挨空翻越，踩着崖上的一条线缝，绕崖往西进去，往下俯瞰就是凌空的栈道上面，走半里就到了内峡谷中。
English: I followed him. From the steep cliff edge to the left of the Jade Emperor's Palace, I climbed along the side of the cliff, stepped on a seam on the cliff, went around the cliff to the west, and looked down at the top of the cliff walkway. Half a mile later, I was in the inner canyon.

古文：峡中危峰内簇，瓣分蒂绾，中空如莲房。
现代文：峡谷中陡峰向内簇拥，如花瓣分开、花蒂连结，中间空如莲花房。
English: Steep peaks in the canyon cluster inwards, like petals separated, flower petals connected, and the space in between is like a lotus house.

古文：有圆峰独穹于后，当峡中峙，两旁俱有峰攒合，界为两峡，合于中峰前。
现代文：有座圆峰单独弯隆在后面，位于峡谷正中峙立，两旁都有山峰攒合，分为两道峡谷，在中峰前合拢。
English: A rounded peak stands alone in the back, in the middle of the canyon. There are peaks on both sides, which are divided into two canyons and close in front of the middle peak.

古文：旁峰外缀连冈，自后脊臂抱而前，合成崖门，对距止成线峡。
现代文：旁边的山峰往外和冈连接，从后脊绕臂向前，会合成崖门，两门相对的距离只有一线峡谷。
English: The peak next to it connects outward with the hill, and from the back ridge around the arm forward, it will form a cliff gate. The distance between the two doors is only a line of canyon.

古文：峡外围中簇，此亦洞天之绝胜矣。
现代文：外部环围中间簇拥，这也是另一种绝妙佳境啊。
English: The outer ring is crowded in the middle, which is another wonderful scene.

古文：冈上小峰，共有五顶，土人谓上按五行，有金木水火土之辨。
现代文：冈上的小峰共有五座，当地人按五行称呼，分为金、木、水、火、土之峰。
English: There are a total of five small peaks on the hill. The locals call them according to the five elements, which are divided into gold, wood, water, fire and earth peaks.

古文：此亦过求之论，即不藉五行，亦岂输三岛哉？
现代文：这也是过于苛求的言论，即使不凭借五行，难道会比不上东海的三神山吗？
English: This is also an overly demanding statement. Even without the Five Elements, wouldn't it be comparable to Mount Mikami in the East China Sea?

古文：中峰前结阁，奉三清，前有古柏一株颇巨，当两峡中合之上。
现代文：中峰前建盖阁，供奉元始天尊、灵宝天尊和太上老君，阁前有一棵十分巨大的古柏，位于两旁崖壁会合的正中之上。
English: A covered pavilion was built in front of the middle peak to enshrine the Genji Tenson, the Lingbao Tenson and the Mother Superior Laojun. In front of the pavilion, there is a very large ancient cypress tree, located in the middle of the cliff walls on both sides.

古文：余欲上蹑中峰，见阁后路甚仄，陟左峡而上，有路前蹈峡门左崖之顶，乃陟峡而北蹑之。
现代文：我想往上攀中峰，看见阁后的路很陡，穿左峡而上，有路往前通到峡口左崖门顶上，于是穿峡谷往北攀登。
English: I wanted to climb up the middle peak. I saw that the road behind the pavilion was very steep, going up through the left canyon. There was a road leading to the top of the left cliff gate at the mouth of the canyon, so I climbed north through the canyon.

古文：东出西转，有塔峙坡间，路至此绝。
现代文：从东出去往西转，坡间峙立着塔，路到这里断了。
English: Go out from the east and turn to the west, there is a tower standing between the slopes, the road is broken here.

古文：余犹攀巉践削，久之不得路，而杨氏之子与担夫俱在下遥呼，乃返。
现代文：我还是攀爬悬崖峭壁，很久没有找到路，而杨贡士的儿子和挑夫都在下面远处呼唤，于是返回。
English: I continued to climb the steep cliff and did not find the way for a long time, while Yang Gongshi's son and the porter were calling from far below, so I returned.

古文：从内峡三清阁前下坠峡底，共一里而至峡门内方池上，就岩穴僧栖，敲火沸泉，以所携饭投而共啖之。
现代文：顺内峡谷三清阁前往下坠到峡底，共走一里就到峡门内的方池边，就着僧人住的岩洞，点火烧泉水，把所带的饭放进去煮了一起分着吃。
English: Shunnai Gorge Sanqing Pavilion to go down to the bottom of the canyon, walk one mile to the side of the square pond inside the canyon gate, go to the cave where the monks live, light the fire to boil the spring water, put the rice you brought in and cook it together to eat separately.

古文：乃与僧同出峡门，循左崖东行。
现代文：于是和僧人一同出峡门，顺左崖往东行。
English: So I went out of the gorge gate with the monks and walked along the left cliff to the east.

古文：僧指右峡壁间突崖之下，石裂而成峡，下临绝壑，中嵌巉崖，其内直逼山后莽歇，峡中从来皆虎豹盘踞，无敢入者。
现代文：僧人指点右峡壁间的突崖下面，石头裂成峡谷，下临绝壑，中间嵌有高峻险要的岩石，往里走直通山后的莽歇岭，峡谷中从来都被虎豹盘踞，没有人敢进去。
English: The monk pointed to the bottom of the cliff between the walls of the right canyon, the stone split into a canyon, next to the cliff, the middle is embedded with high and dangerous rocks, go straight into the mountain after the mountain, the canyon has never been occupied by tigers and leopards, no one dares to enter.

古文：余欲南向悬崖下，僧曰： 既无路而有虎，君何苦必欲以身试也。
现代文：我想往南从悬崖下去，僧人说： 既没有路而又有虎，您何苦一定要亲自试呢。
English: I want to go south from the cliff, the monk said: There is no road and there is a tiger, why do you have to try it yourself.

古文：且外阻危崖，内无火炬，即不遇虎，亦不能入。 
现代文：而且外面有陡崖阻隔，里面没有火把，即使没遇上虎，也不能进去。 
English: Moreover, there is a steep cliff outside, and there are no torches inside. Even if you don't encounter a tiger, you can't enter.

古文：杨氏子谓： 急下山，犹可觅罗尤温泉，此不测区，必不能从也。 
现代文：杨贡士的儿子说： 赶快下山，还可以去看罗尤温泉，这种不能预测安全的地方，一定不能去。 
English: Yang Gongshi's son said: "Hurry down the mountain, you can also go to see Luoyu Hot Spring, this kind of unpredictable safe place, you must not go.

古文：乃随之东北下山。
现代文：于是随他们往东北下山。
English: So they followed them down the mountain to the northeast.

古文：一里，路分两岐：一循山北下，为入州便道；一直东随坡下，即来时道。
现代文：走一里，道路分两岔：一条沿山往北下，是进州治的便道；一条直东顺坡下，就是来时走的路。
English: If you walk for one mile, the road will be divided into two parts: one goes along the mountain to the north, which is the way to enter the state; one goes straight east downhill, which is the way to come.

古文：僧乃别从北去，余仍东下。
现代文：僧人于是告别往北去，我仍然往东下。
English: The monk then said goodbye and headed north, while I continued to head east.

古文：是为天王石。又下一里，至土主庙南，乃逾涧南上坡，循西山之东，逾坡度坞，南向而行。
现代文：走一里，路左边有块巨石，在坡上向东峙立，往下俯瞰土主庙后，巨石有三丈高，东面削平，上面刻着三大天王像，中天王的像更大，上齐石顶，下踏崖脚，手中托着一座塔，左右二天王像稍稍矮一点，这是天王石。又下一里，到土主庙南，于是越过沟涧往南上坡，顺西山东顶，越坡穿坞，向南行。
English: After walking for one mile, there is a boulder on the left side of the road. It stands on the slope facing east. After looking down at the local temple, the boulder is three stories high, the east side is flattened, the top is engraved with three heavenly king statues, the middle heavenly king statue is larger, the top of the rock is aligned, the foot of the cliff is stepped down, a tower is supported in the hand, and the two heavenly king statues are slightly shorter. This is the heavenly king stone. Another mile, to the south of the local temple, then cross the gully to the south uphill, go along the east peak of the west mountain, cross the slope

古文：村之倚坡临川者，篱舍屈曲，竹树扶疏树木高大茂盛，缀以夭桃素李，光景甚异，三里余而得一巨村，则金华之峰，至是南尽。
现代文：靠坡临川的村庄，篱笆房舍曲折，竹木高大茂盛，有妖艳的桃花，素雅的李花点缀，风光景色十分奇异，走三里多就到一个大村庄，金华山延伸到这里为南部尽头处。
English: Villages on the slope of the river, houses with twisted hedges, tall and luxuriant bamboo trees, dazzling peach blossoms, elegant plum blossoms, the scenery is very strange, it takes more than three miles to reach a large village, and Jinhua Mountain extends to the southern end here.

古文：又下为盘岭，回亘南去，兰州之道，由是而西逾之，从杨村而达焉。
现代文：又下去是盘绕的山岭，迂回绵延往南伸去，兰州的路从这里往西越过去，顺杨村走就到了。
English: Further down is the winding mountain ridge, winding and stretching to the south. Lanzhou Road crosses from here to the west, and you will reach Yangcun along the way.

古文：由村南东盘东突之嘴，共里余，南转而得罗尤邑，亦百家之聚也。
现代文：沿村南往东盘绕向东突出的山口走，一共一里多，往南转就到达罗尤邑，也是百户人家的聚居地。
English: Walking along the south of the village to the east, winding around the mountain pass that protrudes to the east, there is a total of more than one mile. Turning south, you will reach Luoyou, which is also a settlement of hundreds of households.

古文：其处有温泉，在村洼中出，每冬月则沸流如注，人争浴之，而春至则涸成污池焉。水止而不流，亦不热矣。
现代文：这里有温泉，从村中的洼地涌出，每年冬月沸腾的水流如注，人们争着去沐浴，而春天时则干涸成污水池，水静止而不流动，也不热。
English: There are hot springs here, gushing out of the depressions in the village. Every winter and month, the boiling water flows like a torrent, people compete to take a bath, and in the spring it dries up into a cesspool. The water is still and does not flow, nor is it hot.

古文：有二池，一在路旁，一在环堵之内，今观之，与行潦积水无异。
现代文：温泉有两个池，一个在路边，一个在围墙内，现在看到的，和积水的洼坑没有两样。
English: The hot spring has two pools, one on the roadside and one inside the enclosure, and what you see now is no different from a puddle of stagnant water.

古文：土人言，其水与兰州温泉彼此互出，溢于此则彼涸，溢于彼则此涸。
现代文：当地人说，这水和兰州温泉彼此互通，从这里溢出则那里干涸，从那里溢出则这里干涸。
English: Locals say that this water and Lanzhou Hot Spring are interconnected. If it overflows here, it will dry up there, and if it overflows there, it will dry up here.

古文：大意东出者在秋冬，西出者在春夏，其中间隔重峦绝箐，相距八十里，而往来有时，更代不爽，此又一异也。
现代文：大致秋冬季往东流出，春夏季往西边流出，东西之间隔着重峦绝氰相距八十里，而泉水往来有时令，东西替换而不违背时令，这又是一桩奇闻异事。
English: Generally, in autumn and winter, the water flows to the east, and in spring and summer, it flows to the west. The distance between east and west is eighty miles, and the spring water comes and goes at certain times, and things are replaced without violating the seasons. This is another strange story.

古文：村中有流泉自西峡出，人争引以灌，与温泉不相涉。
现代文：村中有泉水从西峡谷流出，人们争着引泉水灌溉，和温泉不相关。
English: There is a spring in the village that flows out of the West Canyon, and people compete to draw spring water for irrigation, which has nothing to do with the hot springs.

古文：其上有石龙寺，以晚不及探，遂由大道北返。
现代文：温泉上面有石龙寺，因天晚来不及探访，于是沿大路往北回去。
English: There is a stone dragon temple above the hot spring, but since it was too late to visit, I went back north along the main road.

古文：四里，北越一桥，桥北有居庐，为水寨村。
现代文：四里，往北过一座桥，桥北有民房，名水寨村。
English: Four miles to the north across a bridge, north of the bridge there are houses, famous water village.

古文：从村北折而西，望金华山石门之峡，高悬双阙，如天门夐峙。
现代文：从村北转向西，眺望金华山的石门峡谷，网门高悬在两边，如同天门远远地耸立。
English: From the north of the village to the west, overlooking the stone gate canyon of Jinhua Mountain, the net door hangs high on both sides, like a heavenly gate towering in the distance.

古文：又二里，北抵州治，入南街，又里余而返寓。
现代文：又走二里，往北到达州治，进入南街，又走一里多回到住所。
English: He walked another two miles north to Shuzhuzhi, entered Nanjie Street, and walked another mile to return to his residence.

古文：十五日余欲启行，闻杨君乔梓言莽歇岭为一州胜处，乃复为一日停。
现代文：十五日我准备启程，听杨君父子说，莽歇岭是剑川州的名胜处，于是又决定停留一日。
English: On the 15th, I was getting ready to leave, and I heard Yang Jun and his son say that Mengjie Ridge is a scenic spot in Jianchuan, so I decided to stay for another day.

古文：命担者裹饭从游，先从崖场入。
现代文：命令挑夫带着饭随同游览，先从崖场进去。
English: He ordered the porter to take the meal with him on the tour and enter the cliff first.

古文：崖场者，在金华北峰之下，有涧破重壁而东出，剖层峰为二，其内皆云舂水碓，极幽寂之致。
现代文：崖场在金华山北峰下面，有沟涧穿破重重崖壁而往东伸出，将层层山峰一剖为二，其内全是云雾冲撞、水流涌积，极尽幽静的景致。
English: The cliff area is below the northern peak of Jinhua Mountain. A gully protrudes eastward through the broken cliff wall, cutting the layered mountain peaks into two. Within it all is cloud and fog colliding, water gushing, and an extremely tranquil landscape.

古文：莽歇此为地名正道，当从南崖上；余意披峡而西，由峡底觅道上，更可兼尽，遂溯流入。
现代文：去莽歇岭的正路，应当从南崖上；我想往西穿峡谷，从峡谷底寻路上去，更能兼得穷尽山水，于是溯流而入。
English: The best way to get to Mengjiaoling is from the south cliff; I want to go west through the canyon and find the road from the bottom of the canyon, and I can also exhaust the landscape, so I go downstream.

古文：始缘涧北，不得入。
现代文：开始沿沟涧北面走，不能进去。
English: Start walking along the north side of the ravine, you can't go inside.

古文：仍渡涧南西入，南崖之上，即昨桃花迷坞处，而此当其下嵌。
现代文：便到沟涧南面往西进，南崖上面，就是昨天桃花迷乱的山坞之处，而这里正处在桃花坞下面的凹地。
English: Then I went westward to the south of the gully. Above the south cliff is the place of the dock where the peach blossoms were bewildered yesterday, and here is the depression below the peach blossom dock.

古文：矫首两崖逼霄，但谓涧底流泉，别有天地，不复知峰头春色，更占人间也。
现代文：抬头看两边崖石直逼云霄，便只认为涧底流水，另有一番天地，不再知道峰顶的春色，更占有人间美景。
English: Looking up at the cliffs and rocks on both sides of the sky, they only think that there is flowing water at the bottom of the mountain, and there is another world, no longer knowing the spring color of the peak, but also accounting for the beauty of the world.

古文：曲折三里，只容一溪宛转，乱舂互答。
现代文：曲曲折折走了三里，涧中只容得下一股溪水流转，横冲直撞、交错相应。
English: After three miles of twists and turns, there was only room in the raft for the next stream of water to flow around, rampage and stagger accordingly.

古文：既而峰回峡转，前岭西亘，夹涧北来，中壑稍开，环崖愈嵌，路亦转北，而回眺西南岭头，当是莽歇所在，不应北入。
现代文：不久峰回峡转，前面的山岭向西绵延，狭窄的沟涧从北伸来，壑谷中部逐渐开阔，环绕的崖壁更加凹嵌，道路也转北走，但回头眺望西南边的岭头，应是莽歇岭所在之处，不应当往北走。
English: Soon the peak turns back to the canyon, the mountain range in front stretches westward, the narrow gully extends from the north, the middle of the valley gradually opens, the surrounding cliff walls are more inlaid, and the road turns north, but looking back at the ridge head in the southwest, it should be where the Mengjie Ridge is located, and it should not go north.

古文：适有樵者至，执而问之，曰： 此涧西北从后山来。
现代文：适逢有砍柴人来，拉着询问，砍柴人说： 这沟涧从西北后山伸来。
English: At the right time, a woodcutter came and asked about it. The woodcutter said, "This ravine extends from the northwest back mountain.

古文：莽歇之道，当从西亘之岭，南向蹑其脊，可得正道。 
现代文：去莽歇岭的路，应当顺往西绵延的岭走，往南翻越岭脊，可以走上正路。 
English: On the way to Mangxie Ridge, you should walk along the ridge stretching to the west, and climb over the ridge to the south, and you can take the right road.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从他的话。
English: I listened to him.

古文：遂缘西亘岭西南跻之，虽无路径，方位已不出吾目中。
现代文：就沿往西绵延的山岭向西南攀登，虽然没有路，但方位已经收入眼中。
English: Climbing southwest along the mountains stretching westward, although there is no road, the direction has been taken into account.

古文：一里余，遂南蹑其北突之脊，东来之路，亦逾此转南矣，遂从之。
现代文：走一里多，就往南攀登那向北突起的岭脊，东边伸来的路，也越过此脊转南了，于是顺路走。
English: After walking for more than a mile, I went south to climb the ridge that jutted out to the north. The road that stretched out to the east also crossed this ridge and turned south, so I followed the road.

古文：此峰自金华山北向横突，从此下坠，前尽于崖场峡口，后尽于所逾之脊。
现代文：此峰从金华山向北横耸，从这里下坠，前面到崖场峡谷口结束，后面到所越过的岭脊结束。
English: This peak rises from the Jinhua Mountain to the north, and falls down from here, ending at the entrance to the cliff canyon in front, and at the end of the ridge behind.

古文：其西又有山一支，亦自南北向横突金华山之后，而为北下之峡。
现代文：其西又有一支山脉，也是从南向北横耸在金华山后，从而形成往北延伸的峡谷。
English: To the west, there is another mountain range, which also towers from south to north behind Mount Jinhua, thus forming a canyon extending to the north.

古文：盖二山俱从西南老君山来，分支并驰，中夹成箐，石崖盘错，即所谓莽歇岭也。
现代文：原来两座山都从西南边的老君山伸来，分支并驰，中间夹成著，石崖盘绕错落，就是所说的莽歇岭。
English: Originally, the two mountains extended from Laojun Mountain in the southwest, with branches running side by side, sandwiched in the middle, and stone cliffs winding and falling at different times, which is the so-called Mengjie Ridge.

古文：于是循金华山之西南向二里，又渐下者半里，而抵箐中，其箐南来，东崖即金华北岭之后，西崖是为莽歇，皆纯石危亘，骈峡相对，而路当其下。
现代文：于是沿金华山的西南面走二里，又逐渐下半里，就到达著中，著从南边伸来，东崖就是金华山北岭后面，西崖就是莽歇岭，两边都是陡峭的石峰横贯，并列相对，而道路在崖下。
English: So I walked two miles along the southwest face of Jinhua Mountain, and gradually walked the second half of the mile, reaching the middle, stretching from the south side. The east cliff is behind the north ridge of Jinhua Mountain, and the west cliff is Mengjie Ridge. Steep stone peaks run across both sides, side by side, and the road is under the cliff.

古文：先有一崖，北向横障箐中，下嵌成屋，悬覆二丈余，而东北一石下垂，如象鼻柱地，路南向无隙。
现代文：先有一座崖石，向北横阻在著中，下面凹嵌进去形成石屋，顶盖悬空二丈多高，而东北垂下一块石头，如同象鼻拄地，往南没有缝隙过路。
English: First, there is a cliff stone, northwards and horizontally in the middle, below inlaid to form a stone house, the roof is suspended two feet high, and a stone hangs down in the northeast, like an elephant's trunk, and there is no gap to the south.

古文：从象鼻卷中，傍东崖上透，遂历覆崖之上，望东西两崖，俱有石庋壁覆云，而西崖尤为突兀，上露两亭，因西向蹑危登之。
现代文：顺象鼻卷中，傍靠东崖往上穿，于是穿到覆盖石屋的崖石上面，眺望东西两边的崖壁，都有石块架壁，云彩覆盖，而西崖尤其突出，上面露出两座亭，于是往西向陡崖攀登。
English: In the course of the elephant's trunk roll, he climbed up the side of the east cliff, and then climbed to the top of the cliff stone covering the stone house. Looking at the cliff walls on both sides of the east and west, there are stone walls, covered with clouds, and the west cliff is particularly prominent, with two pavilions exposed above, so he climbed westward to the steep cliff.

古文：其亭皆东向，倚崖缀壁，浮嵌欹仄，而南列者较大，位佛像于中。
现代文：两座亭都向东，靠崖连壁，嵌空倾斜，靠南坐落的亭较大，中间有佛像位置。
English: Both pavilions face east, clinging to the cliff and leaning into the void. The pavilion facing south is larger, with a Buddha statue in the middle.

古文：左壁有泉自石罅出，下涵小池而不溢。
现代文：左壁有泉水从石缝中流出，往下流入小池而不溢出去。
English: On the left wall, there is a spring water that flows out of a stone crack and flows down into a small pond without overflowing.

古文：北亭就嵌崖通路，摭虚而过，得片石冒亭其上，三面悬削，其路遂绝。
现代文：北亭靠着凹嵌的崖壁和路连通，从空亭中穿过，看到一片石块冒出亭上，三面悬空陡削，道路中断。
English: The north pavilion is connected to the road by the inlaid cliff wall. Passing through the empty pavilion, you can see a piece of stone emerging from the pavilion. The sky is steep on three sides, and the road is interrupted.

古文：此反北凌箐口，高出象鼻覆崖之上矣，凭眺久之，闻木鱼声甚亮，而崖回石障，不知其处。
现代文：这里反而往北逼迫警口，高出象鼻、覆崖之上了。登高眺望了很久，听到敲木鱼的声音很响亮，但崖壁迁回，石块阻隔，不知道声音来自何处。
English: Here, on the contrary, they forced the police to the north, higher than the elephant's trunk, on top of the cliff. They climbed up and looked for a long time, and heard the loud sound of the wood fish, but the cliff wall moved back, the stones blocked, and they did not know where the sound came from.

古文：复东下箐底，溯细统北入，则西崖转嘴削骨，霞崩嶂压，其势弥异。
现代文：又往东下到警底，溯小水往北进，只见西崖环转变化，石壁陡峭，如云霞倒塌，屏障下压，形势更加奇异。
English: Further east to Police Bottom, tracing small water to the north, we can only see the changes in the circulation of the west cliff, the stone wall is steep, such as the collapse of clouds, the barrier is under pressure, and the situation is even more bizarre.

古文：半里，矫首上眺，或下嵌上突，或中刳旁裂，或层堆，或直劈，各极骞腾。
现代文：半里，抬头往上眺望，崖壁或是下嵌上耸，或是中剖旁裂，或是层层堆积，或是陡直如劈，各自极尽飞升之势。
English: Half a mile away, looking up, the cliff wall is either embedded in the bottom, or split in the middle, or piled up layer by layer, or as steep as a cliff, each with the potential to soar.

古文：有书其上为 天作高山 者，其字甚大，而悬穹亦甚高，或云以篾箩藤索，从峰顶倒挂而书者。
现代文：崖壁上写着 天作高山 ，字很大，而悬崖绝壁弯隆得很高，有人说字是用蔑箩藤索从峰顶上倒挂下去书写成的。
English: On the cliff wall is written "天作高山" (天作高山), the characters are very large, and the cliff face is very high. Some people say that the characters were written by hanging upside down from the top of the peak.

古文：西崖有白衣大士，东崖有胡僧达摩，皆摩空粘壁而成，非似人迹所到也。
现代文：西崖有观音菩萨，东崖有胡僧达摩，都是凌空粘壁而成，不像是人迹所到之处。
English: The west cliff has Guanyin Bodhisattva and the east cliff has the monk Damo, both of which are made of flying sticky walls and do not look like places visited by people.

古文：更南半里，有玉皇阁当箐中。
现代文：再往南走半里，玉皇阁位于著中。
English: Half a mile further south, the Jade Emperor Pavilion is located in the middle of the lake.

古文：由此攀西崖，捱石磴，有僧嵌一阁于崖隙。
现代文：从这里攀登西崖，紧靠石阶，有个僧人在崖缝中嵌入一座阁。阁也是东向。
English: From here, climb the west cliff, close to the stone steps, there is a monk embedded in the cliff crevice a pavilion. The pavilion is also eastward.

古文：其阁亦东向。其崖上下陡绝，中嵌横纹，而阁倚之。
现代文：崖石上下都极其陡峻，中部嵌有横缝，而阁傍靠在崖缝中。
English: The cliff is extremely steep both up and down, with a transverse gap in the middle and the pavilion leaning against the gap.

古文：挨横纹而北，又覆一亭，中供巨佛，倚壁而立，以崖逼不容青莲座也。
现代文：顺横缝往北，又盖有一座亭，亭中供有巨佛，靠壁而立，因为崖石逼仄容不下青莲座。
English: There is also a pavilion to the north along the horizontal seam. In the pavilion, there is a giant Buddha, standing against the wall, because the cliff is too narrow to accommodate the Blue Lotus.

古文：其北横纹迸绝矣。
现代文：往北横缝也断绝了。
English: The north-facing diaphragm was also severed.

古文：前闻鲸声遥递传递，即引阁僧。
现代文：先前听到远方传送的木鱼声，就是这阁中的僧人所敲。
English: It was the monks in this pavilion who had previously heard the distant call of the carp.

古文：其师为南都人，茹淡辟幽吃的清淡而身处幽深之处，栖此有年，昨以禅诵赴崖场，而守庐者乃其徒也，留余待之。
现代文：僧人的师傅是南京人，吃素开辟幽境，住在这里很多年了，昨天因禅诵而到崖场去了，守屋的是他的徒弟，徒弟留我等候法师。
English: The monk's master is from Nanjing. He is a vegetarian and has lived here for many years. Yesterday, he went to the cliff to meditate. His apprentice is the keeper of the house. The apprentice left me to wait for the master.

古文：余爱其幽险，为憩阁中作记者半日。
现代文：我喜爱这里的幽静险要，就在阁中休息半天，写日记。
English: I like the seclusion here, I like to rest for half a day in the pavilion and write in my diary.

古文：僧为具餐。
现代文：僧人为我准备午餐。
English: The monk prepared lunch for me.

古文：下午而师不至。
现代文：下午法师都没回来。
English: The sorcerer did not return in the afternoon.

古文：盖东崖至是匪石而土。但峭削之极，直列如屏，其上为难。 余时已神往，即仍下玉皇阁，遂东向攀岭上。
现代文：我间僧人： 这里有没有路通到金华山？  僧人说： 金华山还在东南，隔着一重大山，著中没有路上去。往东直登东崖，就往南越过崖顶后往东下。东崖到那里不是石峰而是土山了，只是极其陡峭，直列如屏障，很难上去。 此时我已经神往，就仍然下到玉皇阁，于是向东攀岭而上。
English: The monk said, "Jinhua Mountain is still in the southeast, separated by a large mountain, and there is no road to go there. If you go straight to the east and climb the East Cliff, you will go south over the cliff top and then go east. When you get to the East Cliff, it is not a stone peak but a dirt mountain, but it is extremely steep, in a straight line like a barrier, and it is difficult to go up. At this time, I was already fascinated, so I still went down to the Jade Emperor's Palace, and then climbed up the mountain to the east.

古文：时有游人在玉皇阁者，交呼： 此处险极难阶！ 余不顾，愈上愈峻。
现代文：当时在玉皇阁的游人交相呼叫： 那里极其危险、难以攀登 我不理会，越上越陡。
English: At that time, visitors at the Jade Emperor's Palace called out to each other: "It's extremely dangerous there, it's difficult to climb. I don't care, the higher you go, the steeper it gets."

古文：二里，有路缘峰腰自南而北，担者欲从北去，余强之南。
现代文：上了二里，有路沿峰腰从南向北伸，挑夫想往北去，我强命他往南走。
English: After two miles, there was a road stretching from south to north along the ridge of the peak. The porter wanted to go north, but I ordered him to go south.

古文：半里，此路乃东通后岭，非东南逾顶者，乃复东向蹑峻。担者屡后，呼之不至，余不复待，竭蹶上跻，一里余而东逾其脊。
现代文：半里，这条路往东通到后岭，不是往东南翻越崖顶，于是又向东攀登险峻的山，挑夫常常落后，呼唤而不赶上来，我不再等，竭尽全力往上攀，一里多就往东越过顶脊。
English: Half a mile to the east, this road leads to the back ridge. Instead of climbing over the cliff to the southeast, I climbed the steep mountain to the east. The porter often lagged behind, calling but not catching up. I did not wait any longer, I did my best to climb up, and more than a mile to the east I crossed the top ridge.

古文：从脊上俯视，见州治在川东北矣，乃即从脊南趋。
现代文：从脊上俯视，看到州治位于平川东北，于是顺脊往南急行。
English: Looking down from the ridge, I saw that Shuzhi was located in the northeast of Hirakawa, so I took the South Express along the ridge.

古文：半里，又东南蹑峻上，一里，始凌金华山顶。
现代文：半里，又向东南攀登险峻而上，一里，就登上金华山顶。
English: After half a mile, they climbed steeply to the southeast, and after one mile, they reached the top of Jinhua Mountain.

古文：于是北眺丽江，西眺兰州，东眺鹤庆，南眺大理，虽嵌重峰之下，不能辨其城郭人民；而西之老君，北之大脊，东之大脊分支处，南之印鹤横环处，雪痕云派，无不历历献形，正如天际真人，下辨九州，俱如一黍也。
现代文：于是往北眺望丽江府，往西眺望兰州，往东眺望鹤庆府，往南眺望大理府，虽然都处在重重峰峦之下，分辨不清城郭人民；但西边的老君山，北边的大山，东边大山分支处，南边印鹤山横绕处，雪迹山脉，无不历历在目，正像天边的仙人，辨别天下九州，都像一粒黍子。
English: So I looked north to Lijiang Prefecture, west to Lanzhou, east to Heqing Prefecture, and south to Dali Prefecture. Although they were all under the heavy peaks and ridges, it was hard to distinguish the people in the city; but Laojun Mountain in the west, Dashan Mountain in the north, Dashan Branch in the east, Inhe Mountain in the south, and the snow-covered mountains were all visible, just like the immortals in the sky. To distinguish Kyushu from the world, they were all like a grain of mustard seed.

古文：复从顶脊南行，脊上已有路，直前一里，渐西转向老君，余知乃杨庄道，乃转而北瞰东向之路，得一线垂箐下，遂从之。
现代文：又顺顶脊往南行，脊上已经有路，一直往前走一里，渐渐往西转，通往老君山，我知道是去杨庄的路，于是转北俯瞰向东去的路，看到一条小路垂下著中，就从小路走。
English: I also went south along the top ridge. There was already a road on the ridge. I kept walking for one mile and gradually turned west to Laojun Mountain. I knew it was the road to Yangzhuang, so I turned north to overlook the road to the east. When I saw a small road hanging in the middle, I walked from the small road.

古文：下里余，路穷箐密，倾崖倒坎，欹仄蒙翳，下嵌莫测，乃攀枝横跌，跌一重复更一枝，幸枝稠箐密，不知倒空之险。如是一里，如蹈碧海，茫无涯际。
现代文：走一里多，路断著窄，倾崖倒坎，仄斜蒙蔽，下嵌莫测。于是攀援树枝横跌，跌一段又换一树枝，幸好树枝稠密、警沟狭窄，不觉得倒腾空中危险，像这样走了一里，如踩在绿色的海洋中，茫无边际。
English: After walking for more than a mile, the road was narrow, the cliff was steep, the slope was blinding, and the bottom was unpredictable. Therefore, the climbing support branches fell sideways, and the falling section was replaced by another branch. Fortunately, the branches were dense, the guardrail was narrow, and I did not feel the danger of flying in the air. I walked for a mile like this, as if I stepped on the green ocean, boundless.

古文：既而审视，忽见一塔下涌，虽隔悬重箐，而方隅在目，知去石门，不在弱水外矣。
现代文：不久之后仔细看，忽然看到下面现出一座塔，虽然悬隔着重重沟臀，但边境四隘都看得到，知道距离石门，不会在三千丈弱水之外了。
English: After a short while, I looked carefully and suddenly saw a tower appear below. Although it was separated by a heavy ditch, I could see all four sides of the border. I knew that it was not more than three thousand meters away from the stone gate.

古文：益用攀坠之法。
现代文：再用攀坠法下。
English: Then use the climbing method to climb down.

古文：又一里，有线径伏箐间，随之亟行。
现代文：又下了一里，有条线一样的小路隐藏在警中，急忙顺小路走。
English: After another mile, there was a small path with a similar line hidden by the police. I hurriedly walked along the path.

古文：半里，得中洼之峡，又半里，出三清阁之后，即昨来审视而难从者。
现代文：半里，到中洼的峡谷，又半里，走出三清阁后，就是昨天审视过而难以顺着走的地方。
English: Half a mile, to the canyon of Zhongwaha, and another half a mile, after walking out of Sanqing Pavilion, is the place that was examined yesterday and is difficult to follow.

古文：于是下峡门，过昨所饭处，皆阒无一人。
现代文：于是下到峡谷口，经过昨天吃饭的地方，都空无一人。
English: So I went down to the mouth of the canyon, past the place where we ate yesterday, and there was no one there.

古文：乃前趋过昨所望虎穴之上，此直康衢，非险道矣。
现代文：就往前快步走过昨天所观望的虎穴上面，从这里一直是大路，没有险道了。
English: I went ahead and walked briskly over the tiger's den that I watched yesterday. From here, it has always been a highway, and there are no dangerous roads.

古文：乃从北道循西山北向下，五里而返寓，则担夫犹未归也。
现代文：就顺北路沿西山向北下，五里后回到住所，而挑夫还没回来。
English: He followed the north road along the west mountain to the north, and returned to the residence after five miles, but the driver had not returned.

