古文：凡与敌战，若彼胜我负，未可畏怯，须思害中之利，当整励器械，激扬士卒，候彼懈怠而击之，则胜。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果敌人取得胜利而我军遭到失败了，不可因此畏惧怯战，务必思考不利之中的有利因素，应当整顿军备，修缮兵械，鼓舞士气，等待敌人出现麻痹松懈之时，立即进攻，就一定能胜利。
English: In any war against the enemy, if the enemy is victorious and our army is defeated, we must not be afraid of war, we must think about the favorable factors in the disadvantage, we should rectify the armament, repair the armament, encourage morale, and wait for the enemy to appear paralyzed and slack, immediately attack, and we will surely be able to win.

古文：法曰： 因害而患可解也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 从不利中能够看到有利因素，祸患就可以解除了。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If you can see the favorable factors from the unfavorable ones, the disaster can be resolved.

古文：晋末，河间王颙在关中，遣张方讨长沙王义，率众自函谷人屯河南。惠帝遣左将军皇甫商拒之，方潜军破商，遂入洛阳。
现代文：西晋末年，河间王司马乂割据关中，他派遣部将张方讨伐长沙王司马颙。张方率兵自函谷关进驻河南郡，晋惠帝派左将军皇甫商率军抵抗。张方暗中出兵袭破皇甫商部，于是进入京师洛阳。
English: At the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jin Hui sent Zhang Fang and his troops to fight against Wang Sima Qian of Changsha. Zhang Fang and his troops were stationed in Henan County from Hanzhongguan. Emperor Jin Hui sent Left General Huang Fu and his army to resist. Zhang Fang secretly sent troops to attack Huang Fu's army, and then entered the capital Luoyang.

古文：又奉帝命讨方于城内，方军望见乘舆，于是少却，方止之不可得，众遂大败，杀伤满衢巷。
现代文：司马乂奉惠帝之命讨伐张方于洛阳城内，张方部队望见惠帝乘坐的车子，于是向后稍退，张方竟然无法制止，其部众被打得大败，死伤的士卒充满大街小巷。
English: Sima Qian was ordered by Hui Di to fight against Zhang Fang in Luoyang City. Zhang's troops saw Hui Di's car, so they retreated a little. Zhang could not stop them, and his troops were defeated. The streets were full of dead and wounded soldiers.

古文：方退壁于十三里桥，人情挫衄，无复固志，多劝方夜遁。
现代文：张方率领余众退守十三里桥，部队由于严重受挫，已经丧失固守再战的决心，多数人都劝说张方赶紧乘夜逃走。
English: Zhang Fang led the rest of the crowd to retreat to the Thirteen-Mile Bridge. Due to serious setbacks, the troops had already lost their determination to fight again. Most people persuaded Zhang Fang to flee in the night.

古文：方曰： 兵之利钝是常事，贵因败以为成耳。
现代文：但张方却说： 作战的胜败乃是兵家常事，但可贵的是从失败中汲取教训而转败为胜。
English: However, Zhang Fang said: Winning or losing a battle is a common thing for soldiers, but it is valuable to draw lessons from defeat and turn defeat into victory.

古文：我更前作垒，出其不意，此兵法之奇也。 
现代文：我们现在要采取迫近敌人构筑工事的办法，但要做到出乎他们的意料之外，这就是兵法上所讲的出奇制胜的战法。 
English: We will now take the approach of approaching the enemy to construct the works, but we must do so beyond their expectations. This is the strategy of surprising victory in the art of war.

古文：乃夜潜进逼洛阳城七里。
现代文：张方于是率众乘夜秘密前进，直抵距洛阳七里的地方构筑营垒。
English: Zhang Fang then led the crowd to secretly advance at night, reaching a place seven miles away from Luoyang to build a camp.

古文：义既新捷，不以为意，忽闻方垒成，乃出战，遂大败而还。
现代文：司马乂因为刚刚打了胜仗，丝毫没有防备，突然发觉张方的营垒已经修成，勿忙出战，但是被打得大败而逃。
English: Because Sima Yu had just won the battle, he was completely unprepared and suddenly found that Zhang Fang's camp had been built. He should not rush into battle, but he was defeated and fled.

