古文：东坡游罗浮山，作诗示叔党，其末云： 负书从我盍归去，群仙正草《新宫铭》。
现代文：苏东坡游罗浮山，写诗给叔党，诗的结尾是： 负书从我盔归去，群仙正草《新宫铭》。
English: Su Dongpo toured Luofu Mountain and wrote a poem to his uncle. The end of the poem was: "The negative book has returned from my helmet, and the fairies have gathered" Xin Gongming.

古文：汝应奴隶蔡少霞，我亦季孟山玄卿。 
现代文：汝应奴隶蔡少霞，我亦季孟山玄卿。 
English: You should be a slave to Cai Shaoxia, I am also a descendant of Monshan Xuanqing.

古文：坡自注曰： 唐有梦书《新宫铭》者，云紫阳真人山玄卿撰。
现代文：东坡自注道： 唐代有人梦见书写《新宫铭》，铭文是紫阳真人山玄卿撰写的。
English: Dongpo Zizhi commented: In the Tang Dynasty, someone dreamed of writing the "New Palace Inscription." The inscription was written by Ziyang Zhenrenshan Xuanlong.

古文：其略曰： 良常西麓，原泽东泄。
现代文：碑铭大意说： 良常西麓，原泽东泄。
English: The epitaph says, in essence, "Ryojo west foot, Harasawa east foot."

古文：新宫宏宏，崇轩壒壒。 
现代文：新宫宏宏，崇轩壒壒。 
English: Shingu Honghong, Chongxuan.

古文：又有蔡少霞者，梦人遣书碑铭曰： 公昔乘鱼车，今履瑞云，躅空仰涂，绮辂轮囷。 
现代文：又有一位名叫蔡少霞的，梦见别人让他书写碑铭： 公昔乘鱼车，今履瑞云，躅空仰涂，绮辂轮囷。 
English: Another, named Cai Shaoxia, had a dream that someone asked him to write an inscription: "Long ago, I rode a fish cart. Now, I walk in the clouds.

古文：其末题云，五云书阁吏蔡少霞书。 
现代文：其末题记说，五云书阁吏蔡少霞书。 
English: At the end of the inscription, it says that the book was written by Cai Shaoxia, an official of the Wuyun Library.

古文：予案唐小说薛用弱《集异记》载蔡少霞梦人召去，令书碑，题云：《苍龙溪新宫铭》，紫阳真人山玄卿撰。
现代文：我查考唐代小说薛用弱《集异记》,记载蔡少霞梦见自已被人召去，让书写碑文，题道：《苍龙溪新宫铭》，紫阳真人山玄卿撰。
English: I checked the Tang Dynasty novel "A Collection of Strange Tales" by Xue Yiming, which records that Cai Shaoxia dreamed that she had been summoned by someone to write an inscription with the title: "Canglongxi New Palace Inscription," written by Ziyang Zhenrenshan Xuanqing.

古文：其词三十八句，不闻有五云阁吏之说。鱼车瑞云之语，乃《逸史》所载陈幼霞事，云苍龙溪主欧阳某撰。
现代文：碑铭三十八句，不见有五云阁吏的说法。 鱼车 、 瑞云 这些话，原是《逸史》记载陈幼霞之事，说是苍龙溪主欧阳某人撰的。
English: Thirty-eight sentences of inscriptions, there is no reference to Wuyun Pavilion officials.Fishing car, Zuiyun These words were originally recorded in "Historical Records" about Chen Yuxia, and said to have been written by someone named Ouyang, the master of the Canglong Creek.

古文：盖坡公误以幼霞为少霞耳。
现代文：看来东坡先生把幼霞误以为少霞了。
English: It seems that Mr. Dongpo mistook Xiaoxia for Shaoxia.

古文：玄卿之文，严整高妙，非神仙中人嵇叔夜、李太白之流不能作。今纪于此，云： 良常西麓，源泽东泄。
现代文：玄卿的诗文，严整高妙，除非神仙一般的嵇叔夜、李太白之类的人是写不出的，现在抄录在下面： 良常西麓，源泽东泄。
English: Xuanqing's poem, which is so precise and exquisite that it could not have been written by anyone other than the immortals such as Xun Shuyang and Li Taibai, is now transcribed below: Liangzhang west foot, Yuan Ze east leak.

古文：新宫宏宏，崇轩壒壒。
现代文：新宫宏宏，崇轩壒壒。
English: Shingu Honghong, Chongxuan.

古文：雕珉盘础，镂檀竦楶。
现代文：雕珉盘础，镂檀竦楶。
English: The base of the carving wheel is made of sandalwood.

古文：碧瓦鳞差，瑶阶肪截。
现代文：碧瓦鳞差，瑶阶肪截。
English: The green tiles are uneven, and the steps are uneven.

古文：阁凝瑞雾，楼横祥霓。
现代文：阁凝瑞雾，楼横祥霓。
English: The pavilion is foggy and misty, while the building is bright and shiny.

古文：驺虞巡徼，昌明捧。
现代文：驺虞巡徼，昌明捧。
English: Shengyu parade, Changming parade.

古文：珠树规连，玉泉矩泄。
现代文：珠树规连，玉泉矩泄。
English: The bead tree rules, and the jade spring flows.

古文：灵飙遐集，圣日俯晰。
现代文：灵飙遐集，圣日俯晰。
English: The spirit soars, the holy sun shines brightly.

古文：太上游储，无极便阙。
现代文：太上游储，无极便阙。
English: If the reservoir is too far upstream, it will be flooded.

古文：百神守护，诸真班列。
现代文：百神守护，诸真班列。
English: The guardian of a hundred deities.

古文：仙翁鹄立，道师冰洁。
现代文：仙翁鹄立，道师冰洁。
English: The Immortal stands tall, the Daoist is ice-cold.

古文：饮玉成浆，馔琼为屑。
现代文：饮玉成浆，馔琼为屑。
English: Drink yakitori into a pulp, and eat ginger as a crumb.

古文：桂旗不动，兰幄牙设。
现代文：桂旗不动，兰幄牙设。
English: The cinnamon flag does not move, and the lantern teeth are set.

古文：妙乐竞奏，流铃间发。
现代文：妙乐竞奏，流铃间发。
English: The melody is played competitively, and the bells are rung.

古文：天籁虚徐，风箫泠澈。
现代文：天籁虚徐，风箫泠澈。
English: The heavens tremble, the wind howls.

古文：凤歌谐律，鹤舞会节。
现代文：凤歌谐律，鹤舞会节。
English: The phoenix song melody, the crane dance festival.

古文：三变《玄云》，九成《绛雪》。
现代文：三变《玄云》，九成《绛雪》。
English: Three changes of "Xuan Yun," 90% change of "Xuan Xue."

古文：易迁徒语，童初讵说。
现代文：易迁徒语，童初讵说。
English: It's the language of migrants, said Tong Chuxuan.

古文：如毁乾坤，自有日月。
现代文：如毁乾坤，自有日月。
English: If you destroy the universe, the sun and moon will follow.

古文：清宁二百三十一年四月十二日建。 
现代文：清宁二百三十一年四月十二日建。 
English: It was built on April 12, 231 of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：予顷作广州《三清殿碑》，仿其体为铭诗曰： 天池北阯，越领东鹿。
现代文：予顷作广州《三清殿碑》，仿其体为铭诗曰： 天池北阯，越领东鹿。
English: Preceded by the "Sanqing Monument" in Guangzhou, its body is imitated as an epitaph: "Tianchi Beilun, Yuejing Donglu."

古文：银宫崟崟，瑶殿矗矗。
现代文：银宫崟崟，瑶殿矗矗。
English: The silver palace, the imperial palace.

古文：陛纳九齿，阊披四目。
现代文：陛纳九齿，阊披四目。
English: His Majesty has nine teeth and wears a four-eyed skullcap.

古文：楯角储清，檐牙袤缛，雕牖谽閜，镂楹熠煜。
现代文：楯角储清，檐牙袤缛，雕牖谽閜，镂楹熠煜。
English: The horns are clear, the teeth are clean, the carvings are clean, and the beak is clean.

古文：元尊端拱，泰上秉箓。
现代文：元尊端拱，泰上秉箓。
English: The original image is the end of the arch, and Tai Shang is at the top.

古文：绣黼周张，神光晬穆。
现代文：绣黼周张，神光晬穆。
English: The embroidered braid is twisted around, shining brightly.

古文：宝帐流黄，温屏结绿。
现代文：宝帐流黄，温屏结绿。
English: The treasure ledger is yellow, and the warm screen is green.

古文：翠凤干旗，紫霓溜濆。
现代文：翠凤干旗，紫霓溜濆。
English: Jade and phoenix dry flag, purple dragonfly yakitori.

古文：星伯振鹭，仙翁立鹄。
现代文：星伯振鹭，仙翁立鹄。
English: Xingbo Zhenyao, Xianweng Lijiao.

古文：昌明侍几，眉连捧纛。
现代文：昌明侍几，眉连捧纛。
English: Chang Ming waits for a few, his brow furrowed.

古文：月节下堕，曦轮旁烛。
现代文：月节下堕，曦轮旁烛。
English: The lunar calendar has fallen, and the candle beside the radiant wheel is waning.

古文：涷雨清尘，矞云散縠。
现代文：涷雨清尘，矞云散縠。
English: The rain clears the dust, and the clouds disperse.

古文：钧籁虚徐，流铃禄续。
现代文：钧籁虚徐，流铃禄续。
English: Slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly.

古文：童初渟礻辱，勾漏蓄缩。
现代文：童初渟礻辱，勾漏蓄缩。
English: Children's initial insults, hooks and leaks accumulate and shrink.

古文：岳君有衡，海帝维倏。
现代文：岳君有衡，海帝维倏。
English: Yuejun has Heng, Haidi Wei Wei.

古文：中边何护，时节朝宿。
现代文：中边何护，时节朝宿。
English: There is no protection in the middle, and it is morning accommodation in the morning.

古文：飓母沦威，裛妃谢毒。
现代文：飓母沦威，裛妃谢毒。
English: The mother of the hurricane has fallen into disgrace, and the concubine is poisoned.

古文：丹厓罢徼，赤子累福。
现代文：丹厓罢徼，赤子累福。
English: Dangdang is out, baby is in.

古文：亿龄圣寿，万世宋箓。 
现代文：亿龄圣寿，万世宋箓。 
English: Billion-year-old sacred life, everlasting Song Dynasty.

古文：凡四十句，读者或许之，然终不近也。
现代文：共四十句，读者或许会赞赏它，可是终究与《新宫铭》有距离。
English: A total of forty sentences, the reader may appreciate it, but after all, there is a distance from "New Palace Inscription."

