古文：阎浮龙吴山人白将军温媪柳子华斑石张公洞五台山池张老费鸡师
现代文：阎浮龙吴山人白将军温媪柳子华斑石张公洞五台山池张老费鸡师
English: 

古文：汾水老姥李宣濛阳湫盐井龙尹皓
现代文：汾水老姥李宣濛阳湫盐井龙尹皓
English: Li Xuan, Yang Zhen, Yan Jing, Long Yin

古文：阎浮龙
现代文：阎浮龙
English: Yan Fu Long

古文：龙在阎浮提者五十七亿。
现代文：在阎浮提的龙共有五十七亿。
English: There are 5.7 billion dragons in Yan Fu Ti.

古文：龙于翟陁尼不降浊水。
现代文：在翟陁尼的龙不往地上降污浊的水。
English: The dragon in the dragon does not descend to the ground to pollute the water.

古文：西洲人食浊则夭。
现代文：西洲人食用了污浊的水就夭亡。
English: The Xizhou people died young after drinking polluted water.

古文：单越人恶冷风，龙不发冷。
现代文：单越人厌恶冷风，龙就不发冷。
English: A dragon does not feel cold, just as a human does not like the cold wind.

古文：于弗姿提洲，不作雷声，不起电光。
现代文：在弗姿提洲，龙不作雷声，不起电光。
English: In Fuziti Island, dragons don't make thunder and lightning.

古文：东洲恶之也。
现代文：而这些都是东洲厌恶的。
English: And all of this is abhorrent to Dongzhou.

古文：其雷声，兜率天作歌颂音，阎浮提作海潮音。其雨，兜率天上雨摩尼，获世城雨美膳。
现代文：那雷声，兜率天作歌颂的声音，阎浮提作海潮的声音；那雨，兜率天上下的是摩尼，获世城下的是好饭菜。
English: That thunder, led by heaven, is the sound of praise, and that rain, led by heaven, is the sound of the sea; that rain, led by heaven, is money, and that rain, led by earth, is good food.

古文：海中注雨不绝如连。
现代文：海中下雨不止，雨水象连到了一起。
English: It kept raining in the sea, and the rainwater seemed to clump together.

古文：阿修中雨罗丘伏，阎浮提中雨清浮水。
现代文：阿修中下罗丘伏；阎浮提中下清浮水。
English: Ashi in the middle and lower Luo Qiu Fu; Yan Bui in the middle and lower Qiu Bui.

古文：吴山人
现代文：吴山人
English: Wu Sanren

古文：陇州吴山县，有一人乘白马夜行，凡县人皆梦之。
现代文：陇州吴山县，有一个人骑着一匹白马夜间走路，全县的人都梦到了他。
English: In Wushan County, Luzhou, there was a man riding a white horse at night. People all over the county dreamed of him.

古文：语曰： 我欲移居，暂假尔牛。 
现代文：他说： 我想要搬家，暂时借你们的牛用一下。 
English: He said: "I want to move, so I'll borrow your cows for a while.

古文：言讫即过。
现代文：说完他就走了。
English: And with that, he was gone.

古文：其夕，数百家牛，及明，皆被体汗流如水。
现代文：那天夜里，好几百家的牛，到天明一看，全都一身大汗。
English: That night, several hundred cows were sweating profusely.

古文：于县南山曲出一湫，方圆百余步。
现代文：在县南山弯处出现了一个方圆一百多步的大水池。
English: At the bend of the county's Nanshan Mountain, a large pond with a circumference of more than one hundred paces appeared.

古文：里人以此湫因牛而迁，谓之 特牛湫 也。
现代文：乡里人因为这个水池是用牛迁来的，就叫它 特牛池 。
English: The villagers call it "Tu Niu Pond" because this pond was moved here by cattle.

古文：白将军
现代文：白将军
English: General Bai

古文：僧元可言，近传有白将军者尝于曲江洗马，马忽跳出惊走。
现代文：和尚元可说，近来传闻，有一个被人们称作白将军的人曾经在曲江洗马，那马忽然就跳出去惊跑了。
English: Monk Yuan can say that recently there was a rumor that a person called General Bai once washed a horse in the Qujiang River, and the horse suddenly jumped out and ran away.

古文：前足有物，色白如衣带，萦绕数匝，遽令解之。
现代文：马的前腿上有个东西，白色，象衣带，在马腿上缠了好几圈儿。
English: On the horse's foreleg there was something, white, like a sash, wrapped several times around the horse's leg.

古文：血流数升。
现代文：白将军急忙让人把马腿上的那个东西解下来。
English: General Bai hurriedly ordered someone to untie the thing from the horse's leg.

古文：白异之，遂封纸帖中，藏于衣箱。
现代文：马流了几升血。白将军感到奇怪，就把那个带状的虫子封到纸帖里，装进箱子。
English: The horse bled several liters of blood. General Bai felt strange, so he sealed the ribbon-shaped bug in paper tape and put it in a box.

古文：一日，送客至浐水，出示诸客。
现代文：有一天，送客来到浐水，白将军把那虫拿出来让客人观看。
English: One day, when the guests came to Surabaya, General Bai took the insect out for the guests to see.

古文：客曰： 盍以水试之？ 
现代文：客人说： 为何不用水试它一下？ 
English: The guest said: Why not try it without water?

古文：白以剑划地成窍，置虫于中，沃盥其上。
现代文：白将军就用剑在地上挖了一个坑，把那虫子放到里边，再用水浇它。
English: General Bai used his sword to dig a hole in the ground, put the insect inside, and then doused it with water.

古文：少顷，虫蠕而长，窍中泉涌。
现代文：不一会儿，那虫开始蠕动，而且长长了。坑里头泉水涌动。
English: After a while, the worm began to wriggle and grow. The spring inside the pit began to gush.

古文：倏忽自盘若一席，有黑气如香烟，径出檐外。
现代文：忽然那虫自己盘起来，象一个坐席那么大，有黑气冒出来，象香烟袅袅，径直飘出檐外。
English: Suddenly, the worm coiled itself up, as big as a dining table, and black gas emerged, like a cigarette butt, floating straight out of the cocoon.

古文：众惧曰： 必龙也。 
现代文：大伙恐惧地说： 这一定是龙！ 
English: Everyone said in fear, "It must be a dragon!"

古文：遂急归。
现代文：于是就急忙回来。
English: So he hurried back.

古文：未数里，风雨骤至，大震数声。
现代文：没走几里，风雨骤然袭来。温媪
English: After walking for a few miles, the wind and rain suddenly hit.

古文：温媪温媪者，即康州悦城县孀妇也，绩布为业。
现代文：温媪是康州悦城县的一个寡妇，以织布为业。
English: Wen Wei, a widow from Yuecheng County, was a weaver.

古文：尝于野岸拾菜，见沙草中有五卵，遂收归，置绩筐中。
现代文：有一天她到野外江边拾菜，发现沙草中有五只鸟蛋，就捡了回来，放到织布用的筐子里。
English: One day she went to the river to pick up vegetables and found five bird eggs in the sand. She picked them up and put them in a basket for weaving.

古文：不数日，忽见五小蛇，壳一斑四青。
现代文：不几天，忽然出现五条小蛇，一条花的，四条青的。
English: Not a few days later, five small snakes suddenly appeared, one with flowers and four with lilacs.

古文：遂送于江次，固无意望报也。
现代文：于是她就把它们送到江边去了。本来无意让它们回报什么。
English: So she sent them to the river with no intention of getting anything in return.

古文：媪常濯浣于江边。
现代文：她常常在江边洗衣服。
English: She often washes clothes by the river.

古文：忽一日，见鱼在水跳跃，戏于媪前。
现代文：忽然有一天，她发现鱼在水里跳跃，在她面前做游戏。
English: Suddenly one day, she found a fish jumping in the water and playing in front of her.

古文：自尔为常，渐有知者。
现代文：从此以后经常有这样的事。
English: Since then, this has happened frequently.

古文：乡里咸为龙之母，敬而事之，或询以灾福。亦言多徵应。
现代文：渐渐有人知道了，乡里人都认为她是龙的母亲，对她特别尊敬。有的人向她询问祸福吉凶，她说得也多半都很应验。
English: Gradually, it became known that the villagers all considered her to be the mother of dragons and held her in high esteem. Some people asked her about misfortune, fortune, and good luck, and most of what she said came true.

古文：自是媪亦渐丰足。
现代文：从此她也渐渐富足起来。
English: Since then, she has gradually become rich.

古文：朝廷知之，遣使徵入京师。至全义岭，有疾，却返悦城而卒。
现代文：朝廷知道了，派人把她召到京里，走到全义岭，她病了，就回到悦城县而病死。
English: When the imperial court learned of this, they sent someone to summon her to Beijing. She walked to Quan Yiling, fell ill, returned to Yuecheng County, and died of illness.

古文：乡里共葬之江东岸。
现代文：乡里人一起把她葬到江的东岸。
English: The villagers together buried her on the east bank of the river.

古文：忽一夕，天地晦暝，风雨随作。
现代文：忽然有一天晚上，天地昏黑，风雨大作。
English: All of a sudden, one evening, the sky was dark and stormy.

古文：及明，移其冢于西，而草木悉于西岸。
现代文：等到天明，见她的坟已由江东挪到江西，而且草木也全都挪在西岸。
English: When it was daylight, she saw that her grave had been moved from the east to the west of the river, and all the plants and trees had been moved to the west bank.

古文：柳子华
现代文：柳子华
English: Willow Zihua

古文：柳子华，唐时为城都令。
现代文：柳子华唐朝时做城都县令。
English: Liu Zihua was the governor of Chengdu County during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：一旦方午，忽有犊车一乘，前后女骑导从径入厅事。
现代文：有一天正午，忽然有一辆牛车，前后有骑马的女子引导来到厅堂上。
English: One day at noon, suddenly there was an ox-drawn cart, led by a woman on horseback, that came to the hall.

古文：使一介告柳云： 龙女且来矣。 
现代文：有一位女子上前告诉柳子华说： 龙女将要来到。 
English: A woman came forward and told Liu Zihua: "The Dragon Maiden is coming.

古文：俄而下车，左右扶卫升阶，与子华相见。
现代文：不久，龙女下了车，由左右搀扶卫护着走上台阶来，与柳子华相见。
English: Soon, Long Niang got out of the car and walked up the steps, escorted by guards on both sides, to meet with Liu Zihua.

古文：云： 宿命与君合为匹偶。 
现代文：她说： 命中注定我和你要结成夫妇。 
English: She said: "It was destined that you and I would become a couple.

古文：因止。
现代文：于是就住下了。
English: So they moved in.

古文：命酒乐极欢，成礼而去。
现代文：柳子华命人准备酒席、乐队，举行婚礼之后，龙女才离去。
English: Willow Zihua ordered the people to prepare the banquet, the band, and after the wedding, the dragon woman left.

古文：自是往复为常，远近咸知之。
现代文：从此她常来常往。远近的人们全都知道。
English: Since then, she has been coming and going frequently. People from near and far all know about it.

古文：子华罢秩，不知所之。
现代文：柳子华罢官以后，谁也不知他到哪儿去了。
English: After Liu Zihua was dismissed, no one knew where he had gone.

古文：俗云： 入龙宫，得水仙矣。 
现代文：一般人都说他去了龙宫，成为水仙了。
English: Common people say that he went to the Dragon Palace and became Narcissus.

古文：斑石
现代文：斑石
English: Pebbles

古文：京邑有一士子，因山行，拾得一石子。
现代文：京城里有一位士人，顺着山走路，捡到了一块石子。
English: A scholar in the capital, walking along the mountain, picked up a stone.

古文：青赤斑斓，大如鸡子。
现代文：这块石子斑斓多彩，有鸡蛋那么大。
English: The stone is multi-coloured and the size of an egg.

古文：甚异之。置巾箱中五六年。
现代文：这人觉得很奇怪，就把它放到衣箱里，一放就是五六年。
English: This person thought it was very strange, so he put it in a suitcase, and it's been there for five or six years.

古文：因与婴儿弄，遂失之。
现代文：后来，由于他拿出来给孩子玩，就丢失了。
English: He later lost it when he took it out to play with his children.

古文：数日，昼忽风雨暝晦，庭前树下，降水不绝如瀑布状。
现代文：几天后，大白天就忽然间风雨大作，天地昏黑，院子里的一棵树下，降水不绝就象瀑布一样。
English: A few days later, during the day, there was a sudden wind and rain storm. The sky was dark, and under a tree in the yard, the rain fell incessantly, like a waterfall.

古文：人咸异其故。
现代文：人们都感到惊异，不知是什么原因。
English: People were surprised, I don't know why.

古文：风雨息，树下忽见此石已破，中如鸡卵出壳焉。
现代文：风雨停息之后，忽然发现那块石子就在那树下，但石子已破，里边就象小鸡出壳一样。
English: After the wind and rain subsided, it was suddenly discovered that the stone was under the tree, but the stone was broken, and inside it was like a chicken coming out of its shell.

古文：乃知为龙子也。
现代文：这才知道是龙子。
English: That's when I knew it was Tatsuko.

古文：张公洞
现代文：张公洞
English: Zhang Gongdong

古文：义兴县山水秀绝，张公洞尤奇丽。
现代文：义兴县山水秀丽卓绝，张公洞尤其秀美奇异。
English: The landscape of Yixing County is extremely beautiful, and Zhanggong Cave is particularly beautiful and strange.

古文：里人云，张道陵修行之所也。
现代文：当地人说，这就是张道陵修行的地方。
English: Locals say that this is the place where Zhang Daoling practiced.

古文：中有洞壑，众未敢入。
现代文：这里边有一个山洞，众人谁也不敢进去。
English: There's a cave here that no one dares to enter.

古文：土氓姚生习道，挈杖瓶火，负囊以入。
现代文：有个姓姚的当地人知道道路，拿着棍子，带着火把，背着行囊进去了。
English: A local man surnamed Yao, who knew the way, went in with a stick, a torch and a backpack.

古文：约行数百步，渐渐明朗，云树依稀。
现代文：大约走了几百步，渐渐地明朗起来，依稀能望见云和树木。
English: After walking about a few hundred steps, it gradually became clear and I could see clouds and trees.

古文：近通步武，又十余里，见二道士对弈。
现代文：走近之后，发现自己走上了一条别人走过的小路。又走了十几里，他看到两个道士正在下棋。道士问： 你是谁？
English: After approaching, he found himself walking on a path that others had walked. He walked another dozen miles, and he saw two Taoists playing chess. Taoist asked: Who are you?

古文：曰： 何人？
现代文：你是怎么进来的？ 
English: How did you get in here?

古文：焉得来此？ 
现代文：他从头到尾详细说了一遍。
English: He went over it in detail from start to finish.

古文：具言始末。曰： 大志之士也。 
现代文：道士说： 这还是个有大志的人呢！ 
English: The moralist said, "This is still a person with great aspirations!"

古文：姚生馁甚，因求食。
现代文：姓姚的饿得厉害，就向道士要吃的。
English: Yao was so hungry that he asked a Taoist priest for food.

古文：旁有青泥数斗，道士指曰： 可食此。 
现代文：旁边有几斗青泥。道士指着青泥说： 可以吃这个。 
English: There are several buckets of celandine next to it. The Taoist pointed to the celandine and said, "You can eat this."

古文：试探咀嚼，觉芳馨，食之遂饱。
现代文：他试探着尝了尝，觉得挺香，就吃，就饱了。
English: He probed and tasted the cucumber, found it quite fragrant, ate it, and was full.

古文：道士曰： 尔可去，慎勿语世人。 
现代文：道士说， 你可以走了。千万不要告诉别人。 
English: The priest said, "You can go. Don't tell anyone."

古文：再拜而返，密怀其余。
现代文：姓姚的再拜而返，偷偷把吃剩的青泥揣了回来。
English: The surnamed Yao bowed again and returned, secretly bringing back the leftover green mud.

古文：以访市肆，偶胡贾见。惊曰： 此龙食也。
现代文：他带着这些青泥在市肆间寻访，偶然被一个作买卖的胡人看见了，胡人吃惊地说： 这是龙的食物，是从哪弄来的？ 
English: He took the clay with him on his quest through the markets, and by chance was seen by a merchant named Hu, who was surprised and said, "This is dragon food, where did it come from?"

古文：何方而得？ 
现代文：他就把事情告诉了胡人。
English: He told Hu Ren about the matter.

古文：乃述其事。俱往寻之，但黑巨穴，不复有路。
现代文：胡人和他一块来寻找，一看，那里只有一个黑黑的大洞，不再有路。
English: The fox and the man went to look for it together, but when they saw it, there was only a big black hole, and there was no longer a path.

古文：青泥出外，已硬如石，不可复食。
现代文：青泥拿到外边来已象石头那么硬。不能再吃。
English: The lye is as hard as stone when it is taken outside. It can no longer be eaten.

古文：五台山池
现代文：五台山池
English: Wudaishan Pond

古文：五台山北台下有龙池约二亩有余。
现代文：五台山北台下有一个二亩多地的龙池。
English: At the foot of Mount Wutai, there is a dragon pond with more than two mu of land.

古文：佛经云，禁五百毒龙之所，每至亭午，昏雾暂开，比丘及净行居士方可一睹。
现代文：佛经上说，这是关押五百毒龙的地方。每天到了正午，昏暗的池雾暂时散开，和尚和品行高洁的居士才能看一眼。
English: According to Buddhist scriptures, this is the place where five hundred poisonous dragons are kept. Every day at noon, the dim pool fog temporarily disperses, and only monks and virtuous laymen can take a look.

古文：比丘尼及女子近，即雷电风雨时大作。
现代文：如果尼姑和女人走近，雷电风雨立时就大作。
English: If a nun and a woman come near, there is an instant thunderstorm.

古文：如近池，必为毒气所吸，逡巡而没。
现代文：如果走近池边，一定会被毒气吸到池子里，慢慢沉下去。
English: If you walk close to the edge of the pool, you will definitely be sucked into the pool by the poison gas and slowly sink.

古文：张老
现代文：张老
English: Zhang Lao

古文：荆湘有僧寺背山近水，水中有龙。
现代文：荆湘有一座僧寺背山近水，水中有一条龙。
English: In Jingxiang, there is a monk's temple behind the mountain near the water. There is a dragon in the water.

古文：时或雷风大作，损坏树木。
现代文：这条龙时常兴大风下暴雨，毁坏树木。
English: The dragon often unleashes high winds and torrential rain, destroying trees.

古文：寺中有掸钟张老者，术士也。而僧不知。
现代文：寺中有一个撞钟的张老头，他是一位术士，而和尚并不知道。
English: In the temple there is an old man, Zhang, who strikes the bell. He is a sorcerer, but the monk does not know it.

古文：张老恶此龙损物，欲禁杀之，密为法。
现代文：张老厌恶这条龙祸害东西，就想要把它拘禁起来杀死它。
English: Zhang Lao detested this dragon and wanted to capture it and kill it.

古文：此龙已知，化为人，潜告僧曰： 某实龙也，住此水多年。
现代文：他暗中做法，这条龙已经知道。龙变成人，偷偷地告诉和尚说： 我是一条龙，住在这水中已经多年了。
English: The dragon turned into a man and secretly told the monk, "I am a dragon and I have been living in this water for many years.

古文：或因出，风雨损物，为张老所禁，性命危急，非和尚救之不可。
现代文：或许因为我出去的时候，风雨损坏了东西，被张老看禁起来了。我的性命危急，除了你谁也救不了我。
English: Perhaps because when I went out, the wind and rain damaged things, and I was detained by Zhang Lao. My life is in danger, and no one can save me but you.

古文：倘救其命，奉一宝珠，以伸报答。
现代文：如果你能救我一命，我给你一颗宝珠以示报答。
English: If you can save my life, I'll give you a bead as a reward.

古文：某即移于别处。 
现代文：我立即就搬到别的地方去。 
English: I'll move somewhere else immediately.

古文：僧诺之。
现代文：和尚答应了。
English: The monk agreed.

古文：夜唤张老，求释之。
现代文：夜间喊来张老，求他把龙放掉。
English: He called Zhang Lao at night and begged him to release the dragon.

古文：张老曰： 和尚莫受此龙献珠否？
现代文：张老说： 你不要龙给你的那颗珠子行不行？
English: Zhang Lao said: Can you do without the bead that the dragon gave you?

古文：此龙甚穷，唯有此珠，性又吝恶。今若受珠，他时悔无及。 
现代文：这条龙特别穷，只有这颗珠子，它的性情又是吝啬凶恶的，现在要是要了他的珠子，以后后悔就来不及了。 
English: The dragon was extremely poor and only had this bead. Its nature was stingy and vicious. If it wanted his bead now, it would not have time to regret it later.

古文：僧不之信。曰： 君但为我放之。 
现代文：和尚不相信他说的，说： 你只管为我放了它吧！ 
English: The monk didn't believe him and said, "Leave it for me!

古文：张老不得已，乃放。
现代文：张老不得已，就放了。
English: Zhang Lao had no choice but to let him go.

古文：龙夜后送珠于僧，而移出潭水。
现代文：龙这一夜之后送珠子给和尚，从此搬移别处。
English: After that night, Long sent the beads to the monk and then moved them elsewhere.

古文：张老亦辞僧去。
现代文：张老也辞别和尚走了。
English: Zhang Lao also said goodbye to the monk and left.

古文：后数日，忽大雷雨，坏此僧舍，夺其珠。
现代文：几日后，忽然一阵大雷雨，毁坏了和尚的僧舍，夺回那宝珠。
English: A few days later, a sudden thunderstorm destroyed the monk's hermitage and recaptured the jewel.

古文：果如张老之言。
现代文：果然象张老说的那样。
English: As Zhang Lao said.

古文：费鸡师
现代文：费鸡师
English: Fei Qian Shi

古文：蜀川有一费鸡师者，善知将来之事，而亦能为人禳救。
现代文：蜀川有一个被人所称为 费鸡师 的人，善于预知将来的事，而且也能为人祭祀作法进行解救。
English: In Shu River, there is a person known as Fei Qian Shi, who is good at predicting future events, and can also perform human sacrifice.

古文：多在邛州。蜀人皆神之。
现代文：他多半住在邛州，蜀人都把他当成神。
English: He mostly lived in Ganzhou, and the people of Shu regarded him as a god.

古文：时有一僧言，往者双流县保唐寺，寺有张二师者，因巡行僧房，见有空院，将欲住持，率家人扫洒之际，于柱上得一小瓶子。
现代文：当时有一个和尚说，以前双流县有一座保唐寺，寺里头有一个叫张二师的人，因为巡行僧房，见到有所空院落，将要住进去。张二师率领家人洒扫这个院子的时候，在一根柱子上拾到了一个小瓶子。
English: At that time, a monk said that there used to be a Baotang Temple in Shuangliu County. At the head of the temple, there was a man named Zhang Ershi, who was going to live there because he saw an empty courtyard when he was touring the monks' quarters. When Zhang Ershi led his family to sweep the courtyard, he found a small bottle on a pillar.

古文：二师观之，见一蛇在瓶内。
现代文：张二师一看，见瓶中装有一条小蛇。
English: Zhang Ershi took a look and saw that there was a small snake in the bottle.

古文：覆瓶出之，约长一尺，文彩斑驳，五色备具。
现代文：张二师把蛇从瓶子里倒出来。那蛇大约有一尺来长，文彩斑驳，五色俱全。
English: Zhang Ershi pours the snake out of the bottle. The snake is about a foot long, mottled and multi-colored.

古文：以杖触之，随手而长。
现代文：他用木棍触动它，它随着他的触动而长大。
English: He touched it with a stick and it grew with his touch.

古文：众悉惊异。
现代文：大家都感到惊异。
English: Everyone was surprised.

古文：二师令一物挟之，送于寺外。
现代文：张二师让人用一种东西挟制它，把它送到寺外去。
English: Zhang Ershi had someone pin it down with something and take it outside the temple.

古文：当携掇之际，随触随大，以至丈余，如屋椽矣。
现代文：当摆弄它的时候，它随触随大，以至于长到一丈多长，赶上一根椽子了。
English: When you play with it, it grows bigger and bigger until it's as long as a rake.

古文：二人担之方举，送者愈惧，观者随而益多。
现代文：两个人抬才能把它抬起来。往外送的人更加害怕。围观的人也越来越多。
English: It takes two people to lift it. The people taking it outside are even more scared. The number of onlookers is also increasing.

古文：距寺约二三里，所在撼动之时，增长不已。
现代文：离寺二三里的地方，它随着那撼动，不停地增长。
English: Two or three miles from the temple, it kept growing with the shaking.

古文：众益惧，遂击伤，至于死。
现代文：众人更加惧怕，就把它打伤，以至于打死。
English: They were even more afraid, so they beat him so badly that he died.

古文：明日，此寺院中有虹蟪，亭午时下寺中。
现代文：第二天，有一道彩虹于正午时分下到寺中。
English: The next day, a rainbow descended on the temple at noon.

古文：僧有事至临邛，见鸡师说之。鸡师曰： 杀龙女矣！
现代文：这个和尚因事来到邛州，就把这件事对费鸡师讲了。费鸡师说： 杀死龙女了！
English: When this monk came to Zhangzhou for some reason, he told this to Fei Qian. Fei Qian said, "Kill the dragon maiden!"

古文：张二师与汝寺之僧徒。皆当死乎！ 
现代文：张二师和你们寺中的和尚们都得死啊！ 
English: Zhang Ershi and the monks in your temple will all die!

古文：后卒如其言。他应验不可胜记。
现代文：后来，终于象他说的那样都死了。
English: Then, finally, they all died, just as he said.

古文：竟不知是何术。
现代文：他应验的事情数不胜数，却不知是什么法术。
English: He has performed innumerable feats, but he doesn't know what magic is.

古文：韦绚长足为杜元颖从事，其弟妹皆识费师。于京中已悉知有此事。
现代文：韦徇的大哥做杜元颖的从事，他的弟弟妹妹都认识费鸡师，在京中已经全都知道有此事。
English: Wei Wei's eldest brother is engaged in Du Yuanying, his younger brothers and sisters all know Fei Qian Shi, and everyone in Beijing already knows about this.

古文：自到，即询访鸡师之术。
现代文：杜元颖自从到任，就询访费鸡师的法术。
English: Du Yuanying has been inquiring about Fei Qian Shi's magic since she took office.

古文：凡有病者来告，鸡师发即抱一鸡而往。
现代文：凡是有病的来告知费鸡师，费鸡师就抱着一只鸡前往。
English: If anyone is sick and comes to tell Fei Qianshi, Fei Qianshi will go with a chicken in his arms.

古文：及其门，乃持咒其鸡，令入内，抵病者之所。鸡入而死，病者差。鸡出则病者不起矣。
现代文：到了门口，他抱着鸡念咒，让鸡进去。到了病人住的地方，鸡就死了，病人就能痊愈；如果鸡进而复出，那么有病的人就永远起不来了。
English: When he got to the door, he cradled the chicken and chanted a spell to make it go inside. When he got to the place where the patient lived, the chicken died and the patient was able to recover; if the chicken then came back to life, then the sick person would never be able to get up.

古文：时人遂号为 费鸡师 。
现代文：当时人们因此叫他 费鸡师 。
English: At the time, people called him the "chicken farmer" because of this.

古文：又以石子置病者腹上，作法结印，其石子断者，其人亦不起也。
现代文：他又把石子放到病人的肚子上，作法念咒，那石子断了的，那人也就没救了。
English: He also placed a stone on the patient's stomach and chanted a spell. If the stone broke, the man would not be saved.

古文：又能书符，先焚符为灰，和汤水，与人吞之，俄复吐出，其符宛然如不烧。
现代文：又能写符。先把符烧成灰，和以汤水，让病人吞下，不一会儿又吐出来，那符竟然象没烧过一样。
English: He was also able to write symbols. First, he burned the symbols to ashes, mixed them with water and let the patient swallow it. A moment later, he spat it out, and the symbol looked as if it had never been burned.

古文：又云，城南建昌桥下，其南岸先有龙窟，岁常损人。
现代文：又说，城南建昌桥下，它的南岸以前有龙窟，一年一年常常害人。
English: He also said that under the Jianchang Bridge in the south of the city, there used to be a dragon cave on its south bank, which often harmed people year after year.

古文：至有连马而溺者，如有攫拿于水。
现代文：甚至有连人带马一块掉进去淹死的，好象被人捉拿到水里去似的。
English: There have even been cases of men and horses falling in together and drowning, as if they had been caught in the water.

古文：当韦皋时，前后运石，凡几万数。顷之，石复失焉。
现代文：在韦皋那时候，先后一共运来几万块石头，顷刻之间，石头又全都没了。
English: At the time of Wei Wei, a total of tens of thousands of stones were successively transported, and in an instant, the stones were all gone.

古文：后命道士投简于内，以土筑之，方满。
现代文：后来让道士把一封书简投进去，然后象筑墙那样把土倒进去，这才填满。
English: Later, he asked the Taoist priest to cast a booklet into it, and then poured soil into it like building a wall, and it was filled.

古文：自此之后，龙窟移于建昌寺佛殿下，与西廊龙井通焉。
现代文：从此之后，龙窟挪到建昌寺佛殿下边，与西廊的龙井相通了。
English: Since then, the Dragon Grotto has been moved to the lower side of the Buddhist hall of Jianshang Temple, and is connected to the Dragon Well in the west corridor.

古文：而建昌桥下，往往损人而不甚也。
现代文：而建昌桥下，往往有人受害，但是不严重。
English: But under the Jianchang Bridge, people are often injured, but not seriously.

古文：询问吏卒，往时人马溺于其间，良久尸浮皆白，其血被吮吸已尽，而尸乃出焉。
现代文：听吏卒说，以前人和马被淹在水里，很长时间才能浮上尸体来，尸体全都很白。血被吸吮已尽，尸体才能浮上来。
English: The auditor said that in the past, people and horses were submerged in the water, and it took a long time for the bodies to float to the surface. The bodies were all very white. The blood had been sucked out before the bodies could float to the surface.

古文：汾水老姥
现代文：汾水老姥
English: The Old Woman of Surabaya

古文：汾水边有一老姥获一赤鲤，颜色异常，不与众鱼同。
现代文：汾水边有一位老太太弄到一条红色鲤鱼，颜色异常，不与众鱼相同。
English: On the edge of Surabaya, an old lady caught a red snapper. It was an unusual color, different from other fish.

古文：既携归，老姥怜惜，且奇之。凿一小池，汲水养之。
现代文：把这条鱼拿回家之后，老太太可怜它，又觉得它挺怪，就挖了一个小水池，放上水把它养起来。
English: After taking the fish home, the old lady felt sorry for it and thought it was strange, so she dug a small pond and put it in water to raise it.

古文：经月余后，忽见云雾兴起，其赤鲤即腾跃，逡巡之间，乃渐升霄汉，其水池即竭。
现代文：经过一个多月之后，忽然发现那水池云雾兴起，那鲤鱼就在里边腾跃，转眼之间，就渐渐升入云天。那水池就干了。
English: After more than a month, it was suddenly discovered that the pool had become foggy, the eel was leaping inside, and in the blink of an eye, it gradually rose into the sky. The pool was dry.

古文：至夜，又复来如故。
现代文：到了晚上它就又回来了，和原先一样。
English: In the evening it comes back, just as it was before.

古文：人见之者甚惊讶，以为妖怪。
现代文：看到的人都很惊讶，以为是妖怪。
English: People who saw it were surprised and thought it was a monster.

古文：老姥恐为祸，颇追悔焉。
现代文：老太太怕它作祸，特别后悔。
English: The old lady was afraid that it would do harm, and she especially regretted it.

古文：遂亲至小池边祷祝曰： 我本惜尔命，容尔生，反欲祸我耶？ 
现代文：于是她就亲自到小池边祷告说： 我本来怜惜你的性命，容许你活下来，你反倒想要祸害我吗？ 
English: So she went herself to the edge of the little pool and prayed, saying, "I had pity on your life and allowed you to live, but instead you want to harm me?

古文：言才绝，其赤鲤跃起，云从风至，即入汾水。
现代文：话才说完，那鲤鱼就跳起来，云跟着风来，就投到汾水里去了。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, the eel jumped up, and the cloud, following the wind, cast itself into the turbid water.

古文：唯空中遗下一珠，如弹丸，光晶射人。
现代文：只从空中丢下来一颗珍珠，弹丸那么大，晶莹光亮，耀眼夺目。
English: Just a pearl dropped from the sky, as big as a projectile, crystal bright, dazzling and dazzling.

古文：其老姥得之，众人不敢取。
现代文：那老太太得了。别人不敢动。
English: The old lady got it. No one else dared to move.

古文：后五年，老姥长子患风，病渐笃，医莫能疗，老姥甚伤。
现代文：五年后，老太太的大儿子得了风病，病情越来越重，谁也治不好。
English: Five years later, the old lady's eldest son fell ill with rheumatism. His condition became more and more serious, and no one could cure him.

古文：忽意取是珠，以召良医。
现代文：老太太特别伤心，忽然想用那颗珠子招聘名医。
English: The old lady was very sad and suddenly wanted to use the bead to recruit a famous doctor.

古文：其珠忽化为一丸丹。
现代文：一看，那珠子已变成一粒丹药。
English: At a glance, that bead has turned into a potion.

古文：老姥曰： 此赤鲤遗我，以救我子，答我之惠也。 
现代文：老太太说： 这是鲤鱼送给我，用来救我儿子，报答我的恩惠的。 
English: The old lady said, "This eel was given to me to save my son and repay my kindness.

古文：遂与子服之，其病寻愈。
现代文：于是就给儿子吃下去，果然不久就好了。
English: So he gave it to his son to eat, and sure enough, he soon felt better.

古文：李宣
现代文：李宣
English: Li Xuan

古文：李宣宰阳县，县左有潭，传有龙居，而鳞物尤美。
现代文：李宣在阳县做县令，县左边有个水潭，传说有龙住在里边，而且鳞角特别好看。
English: Li Xuan was a county magistrate in Yang County. On the left side of the county, there is a pond. It is said that there is a dragon living in it, and the scales are particularly beautiful.

古文：李之子惰学，爱钓术，日住潭上。
现代文：李宣的儿子学业上很懒惰，喜欢钓术，一天到晚呆在潭上。
English: Li Xuan's son is lazy in his studies, likes fishing and stays in the lake all day.

古文：一旦龙见，满潭火发，如舒锦被。
现代文：有一天龙果然出现了，满潭着起火来，就象展开的锦被。
English: One day, the dragon did indeed appear, bursting into flames like an unfurled bedspread.

古文：李子褫魄，委竿而走。
现代文：李宣的儿子吓得魂飞魄散，扔掉钓竿就跑。
English: Li Xuan's son was so scared that he threw away his fishing rod and ran away.

古文：盖钓术多以煎燕为饵，果发龙之嗜欲也。
现代文：大概钓术都是以前燕为饵，果然诱发了龙的嗜欲。
English: Presumably, all fishing techniques used to be a game of cat-and-mouse, which has certainly induced the dragon's craving.

古文：濛阳湫
现代文：濛阳湫
English: 阳

古文：彭州濛阳县界，地名清流，有一湫。
现代文：彭州濛阳县境内，一个名叫 清流 的地方，有一个水池。
English: In the territory of Panyang County, Pengzhou, there is a pool in a place called Qingliu.

古文：乡俗云，此湫龙与西山慈母池龙为昏，每岁一会。
现代文：乡里一般人都说，这池里的龙与西山慈母池里的龙是夫妻，每年会一次面。
English: Ordinary people in the village say that the dragon in this pond and the dragon in the West Mountain Mother's Pond are husband and wife, and they meet once a year.

古文：新繁人王睿乃博物者，多所辨正。
现代文：新繁人王睿是个能辨识许多事物的人，经他辨别而得出正确结论的事情有许多。
English: Xinfangren Wang Rui is a person who can discern many things. There are many things that he can discern and come to the right conclusion.

古文：尝鄙之。
现代文：他曾经对上述说法看不起。
English: He once scoffed at the notion.

古文：秋雨后经过此湫，乃遇西边雷雨冥晦，狂风拔树。
现代文：有一回一场秋雨之后，他路过这个水池，竟然遇上西边雷雨昏暗，狂风拔树。
English: Once, after an autumn rain, he passed by this pool and was surprised to encounter a thunderstorm in the west, with darkness and a strong wind uprooting trees.

古文：王睿絷马障树而避。
现代文：他把马拴到一棵树上避雨。
English: He tied his horse to a tree to shelter from the rain.

古文：须臾，雷电之势，止于湫上，倏然而霁，天无纤云。
现代文：不多时，雷电在池上停止，倏然间雨住天晴，万里无云。
English: Not infrequently, thunder and lightning stop over the pond, and suddenly the rain stops and the sky clears, with not a cloud in the sky.

古文：诘彼居人，正符前说也。
现代文：问那些住在本地的人这是怎么回事，说法与前边说的正好相符。
English: Ask anyone who lives in the area what it's like, and they'll say the same thing.

古文：云安县西有小汤溪。土俗云，此溪龙与云安溪龙为亲。
现代文：云安县西有个小汤溪，当地人说，这溪里的龙与云安溪里的龙是亲戚。
English: There is a small Tang Creek in the west of Yunan County. Locals say that the dragon in this creek is related to the dragon in Yunan Creek.

古文：此乃不经之谈也。
现代文：这是不合常理的说法。
English: That's an extraordinary thing to say.

古文：或一日，风雷自小汤溪，循蜀江中而下，至云安县。云物回薄，入溪中，疾电狂霆诚可畏。
现代文：有一天，风雷从小汤溪沿着蜀江而下来到云安县，云中物旋转到溪边长满草丛地方，进入溪中，风雷闪电，实在可怕。
English: One day, the wind and lightning came down from Xiaotang Creek along the Shu River to Yun'an County. The object in the cloud rotated to a place full of grass along the stream, and entered the stream. The wind, thunder and lightning were really terrible.

古文：有柳毅洞庭之事，与此相符。
现代文：有柳毅洞庭传书一事，与此说相符。
English: The fact that Liu Yi Dongting passed on the letter is consistent with this.

古文：小汤之事自目睹。
现代文：小汤溪的事是亲眼所见。
English: I saw the events in Xiaotangxi with my own eyes.

古文：盐井龙
现代文：盐井龙
English: Shiitai Ryu

古文：王蜀时。夔州大昌盐井水中往往有龙，或白或黄，鳞鬣光明。
现代文：王蜀的时候，夔州大昌的盐井水中往往有龙，有的白，有的黄，鳞和鬣闪闪发光。
English: During the reign of King Shu, there were often dragons, some white, some yellow, and scales and worms glittering in the salt well water of Dashang, Luzhou.

古文：搅之不动，唯沮沫而已。
现代文：搅动井里的水，龙也不动，只吐一些白沫而已。
English: Stirring the water in the well, the dragon did not move, only spit some foam.

古文：彼人不以为异。
现代文：那里的人司空见惯，不以为怪。
English: It's not surprising that people there are used to it.

古文：近者秭归永济井卤槽，亦有龙蟠，与大昌者无异。
现代文：近来秭归县永济井的卤槽子里，也有龙，与大昌盐井里的没什么两样。
English: Recently, there was also a dragon in the brine tank of Yongji well in Yugui County, which is no different from the dragon in the Dashang salt well.

古文：识者曰： 龙之为灵瑞也，负图以升天，今乃见于卤中，岂能云行雨施乎？ 
现代文：认识龙的人说： 龙作为一种灵瑞，是为了行云布雨而到天上去的。现在却出现在卤水里，怎么能云行雨施呢？ 
English: People who know dragons say, "Dragons, as a kind of good luck charm, went up to the sky in order to make clouds and rain. But now they appear in the brine, how can they make clouds and rain?"

古文：云安县汉成宫绝顶，有天池深七八丈。
现代文：云安县汉成宫山的最顶上，有一个七八丈深的天池。
English: At the top of the Hancheng Palace Mountain in Yunnan County, there is a seven-meter-deep sky pool.

古文：其中有物如蜥蜴，长咫尺，五色备具，跃于水面，象小龙也。
现代文：池中有一种动物象蜥蜴，八寸来长，五色具备，跳动在水面上，象小龙。
English: In the pool there is an animal like a lizard, eight inches long, with five colors, beating on the water, like a small dragon.

古文：有高遇者为刺史，诣宫设醮，忽浮出。
现代文：有一个叫高遇的人做刺史，他来到汉成宫进行祭祀，那东西忽然就浮上水面。
English: There is a story about a man named Gao Feng. He came to Hancheng Palace to perform a ritual, and the object suddenly floated to the surface of the water.

古文：或问监官李德符曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：有人问监官李德符说： 这是什么征兆呢？ 
English: Someone asked the supervisor, Li Defu, "What is this sign?"

古文：符曰： 某自生长于此，且未常见汉成池中之物。
现代文：李德符说： 我从小生长在这里，还没见过汉成池中的那种东西。
English: Li Defu said, "I grew up here, and I haven't seen that kind of thing in Hancheng Pond.

古文：高既无善政，谄佛侫神，亦已至矣。安可定其是非也？ 
现代文：高遇既然没有善政，对佛和神如此谄侫讨好，也已经做到家了，怎么能确定他是对是错呢？ 
English: Since there is no such thing as good governance, and since he is so eager to please the Buddha and the gods, and since he has already achieved a family, how can he be sure that he is right or wrong?

古文：夷陵清江有狼山潭，其中有龙。
现代文：夷陵的清江有一个狼山潭，潭中有一条龙。
English: There is a wolf mountain pool in the Qingjiang River in Yiling, and there is a dragon in the pool.

古文：土豪李务求祷而事之。
现代文：土豪李务求到潭边祷告，往潭中一看，锦被盖着水面。
English: Local hero Li Muqiu went to the edge of the pond to pray. When he looked into the middle of the pond, the brocade was covered by the water.

古文：往见锦衾覆水，或浮出大木，横塞水面，号为龙巢。遂州高栋溪潭，每岁龙见，一如狼山之事。
现代文：或者浮出大木头来，横塞在水面上，叫作龙巢。遂州高栋的溪潭，年年都有龙出现，和狼山潭完全一样。
English: Or a large log floats up, sticking sideways on the surface of the water, and is called a dragon's nest. Suizhou's high-rise creek, where dragons appear year after year, is exactly the same as the Wolf Mountain Lake.

古文：尹皓
现代文：尹皓
English: Yin Qi

古文：朱梁尹皓镇华州。
现代文：朱梁时尹浩镇守华州。
English: At the time of Zhu Liang, Yin Hao was in charge of Huazhou.

古文：夏将半，出城巡警。
现代文：夏季将过去一半。一日，他出城巡警。
English: Halfway through the summer, one day, he was out on patrol.

古文：时蒲雍各有兵戈相持故也。
现代文：因为当时蒲雍各有兵戈相持，于是就下马。
English: Because at that time, each puyang had its own war, so they dismounted.

古文：因下马，于荒地中得一物如石，又如卵。
现代文：他在地上捡到一个东西，像石，又像卵。
English: He picked up something on the ground, like a stone, like an egg.

古文：其色青黑，光滑可爱。
现代文：它是青黑色的，光滑可爱。
English: It's blue-black, smooth and lovely.

古文：命左右收之。
现代文：他让左右把它收起来。
English: He told the left and right to put it away.

古文：又行三二十里，见村院佛堂。遂置于像前。
现代文：又走了二三十里，见村院里有佛堂，就把那个像石又像卵的东西放到佛像前。
English: After walking another twenty or thirty miles, he saw that there was a Buddhist temple in the village, so he placed the stone-like and egg-like object in front of the Buddha statue.

古文：其夜雷霆大震，猛雨如注，天火烧佛堂，而不损佛像。
现代文：那一夜雷霆大震，暴雨如注，天火烧了佛堂，却没有损坏佛像。
English: That night there was a thunderous earthquake, torrential rain, and the sky fire burned the Buddhist temple, but did not damage the Buddha statue.

古文：盖龙卵也。
现代文：大概那是龙卵。
English: It's probably a dragon's egg.

古文：院外柳树数百株，皆倒植之。
现代文：院外有数百棵柳树，全都倒过来了。
English: There are hundreds of willows outside the hospital, all of which have fallen over.

古文：其卵已失。
现代文：卵已经失去。
English: The eggs are gone.

