古文：烈裔敬君毛延寿赵岐刘褒张衡徐邈曹不兴卫协王献之顾恺之顾光宝王慄王濛戴逵宗炳黄花寺壁
现代文：烈裔敬君毛延寿赵岐刘褒张衡徐邈曹不兴卫协王献之顾恺之顾光宝王慄王濛戴逵宗炳黄花寺壁
English: The descendants of the martyrs respect Mao Yan Shou, Zhao Qi, Liu Bo, Zhang Heng, Xu Qi, Cao Nuxing, Wei Hei, Wang Xian, Wang Xian, Wang Daizhong, Huanghua Temple wall

古文：烈裔
现代文：烈裔
English: Descendants of martyrs

古文：秦有烈裔者，骞霄国人。
现代文：秦朝时有个叫烈裔的人，骞霄国人。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, there was a man called the Descendant of the Martyrs, a native of Shenshan.

古文：秦皇帝时，本国进之。
现代文：秦始皇时代，是他本国将他当成贡品进献给秦朝的。
English: During the reign of Qin Shi Huangdi, his country presented him as a tribute to the Qin Dynasty.

古文：口含丹墨，噀壁以成龙兽。以指历地如绳界之，转手方圆，皆如规度。
现代文：烈裔可以在一寸见方那么大的地方画上各种山岳、河流，各个国家的版图。
English: The descendants of the martyrs can draw all kinds of mountains, rivers, and territories of various countries on a square inch.

古文：方寸内有五岳四渎，列国备焉。善画龙凤，轩轩然唯恐飞去。
现代文：他特别擅长画龙画凤，画出的龙凤活脱脱的，唯恐它展翅飞去。
English: He is particularly good at drawing dragons and phoenixes. If the dragon and phoenix are alive and free, they should not fly away.

古文：敬君
现代文：敬君
English: Respectfully yours,

古文：齐敬君善画。
现代文：齐国的敬君擅长绘画。
English: Qigong's Jingjun is good at painting.

古文：齐王起九重台，召敬君画。
现代文：齐王建造一座九重台，召见敬君去九重台作画。
English: King Qi built a nine-storied pagoda and summoned King Jing to go to the pagoda to paint.

古文：君久不得归，思其妻，遂画真以对之。
现代文：敬君很长时间没有回家了，他非常想念他的妻子，于是绘了一幅妻子的画像，很美，跟真人一样。
English: Keijun hadn't been home for a long time, he missed his wife very much, so he drew a picture of his wife, very beautiful, just like a real person.

古文：齐王因覩其美，赐金百万，遂纳其妻。
现代文：齐王看见了这幅画像，也觉得画的女人非常美丽。于是齐王赏赐给敬君钱百万，将他的妻子迎入宫内为嫔妃。
English: King Qi saw the painting and thought the woman depicted was very beautiful, so he rewarded King Keijun with one million yuan and welcomed his wife into the palace as his concubine.

古文：毛延寿
现代文：毛延寿
English: Mao Yanshou

古文：前汉元帝，后宫既多，不得常见。
现代文：前汉元帝时，后宫里的嫔妃特别多。
English: In the time of the former Han Emperor Yuan, the number of concubines in the harem was particularly high.

古文：乃令画工图其形，按图召幸之。
现代文：元帝不能经常都看到她们，于是画工们给这些嫔妃们每人画一幅像，元帝看着画像喜爱那个就召见那个。
English: Yuan Di could not always see them, so the painters drew a portrait of each of these concubines, and Yuan Di looked at the picture and liked the one and summoned the other.

古文：诸宫人皆赂画工，多者十万，少者不减五万。唯王嫱不肯，遂不得召。
现代文：后宫里的嫔妃们都纷纷贿赂画工，多的给十万钱，少的也得给五万钱，为的是让画工将自己画得妩媚漂亮些，好得到皇帝的宠爱。
English: The concubines in the harem all bribed the painters one after another, most of them to the tune of one hundred thousand dollars, while others had to pay as much as fifty thousand dollars, in order to get the painters to paint themselves more attractively and beautifully, so that they could win the emperor's favor.

古文：后匈奴求美人为阏氏，上按图召昭君行。
现代文：只有王嫱不肯贿赂画工，这样，她始终没有让元帝召见过。
English: Only Wang Yao refused to bribe the painter, so she was never summoned by Yuan Di.

古文：及去召见，貌美压后宫。而占对举止，各尽闲雅。
现代文：而且，眼前这位他第一次见到的嫔妃，行、立、坐、卧、一举一动、一频一笑都是那么的闲雅大方，妩媚得让人销魂。
English: Moreover, in front of his eyes, this concubine, whom he saw for the first time, walked, stood, sat, lay down, every move, every laugh was so leisurely and elegant, so charming that it was soul-stirring.

古文：帝悔之，而业已定。
现代文：汉元帝深深地感到惋惜与后悔。
English: Emperor Hanyuan deeply felt regret and remorse.

古文：帝重信于外国，不复更人。
现代文：但是事情已成定局，堂堂大汉朝的天子得讲信誉，不能再更换人选了。
English: However, the matter has become a foregone conclusion. The great Han dynasty's divine son has to prove his credibility and can no longer be replaced.

古文：乃穷按其事，画工皆弃市。
现代文：于是，元帝命人彻底追究这件事情。将所有宫内的画工都处死。
English: As a result, the former emperor ordered someone to investigate the matter thoroughly, and all the painters in the palace were put to death.

古文：籍其家，资皆巨万。
现代文：抄没画工们的家产时发现，每个画工的家产都超过一百万。
English: When the family assets of the painters were confiscated, it was found that the family assets of each painter exceeded one million.

古文：画工杜陵毛延寿为人形，丑好老少，必得其真。
现代文：其中有一个画工叫毛延寿，杜陵人，他为作人像画丑陋的、老的、年轻的，都画得真实生动。
English: Among them, there is a painter named Mao Yanshou, a man from Tuling, who paints portraits of ugly, old, and young people, all realistically and vividly.

古文：安陵陈敞，新丰刘白、龚宽并工牛马众势，人形丑好，不逮延寿。
现代文：安陵陈敞，新丰刘白、龚宽等画工都擅长画牛马群图。然而画人像不管是美是丑都赶不上毛延寿。
English: Painters such as Anling Chen Zhan, Xinfeng Liu Bai, and Xing Kuan are all good at painting cattle and horses. However, they can't catch up with Mao Yanshou in painting portraits, whether they are beautiful or ugly.

古文：下杜阳望亦善画，尤善布色，同日弃市。
现代文：下杜阳望也画得一手好人像。他尤其擅长调配颜色，也是同一天被处死。
English: Lower Du Yangwang also painted a good man. He was particularly good at mixing colors and was also executed on the same day.

古文：京师画工，于是差希。赵岐
现代文：一时间，京城中的画工很少了。赵岐
English: For a while, there were very few painters in the capital.

古文：后汉赵歧字邠卿，京兆杜陵人。多才艺，善画。
现代文：后汉赵歧，字邠卿，京都地区杜陵人，多才多艺，擅长绘画。
English: Zhao Qifu in the late Han Dynasty, also known as Lord Zhaozhuang, was a man from the Tuling area of Kyoto. He was multi-talented and good at painting.

古文：自为寿藏于郢城中。
现代文：他给自己绘的寿像藏在郢城中。
English: The portrait he painted of himself is hidden in the castle.

古文：画季札、子产、晏婴、叔向四人居宾位，自居主位，各为赞诵。
现代文：画像上画有季札、子产、晏婴、叔向四人位在宾座，将他自己画在主位。
English: On the picture, there are four people in the guest seat, including the season ticket holder, the child, the baby, and the uncle, and he himself is painted in the main seat.

古文：献帝建安六年，官至太常卿。
现代文：这四个人给他献赞礼祝寿。汉献帝建安六年。赵歧官任太常卿。
English: These four people gave him praise and congratulated him on his birthday. Han Xian Di Jianan for six years. Zhao Qifu was appointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：刘褒
现代文：刘褒
English: Liu Bo

古文：后汉刘褒，桓帝时人。曾画云台阁。人见之觉热；又画北风图，人见之觉凉。
现代文：后汉刘褒，汉桓帝时代的人，曾经给云台阁作画，人们看了后感觉热；又画《北风图》这回人看了感觉凉了。
English: Later Han Liu Bo, a person in the era of Emperor Han Huan, once painted Yuntai Pavilion, and people felt hot after seeing it; he also painted "Map of the North Wind," and this time people felt cool after seeing it.

古文：官至蜀郡太守。
现代文：官至蜀郡太守。
English: He rose to the position of Shuxi County Governor.

古文：张衡
现代文：张衡
English: Zhang Heng

古文：后汉张衡字平子，南阳西鄂人。高才过人，性聪，明天象，善书。累拜侍中，出为河间王相，年六十二。
现代文：后汉的张衡，字平子，南阳西鄂人，才高过人，生性聪慧，通晓天象，擅长书法，多年官任郎中，后来出任河间王相，享年六十二岁。
English: Zhang Heng of the later Han Dynasty, also known as Ping Zi, was from the Southern Yang Dynasty and Western Han Dynasty. He was taller than other people, naturally intelligent, familiar with celestial objects, and good at calligraphy. He was an official for many years and later served as the king of Kawama, and died at the age of sixty-two.

古文：昔建州满城县山有兽名骇神，豕身人首，状貌丑恶，百鬼恶之。
现代文：以前，建州满城县山中出现一只怪兽名叫骇神。人头猪身，长相非常丑恶，各种山神鬼怪都厌恶它。
English: In the past, a monster named Hao Shen appeared in the mountains of Jianzhou Mancheng County. It was a pig with a human head. It was very ugly, and all kinds of mountain gods and monsters hated it.

古文：好出水边石上，平子往写之，兽入水中不出。
现代文：这种怪兽在水边石头上出现，张衡前去山中想将它画下来。他来到水边取出纸笔后，怪兽又不出来了。
English: The monster appeared on a stone by the water's edge, and Zhang Heng went to the mountain to draw it. When he came to the water's edge to take out a pen and paper, the monster did not come out.

古文：或云，此兽畏写之，故不出。
现代文：有人说：这只怪兽惧怕画它，因此不出来了。
English: Some people say, "This monster is afraid to draw it, so it won't come out."

古文：遂去纸笔，兽果出。
现代文：于是张衡收起纸笔，双手交叉着放在胸前，一动也不动，怪兽果然出来了。
English: So Zhang Heng put away his pen and paper, crossed his hands on his chest, and did not move at all. The monster did indeed come out.

古文：平子拱手不动，潜以足指画之。今号巴兽潭。
现代文：张衡悄悄用脚指将它画下来。这幅画现在有人称它为《巴兽潭》。
English: Zhang Heng quietly drew it with his toes. This painting is now called "Beast Pond."

古文：徐邈
现代文：徐邈
English: Xu Jun

古文：魏徐邈字景山，性嗜酒，善画。
现代文：魏徐邈，字景山，好喝酒，擅长绘画。
English: Wei Xuxuan, Zhaojing Mountain, good at drinking, good at painting.

古文：魏明帝游洛水，见白獭爱之，不可得。
现代文：魏明帝游赏洛水，看见从水中出来一只白獭。
English: Wei Mingdi swam in Luoshui and saw a egret coming out of the water.

古文：邈曰：獭嗜鲻鱼，乃不避死。
现代文：明帝非常喜爱它而又不能捉到它。徐邈说：獭喜欢吃鲻鱼，见到鲻鱼不怕死地抢着吃。
English: Emperor Ming loved it very much, but he couldn't catch it. Xu Yao said: Yao liked to eat eel, and when he saw eel, he was not afraid to eat it.

古文：遂画板作鲻鱼，悬岸。群獭竞来，一时执得。
现代文：之后，他就在画板上画上鲻鱼挂在岸边，果然引得群獭争相来食，终于捉到一只白獭。
English: After that, he drew a snapper on the drawing board and hung it on the shore, which really attracted a group of egrets to compete for food, and finally caught a egret.

古文：帝嘉叹曰：卿画何其神也。
现代文：明帝赞叹地说：徐卿你画的鲻鱼简直都神了，竟能将白獭引来！
English: Emperor Ming said with admiration: "Xu Xing, the eels you drew are simply amazing, they can even attract egrets!

古文：答曰：臣未尝执笔，所作者自可庶几。曹不兴
现代文：徐邈回答说：我不常执笔绘画。我作的画，都跟这幅鲻鱼差不多。曹不兴
English: Xu Yao replied, "I don't often paint with a brush. All my paintings are similar to this eel painting. Cao Buxing

古文：谢赫云：江左画人吴曹不兴，运五千尺绢画一像，心敏手疾，须臾立成。
现代文：谢赫说：江左吴地有个画人叫曹不兴，在五千尺阔的绢上画人像，心想手到不一会儿就画好了。
English: Sheikh said: There is a painter in Jiangzaowu named Cao Nuxing, who paints portraits on a five-thousand-foot-wide raft, and he can finish it in no time.

古文：头面手足，胸臆肩背，无遗失尺度。
现代文：画上的人物头、脸、手、脚、胸膛、两肩、脊背，都非常合乎比例。
English: The figure's head, face, hands, feet, chest, shoulders and back are all in proportion.

古文：此其难也，唯不兴能之。
现代文：这是很难做到的，只有曹不兴能画到这种程度。
English: This is very difficult to achieve, and only Cao Bingxing can draw to such an extent.

古文：陈朝谢赫善画，尝阅秘阁，叹伏曹不兴所画龙首，以为若见真龙。
现代文：陈朝谢赫也擅长作画，有一次他悄悄走进曹不兴作画的秘室中，看到曹不兴画的一只龙头，栩栩若生，以为自己看到的是一只真龙头。
English: Chen Chaoxieh is also good at painting. Once he quietly walked into Cao Bu Xing's secret room and saw a dragon head that Cao Bu Xing had painted. It looked so lifelike that he thought he was looking at a real dragon head.

古文：卫协
现代文：谢赫叹服不已。卫协
English: The sheikh was overwhelmed with admiration.

古文：晋卫协。
现代文：晋人卫协。
English: The Jin People's Defense Association.

古文：《抱朴子》云：卫协、张墨、并为画圣。
现代文：《抱扑子》说：卫协、张墨、并列为画圣。
English: "Cuddle" said: Wei Xie, Zhang Mo, and listed as a painting saint.

古文：孙鸿之《上林苑图》，协踪最妙。
现代文：孙鸿收藏的《上林苑图》，是卫协画作中最好的一幅。
English: Sun Hong's collection of "Shanglinyuan Map" is one of the best paintings in the collection of the Chinese People's Medical Association.

古文：又《七佛图》，人不敢点眼睛。
现代文：还有《七佛图》，画上的人物都不敢给他们画上眼睛。
English: There is also "The Seven Buddhas," in which the figures do not dare to have their eyes painted on.

古文：恺之论画云，《七佛》与《烈女》，皆协之迹，壮而有情势。
现代文：恐怕点上后，人物活了以后从画上走下来。顾恺之评论画说：《七佛图》与《烈女图》都是卫协的真迹，人物壮美而情趣盎然。
English: I'm afraid that after dotting, the figures come down from the painting after they have come to life. Gu Xizhi commented on the painting: "Seven Buddhas" and "Fierce Female Figure" are the true works of Wei Xie, the figures are magnificent and full of passion.

古文：《毛诗北风图》亦协手，巧密于情思。
现代文：《毛诗北风图》也出自卫协之手，构思的奇巧在于表现人物的情态上。
English: "Mao's Map of the North Wind" was also created by Wei Xie. The ingenuity of the concept lies in the mood of the characters.

古文：此画短卷，长装八分。
现代文：这是一幅短卷，长装八分。
English: It's a short story, eight minutes long.

古文：张彦远题云，元和，宗人惟素将来，余大父答以名马精绢二百匹，惟素后却又将货与韩愈。
现代文：张颜远题字：唐宪宗元和年间，同族人惟素要将这幅画卖给我家，我的祖父答应用名马，精绢二百匹买这幅画。后来，惟素又将这幅画卖给了韩愈。
English: Zhang Yanyuan Inscription: During the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, a member of the same ethnic group, Xue Su, wanted to sell this painting to my family. My grandfather agreed to buy the painting with 200 fine horses. Later, Xue Su sold the painting to Han Yu.

古文：韩之子昶借与相国段文昌，却以模本归于昶。
现代文：韩愈的儿子韩昶，借给了相国段文昌。段文昌留下了真迹，却将摹本还给了韩昶。
English: Han Yu's son, Han Kuo, lent it to his brother-in-law, Duan Wenchang. Duan Wenchang kept the original, but returned the copy to Han Kuo.

古文：会昌元年见段家本。后于襄州从事见韩家本。
现代文：会昌元年，见到了段文昌家中收藏的真本，后来又在襄州从事那里见到了韩家摹本。
English: In the first year of Huichang, he saw a genuine copy in the collection of Duan Wenchang's home, and later he saw a Korean copy in Xiangzhou.

古文：谢赫云，古画皆略，至此始精。
现代文：谢赫说：古人的画都很粗糙，到了卫协才开始精美起来。
English: The sheikh said: "The paintings of the ancients were very rough. It was not until the time of the Guarding Association that they began to be refined.

古文：六法颇为兼善，虽不备该形似而有气韵，陵跨群雄。
现代文：作画的六种技法比较全面地运用了，而且日渐精熟。卫协的画虽然还没有达到形神兼备的程度，却已经超越了以前的诸位画师，是世间从来未有过的绘画精品。
English: The six techniques of painting have been used more comprehensively and are becoming more and more sophisticated. Although the paintings of Wei Xie have not yet reached the level of both form and spirit, they have surpassed the previous painters and are exquisite paintings that have never existed in the world.

古文：旷代绝笔。在第一品曹不兴下，张墨、荀勖上。
现代文：他的作品在画坛第一名家曹不兴之下，在张墨、荀勖之上。
English: His works are below the first place in the art world, Cao Bu Xing, and above Zhang Mo and Zou.

古文：王献之
现代文：王献之
English: Wang Xianzhi

古文：晋王献之字子敬，少有盛名，风流高迈。草隶继父之美，妙于画。
现代文：晋王献之，字子敬，年轻时就负有盛名，风流豪迈，草书、隶书继承他父亲王羲之的风格，更擅长作画。
English: Jin Wang Xianzhi, known as "Zhizi Jing," was famous and popular when he was young. He inherited the style of his father Wang Xizhi in cursive and calligraphy, and was better at painting.

古文：桓温尝请画扇，误落笔，就成乌駮悖牛，极妙绝。
现代文：桓温曾经请他画扇面，下笔有误，就着这一错笔而画出一头乌斑母牛，画极好。
English: Kuan Wen once asked him to draw a fan, but he made a mistake in the next stroke, so he drew a black-spotted cow with this wrong stroke, and the drawing was excellent.

古文：又书《驳牛赋》于扇上，此扇义熙中犹在。
现代文：又作一首《斑牛赋》，写在扇子上。这把扇子，义熙年间还有呢。
English: He also composed a poem, "Mottled Cow Fu," which was written on a fan. This fan was still around during the Yixi era.

古文：顾恺之
现代文：顾恺之
English: Gu Xizhi

古文：晋顾恺之字长康，小字虎头，晋陵人。
现代文：晋顾恺之，字长康，小名叫虎头，晋陵人。
English: Jin Gu Xizhi's nickname was "Chang Kang," his nickname was "Kotou," and he was from Jinling.

古文：多才气，尤工丹青，傅写形势，莫不妙绝。
现代文：顾恺之很有才气，尤其擅长作画。他的画构图勾线，涂抹写意，没有不绝妙的。
English: Gu Xizhi is very talented, especially good at painting. His painting composition is hooked, smeared and written, which is nothing short of brilliant.

古文：谢安谓长康曰：卿画自生人已来未有。
现代文：谢安对顾恺之说：你的书法，自从有人类存在以来没有过你这样的。
English: Xie'an said to Gu Yanzhi: "Your calligraphy, since the existence of human beings, has never been like you.

古文：又云：卿画苍苍，古来未有。
现代文：又说，你的画郁郁苍苍，也是从古以来所未有的。
English: He also said that your paintings are rich and vibrant, which is unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：曾以一橱画暂寄桓玄，皆其妙迹所珍秘者，封题之。其后玄闻取之，诳云不开。
现代文：后来恒玄听说厨柜里盛的都是顾恺之自己的上品画作，便打开柜将画取走，并欺骗顾说他并没有打开柜子。
English: Later, Heng Xuan heard that the kitchen cabinet was full of Gu Yao's own fine paintings, so he opened the cabinet to take the paintings away, and deceived Gu that he did not open the cabinet.

古文：恺之不疑被窃，直云：妙画通神，变化飞去，犹人之登仙也。
现代文：顾恺之不怀疑他柜子里的画是让人给偷走了。而是自我解释说：好画能通神，幻化成仙飞走了。就象人修炼成仙一样。
English: Gu Yanzhi did not suspect that the paintings in his cupboard had been stolen by someone. Instead, he explained himself: good paintings can communicate with the gods and fly away as if they had been transformed into immortals. Just like people cultivating into immortals.

古文：恺之有三绝：才绝、画绝、痴绝。
现代文：顾恺之有三绝：才绝、画绝、痴绝。
English: Gu Xizhi has three extremes: talent, painting and obsession.

古文：又尝悦一怜女，乃画女于壁，当心钉之。
现代文：顾恺之曾经爱过邻居的一位姑娘，将这位姑娘的画像画在墙上，用钉子钉在心上。
English: Gu Yanzhi had once loved a girl in his neighborhood. He painted a picture of the girl on the wall and nailed it to his heart.

古文：女患心痛，告于长康，康遂拔钉。
现代文：这位姑娘马上心疼，将这事告诉了顾恺之。
English: The girl was immediately distressed and told Gu Xizhi about it.

古文：乃愈。又尝欲写殷仲堪真，仲堪素有目疾，固辞。
现代文：顾恺之马上拔走画像上的钉子，这位邻家姑娘心马上不疼了。还有一次，顾恺之想为殷仲堪画一幅像。殷仲堪有眼疾，坚决辞谢。
English: Gu Xizhi immediately pulled out the nail on the picture, the neighbor girl's heart immediately did not hurt. Another time, Gu Xizhi wanted to draw a picture for Yin Zhongkan. Yin Zhongkan has an eye disease, resolutely declined.

古文：长康曰：明府无病，若明点瞳子，飞白拂上，便如轻云蔽日。
现代文：顾恺之说：画像上的你眼睛没有病，我画人物从来不点眼睛。若明点眼瞳，涂上一笔，便如同轻云蔽日一样，那不好。
English: Gu Yanzhi said, "Your eyes in the picture are not diseased. I never dot my eyes when I draw people. If I do, it will be like a light cloud covering the sun. That's not good.

古文：画人物，数年不点目睛。
现代文：顾恺之画人物，多年不画眼睛。
English: Gu Gan's characters have not had their eyes painted for many years.

古文：人问其故，答曰：四体妍蚩，本无关于妙处。传神写貌，正在阿堵之中。
现代文：有人问他不画眼睛的原因，他回答说：画人物画身体四肢画得好与不好，没有多大关系，传神之笔，就在这不画眼睛中呢！
English: When someone asked him why he didn't paint the eyes, he replied: "It doesn't matter whether the limbs of the body are drawn well or poorly, the pen of God is in the eyes that are not painted!"

古文：又画裴楷真，颊上乃加三毛。云：楷俊郎，有鉴识。
现代文：顾恺之给裴楷画像，脸颊上加上三根毛，说：裴楷长相俊，有鉴识，就画在此处。
English: Gu Yanzhi gave Pei Kai a picture of a cucumber, adding three hairs to his cheek, saying: Pei Kai is good-looking and has discernment, so he drew it here.

古文：具此，观之者定觉殊胜。
现代文：看画的人一定感觉这个人很不寻常。
English: The viewer of the painting must feel that this person is very unusual.

古文：嵇康赠以四言诗，画为图。常云：手挥五弦易，目送归鸿难。
现代文：嵇康赠给顾恺之四言诗一首，顾恺之将诗意绘成画，常常指着这幅画说：画上的这个人物，画他挥手弹琴很容易，画他目送归飞的鸿雁就难了。
English: Yu Kang presented a four-character poem to Gu Xizhi. Gu Xizhi drew the poem into a picture, often pointing to the picture and saying, "This person on the picture, it is easy to draw him waving and playing the piano, but it is difficult to draw him watching the wild geese fly away."

古文：又画谢幼舆于一岩中，人问其故。
现代文：顾恺之又作一幅画，画的是谢幼舆站在山谷中。有人问他怎么这样画？
English: Gu Yuzhi also made another painting, depicting Xie Youyou standing in a valley. Someone asked him how to paint like this?

古文：云：一丘一壑，此子宜置岩壑中。
现代文：回答说：一山一谷，这个人适合将他放在山谷中。
English: And he said, This is a good man; let him be put in the middle of the valley.

古文：长康又尝于瓦棺寺北殿内画维摩居士，画毕，光辉月余。
现代文：顾恺之曾经为瓦棺寺北殿的墙壁上画维摩居士像，画好后维摩头顶华光四射，月余不散。
English: Gu Yanzhi once painted the image of the deity Vima on the wall of the North Hall of the Wajin Temple. After the painting was completed, the top of Vima's head shone brightly for months.

古文：《京师寺记》云，兴宁中，瓦棺寺初置僧众，设刹会，请朝贤士庶宣疏募缘。时士大夫莫有过十万者，长康独注百万。
现代文：《京师寺记》上记着说：兴宁中年，瓦棺寺刚建成住进僧人，设置法会，请朝中贤士，世间应人捐款赞助，当时的官员文士捐款没有超过十万钱的，唯有顾恺之捐资百万钱。
English: It is recorded in the "Record of the Beijing Teachers' Temple" that: Xingning was middle-aged, the Wafang Temple had just been built and monks had moved in, a puja was set up, the wise men of the dynasty were invited, and people from all over the world made donations. At that time, the officials and scribes did not donate more than 100,000 yuan, but only Gu Xi donated one million yuan.

古文：长康素贫，众以为大言。后寺僧请勾疏，长康曰：宜备一壁。
现代文：他家一向清贫，人们都认为他在说大话，后来法会上宣读的捐款祝祷文上写的数额付款时，顾恺之对僧人说：请贵寺选一面空白墙壁，我去到那里后，关好门户，不许他人进入。
English: His family had always been poor, and people thought he was exaggerating. Later, when paying the amount written on the donation and blessing prayer read at the puja, Gu Yanzhi said to the monk: "Please choose a blank wall for your temple. When I get there, close the gate and do not allow others to enter."

古文：闭户不出一月余，所画维摩一躯工毕。将欲点眸子，乃谓僧众曰：第一日观者，请施十万；第二日观者，请施五万；第三日观者，可任其施。
现代文：顾恺之在寺里整整呆了一月有余，在这面墙壁上绘一幅巨大的维摩画像，将要画眼睛时，顾恺之对僧人说：这幅画作好后，第一天来观看的人，请让他向寺里施钱十万，第二天来观看的施钱五万，第三天来看的随便施多少都可以了。
English: Gu Xizhi stayed in the temple for more than a month. On this wall, he painted a huge picture of Vima. When he was about to paint the eyes, Gu Xizhi said to the monk: "After this painting is finished, if you come to see it on the first day, please let him give 100,000 yuan to the temple. If you come to see it on the second day, give 50,000 yuan. If you come to see it on the third day, you can give as much as you like."

古文：及开户，光照一寺。
现代文：到打开门时，壁上的维摩巨像，光濯整个寺院。
English: By the time the door was opened, the colossal statue of Vima on the wall had stripped the entire temple bare.

古文：施者填咽，俄而及百万。
现代文：前来观看布施的人群堵塞寺门，挤满了寺院，不到一会儿工夫，就集资上百万钱。
English: The crowd of people who came to watch the giving blocked the temple gate, crowded the temple, and within a short time, they raised millions of money.

古文：刘义庆《世说》云，桓大司马每请长康与羊欣讲论画书，竟夕忘疲。
现代文：刘义庆在《世说新语》中说：桓玄大司马，每请顾恺之与羊欣讲论画书时，竟然一谈就是一个通宵，连疲劳都忘记了。
English: Liu Yixing said in "World News" that every time he invited Gu Yanzhi and Yang Xin to talk about picture books, Gu Yanzhi and Yang Xin would talk all night long, forgetting even their fatigue.

古文：又《清夜游西园图》，顾长康画。
现代文：又《清夜游西园图》是顾恺之画的。
English: In addition, "Clear Night Tour of the West Garden" is a painting by Gu Yao.

古文：有梁朝诸王跋尾处云，图上若干人并食天厨。
现代文：画的末尾处，有梁朝诸王写的《跋》：画上象有上千人一同在天上的御厨里吃饭。
English: At the end of the painting, there is Liang Dynasty's "Taba" written by the kings: it looks like thousands of people are eating together in the heavenly kitchen.

古文：贞观中，褚河南诸贤题处具在。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，褚遂良等诸位贤人的题署也都具在。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong Zhenguan of Tang Dynasty, the inscriptions of all the wise men such as Zou Suiliang were also present.

古文：本张惟素家收得，至相国张公弘靖。
现代文：《清夜游西园图》原来由张惟素家收藏，一直传到宰相张弘靖。
English: "Clear Night Tour of the West Garden" was originally collected by Zhang Weisui's family, and was passed down to Prime Minister Zhang Hongjing.

古文：元和中，宣惟素并钟元常写《道德经》，同进入内。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，皇上宣召张惟素和钟繇进宫书写《道德经》，张惟素同时将此画进献给皇上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong Yuan of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor called Zhang Weisu and Zhong Xi into the palace to write the "Moral Classic," and Zhang Weisu also presented this painting to the emperor.

古文：后中贵人崔谭峻自禁中将出，复流传人间。
现代文：后来宫内太监崔谭峻又从宫内将这幅画带出来，使它重又流入民间。
English: Later, the eunuch of the palace, Cui Tanjun, brought the painting out of the palace, causing it to circulate among the common people.

古文：惟素子周封前泾州从事在京，一日有人将此图求售，周封惊异之，遽以绢数匹易得。
现代文：张惟素的儿子前泾州从事张周封在京期间，一天，有人拿着《清夜游西园图》想卖给他。张周封非常惊异，马上付给这个人几匹绢买得这幅名画。
English: When Zhang Weisu's son, the former Luzhou, was working with Zhang Zhoufeng in Beijing, one day, someone tried to sell him "Clear Night Tour of the Western Garden." Zhang Zhoufeng was very surprised and immediately paid the man several horses to buy this famous painting.

古文：经年，忽闻款门甚急。
现代文：过了一年，忽然听到有人急剧地敲门，问这个人有什么事？
English: A year later, I suddenly heard someone knocking sharply on the door, asking what had happened to this man?

古文：问之，见数人同称，仇中尉愿以三百素绢，易公《清夜图》。
现代文：看到门外有好几个人异口同声地说：仇中尉愿意用三百匹白绢换你的《清夜游西园图》。
English: Seeing several people outside the door, they said in unison: "Lieutenant Qiu is willing to exchange three hundred egrets for your "Clear Night Tour of the Western Garden."

古文：周封惮其迫胁，遽以图授之。
现代文：张周封惧怕这些人威胁他，立即将《清夜游西园图》取出来，给了这些人。
English: Zhang Zhoufeng, fearing that these people were threatening him, immediately took out the "Clear Night Western Garden Tour Map" and gave it to these people.

古文：明日，果赍绢至。
现代文：第二天，果然有人如数运来了白绢。
English: The next day, as expected, a large number of egrets arrived.

古文：后方知诈伪，乃是一豪士求江淮大监院。
现代文：后来才知道，这是受了人家的欺诈。原来，有一个劣绅有求于江淮盐署衙门，当时是王淮在那署理盐铁。
English: It was later learned that this was a case of fraud. It turned out that an unscrupulous person had asked the Jianghuai Salt Administration to open the gate. At that time, Wang Huai was the person in charge of salt and iron at the agency.

古文：时王淮判盐铁，酷好书画，谓此人曰：为余访得此图，然遂公所请。
现代文：此公酷受书画，对求他的这个人说：你能为我求得《清夜游西园图》，一定满足你的请求。
English: The official was impressed by the calligraphy and painting, and said to the man who asked him: "If you can get me the "Clear Night Western Garden Tour Map," I will definitely satisfy your request."

古文：因为计取耳。及王家事起，复流一粉铺家。
现代文：这才有这位豪绅设计从张周封那里诈取《清夜游西园图》一事。
English: It was only then that this wealthy gentleman designed to swindle "Clear Night Tour of the Western Garden" from Zhang Zhoufeng.

古文：郭侍郎承嘏阍者以钱三百市得。
现代文：待到王淮家犯事后，这幅画又流入一个粉铺家，又让郭侍郎委托一个在宫内担任祭祀执事的人，用三百钱买到手里。
English: After the Wang Huai family committed the crime, the painting flowed into a powder shop, and Guo Zhi Lang commissioned a person who served as a sacrificial deacon in the palace to buy it for three hundred dollars.

古文：郭公卒，又流传至令狐家。
现代文：郭侍郎去世后，这幅《清夜游西园图》又流入令狐家。
English: After the death of Guo Zhi Lang, this painting "Clear Night Tour of the West Garden" flowed into Ling Xue's family.

古文：宣宗尝问相国有何名画，相国其以图对。
现代文：唐宣宗有一次问宰相令狐藏有什么名画？令狐说他家藏有一幅《清夜游西园图》。
English: Tang Xuanzong once asked the prime minister Ling Juxu what famous paintings he had. Ling Juxu said that his family had a painting of "Clear Night Journey to the West Garden."

古文：后进入内。
现代文：后来，将这幅画进献给皇上。
English: Later, the painting was presented to the emperor.

古文：顾光宝
现代文：顾光宝
English: Gu Guanbao

古文：顾光宝能画。
现代文：顾光宝能画。
English: Gu Guanbao can draw.

古文：建康有陆溉，患疟经年。医疗皆无效。
现代文：建康有个人叫陆溉，身患疟疾有一年了，多处求医治疗都不见效果。
English: There is a person in Jiankang called Lu Yi, who has been suffering from malaria for a year, and many places to seek medical treatment have not been effective.

古文：光宝常诣溉，溉引见与卧前，谓光曰：我患此疾久，不得疗矣，君知否？
现代文：顾光宝有一次到陆溉家去，陆溉将他请到床前，说：我患这种病很长时间了，怎么治也治不好，你知道吗？
English: Gu Guanbao once went to Lu Rui's home for a walk. Lu Rui invited him to his bedside and said, "I have been suffering from this disease for a long time. There is no cure, you know?

古文：光宝不知溉患，谓溉曰：卿患此，深是不知。
现代文：顾光宝不知道他患有这种病，对他说：你患了这种病，我确实不知道。
English: Gu Guobao did not know that he was suffering from this disease, and said to him: "You are suffering from this disease, I really do not know.

古文：若闻，安至伏室。
现代文：要知道，何必让你躺在室内这么久。
English: You know, why let you lie indoors for so long.

古文：遂命笔，以墨图一狮子，令于外户榜之。
现代文：于是让人拿来笔墨，画一墨狮子，让陆溉张贴在室外的牌榜上，并对陆溉说：这幅狮子图贴出去便灵验。
English: So someone took a pen and ink, drew a lion, and asked Lu Yi to post it on the outdoor card table, and said to Lu Yi: This lion picture will be effective if posted.

古文：谓溉曰：此出手便灵异，可虔诚启心至祷，明日当有验。溉命张户外，遣家人焚香拜之。
现代文：你可在心里虔诚祷告，明天就会灵验的。陆溉当即让人张贴室外牌榜上，并派家人焚香膜拜墨狮。
English: You can pray devoutly in your heart, and it will be fulfilled tomorrow. Lu Yi immediately had someone post it on the outdoor billboard, and sent his family to burn incense to worship the cuttlefish.

古文：已而是夕中夜，户外有窸窣之声，良久，乃不闻。
现代文：到了这天晚上半夜时分，听到室外有窸窣之声，过了好久，才听不到了。
English: At midnight that night, I heard a rattling sound outside. It was a long time before I could hear it again.

古文：明日，所画狮子，口中臆前，有血淋漓，及于户外皆点焉。
现代文：第二天早起，见牌榜上贴的墨狮子，口中胸前有淋漓的血迹，整个室外都溅有血点子。
English: The next day, I got up early and saw the inked lion on the board. There was blood dripping from his mouth and chest, and the entire outdoor area was splattered with blood.

古文：溉病乃愈，时人异之。王慄
现代文：陆溉的疟疾病痊愈了。当时的人都感到惊异。王慄
English: The malarial disease of overland irrigation was cured. People at the time were surprised.

古文：晋王慄字世将，琅琊临川人。善属词，攻书画。
现代文：晋王慄，字世将，琅琊临川人，擅长填词，又攻书画。
English: Jin Wang Qian, known as a world-class general, was born in Linchuan. He was good at filling in words and at painting and calligraphy.

古文：过江后，为晋朝书画第一。
现代文：过长江后，是晋朝书画界第一妙手。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River, it was the first brilliant move in the painting and calligraphy circles of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：音律众妙毕综。
现代文：诗、琴、书、画全都通晓。
English: She knows everything about poetry, the piano, books and paintings.

古文：元帝时为左卫将军，封武康侯。
现代文：晋元帝时官任左卫将军，封武康侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Yuan, he held the positions of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and Fongwu Kanghou.

古文：时镇军谢尚于武昌乐寺造东塔，戴若思造西塔，并请慄画。
现代文：当时正值镇军谢尚在武昌乐寺建造东塔，戴若思建造西塔，都请王慄为塔作画。
English: At that time, when the town army Xie Shang was building the east tower of Wuchang Le Temple and Dai Rocsi was building the west tower, they both asked Wang Xuan to paint the tower.

古文：王濛
现代文：王濛
English: Wang Yao

古文：晋王濛字仲祖，晋阳人。
现代文：晋王濛，字仲祖，晋阳人，生性放诞不羁。
English: Jin Wangqian, Zhaozhu, and Jin Yangren were born with free will.

古文：放诞不羁，书比慄翼。丹青甚妙，颇希高远。尝往驴肆家画轜车。
现代文：书法比王慄高，绘画大妙，特别追求高远的境界，经常去驴市那儿画丧车。
English: His calligraphy is better than Wang Yao's, his painting is great, and he pursues the lofty realm in particular. He often goes to Donkey Town to paint funeral cars.

古文：自云：我嗜酒好肉善画，但人有饮食美酒精绢，我何不可也。
现代文：王濛自嘲道：我平生嗜酒好吃肉擅长绘画，如果有人肯拿出丰盛的菜肴、美酒、白丝绢，我为什么不可以为他作画呢！
English: Wang Yao laughed to himself: I've always been an alcoholic, a meat eater, and I'm good at painting. If someone is willing to come up with sumptuous dishes, fine wine, and white silk cocoons, why can't I paint for him!

古文：特善清谈，为时所重。
现代文：王濛特别擅长高谈阔论，为当时人所看重。
English: Wang Yao was particularly good at high-brow discourse, which was valued by people at the time.

古文：戴逵
现代文：戴逵
English: Wearing a skullcap

古文：晋戴逵字安道，谯郡铚县人。幼年已聪明好学，善琴攻画。
现代文：晋戴逵，字安道，谯郡铚县人，幼年时就聪明好学，擅长弹琴爱好绘画。
English: Jin Deyi, a native of An Dao, Jixian County, Shixian County, was bright and eager to learn at an early age. He was good at playing the piano and loved painting.

古文：为童儿时，以白瓦屑鸡卵汁和溲作郑玄碑，时称绝妙。
现代文：戴逵在孩童时，就用白瓦屑、鸡蛋汁放在一块，再用尿将它们和在一起作成郑玄碑，当时人看了都称赞他作的绝妙。
English: When Dai Yao was a child, he used white shingles and egg yolk to put them together, and then used urine to put them together to make Zheng Xuan's monument. At that time, people praised him for his excellent work.

古文：庾道季看之，语逵云：神犹太俗，卿未尽耳。
现代文：庚道季看了后，对戴逵说：这座碑的神韵还太俗气，你还没有尽心地去作。
English: After watching it, Geng Daojie said to Dai Juan: "The charm of this monument is still too cheesy, you haven't done your best to make it.

古文：逵曰：唯务允当，免卿此语。
现代文：戴逵说：我一定将它作的再好些，免得你说这样的话。
English: Dai Ye said: I will definitely make it better, lest you say such a thing.

古文：又戴安道幼岁，在瓦棺寺内画。王长史见之曰：此童非徒能画，亦终当致名，但恨吾老，不见其盛耳。
现代文：又戴逵小时候，在瓦棺寺内作画，王长史看到后说：这孩子没有经过拜师学艺就能作画，他最终有一天会成名的。但是可惜我年迈了，见不到名声鼎盛时候的他了。
English: When Dai Yao was a child, he used to draw pictures in the casket temple. When Wang Changshi saw this, he said, "This child can draw without learning from a teacher. He will eventually become famous one day. But unfortunately, I am too old to see him at the height of his fame."

古文：宗炳
现代文：宗炳
English: 宗

古文：宋宗炳字少文，善书画，好山水。
现代文：宋宗炳，字少文，擅长书画。
English: Song Zongxuan had few words and was good at calligraphy and painting.

古文：西涉荆巫，南登衡岳。
现代文：他西面乘船去过荆江、巫峡，南面登过衡山。
English: To the west, he took a boat to the Jing River and Wuxia Gorge, and to the south, he climbed Hengshan Mountain.

古文：因结宇衡山，以疾还江陵。
现代文：并且在衡山建座草房住在那里，后来因为有病才返归江陵。
English: He also built a grass hut in Hengshan and lived there. Later, he had to return to Gangneung due to illness.

古文：叹曰：老疾俱至，名山恐难遍游。
现代文：感叹地说：年老多病，天下的名山恐怕不能都游遍了。
English: Lamenting, he said: "I am old and sickly, and I am afraid I cannot travel all the famous mountains in the world.

古文：当澄怀观道。卧以游之。
现代文：我该沉淀一下我的情绪，平心入静，躺在家里游吧。
English: I should let my emotions settle for a while, calm down, lie down at home and swim.

古文：凡所游历，皆图于壁，坐卧向之。
现代文：于是将他游历过的名山大川都绘画在墙壁上，整日坐卧面向墙壁观看。
English: As a result, he painted the famous mountains and rivers he had visited on the walls, and spent the whole day sitting and lying down facing the walls.

古文：黄花寺壁
现代文：黄花寺壁
English: Huanghua Temple wall

古文：后魏孝文帝登位初，有魏城人元兆能以九天法禁绝妖怪。
现代文：后魏孝文帝初登位时，有个魏城人叫元兆的，能用九天法禁绝妖怪。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the later Wei Dynasty ascended the throne for the first time, there was a Wei citizen named Yuan Zhao who could banish monsters with the nine-day method.

古文：先邺中有军士女年十四，患妖病累年，治者数十人并无据。
现代文：超先，邺中有个军士的女子，十四岁，得上了一种邪病有好几年了。
English: First, there was a sergeant's daughter, fourteen years old, who had been suffering from an incurable disease for several years.

古文：一日，其家以女来谒元兆所止，谒兆。
现代文：给这女孩治病的，先后有几十个人，都没有办法治好她。一天，这个军士带着女儿到元兆住的地方来求见他给女儿治病。
English: There are dozens of people who have treated the girl, but none of them have been able to cure her. One day, the sergeant brought his daughter to where Yuan Zhao lived to ask him to treat her.

古文：兆曰：此疾非狐狸之魅，是妖画也。
现代文：元兆看了看女孩，说：她的病不是狐仙等妖魅作的怪，是画妖使她这样的啊。
English: Yuan Zhao looked at the girl and said, "Her illness is not the result of a spell cast by a fox spirit or any other demon. It is the spell that has made her like this."

古文：吾何以知？
现代文：我怎么知道的？
English: How did I know?

古文：今天下有至神之妖，有至灵之怪，有在陆之精，有在水之魅，吾皆知之矣。
现代文：现在天下有成了神仙的妖精，也有具备灵性的妖精；有在陆地上的妖精，有在水中的妖精我都知道他们啊。
English: Now there are fairies who have become immortals, and there are fairies with spirituality; there are fairies on land, and there are fairies in the water - I know them all.

古文：汝但述疾状，是佛寺中壁画四天神部落中魅也，此言如何？
现代文：你所讲述的病状，是佛寺中壁画上面四天神部下的魅在这个女子身上作祟。
English: The illness you describe is caused by the charm of the four heavenly deities depicted on the mural in the Buddhist temple.

古文：其女之父曰：某前于云门黄花寺中东壁画东方神下乞恩，常携此女到其下。又女常惧此画之神，因夜惊魇，梦恶鬼来，持女而笑，由此得疾。
现代文：我这话说的对不对？女孩的父亲说：先前我在云门黄花寺中东壁画东方神下乞求他老人家施给我恩惠，经常带着我这个女孩一块儿去，我这女孩常常惧怕这壁画上的神仙，夜里梦魇，梦见恶鬼来了，抓住她大笑，从此得了这种邪病。
English: Am I right in saying this? The girl's father said: Previously, I begged the old man to grant me a favor under the Middle Eastern mural of the Middle Eastern god at Yunmen Huanghua Temple, and often took my girl with me. My girl was often afraid of the immortal on this mural, had nightmares at night, dreamed of evil spirits coming, grabbed her and laughed, and got this evil disease.

古文：兆大笑曰：故无差。
现代文：元兆大笑，说：没错。
English: Yuan Zhao laughed loudly and said, "That's right."

古文：因忽与空中人语，左右亦闻空中有应对之音。
现代文：忽然与空中人说话，左右的人也听到空中有人语跟他对答。
English: Suddenly, he spoke to the man in the sky, and people on both sides heard the man in the sky replying to him.

古文：良久，兆向庭嗔责之云：何不速曳，亟持来。
现代文：过了好一会儿，元兆向室外庭院中生气地责备说：怎么不快回去？疾速将他押来！
English: After a while, Yuan Zhao angrily scolded the man in the outdoor courtyard, saying, "Why don't you go back? Hurry up and bring him here!"

古文：左右闻空中云：春方大神传语元大行，恶神吾自当罪戮，安见大行？
现代文：旁边的人听到空中有人说：春方大神传话给元大行： 恶神我自己应当处死，怎么还需要见元大行呢？
English: People nearby heard someone in the air say: "Chunfang Daishin sent a message to Yuan Da Xing: Evil god, I myself should be put to death, why do I still need to see Yuan Da Xing?"

古文：兆怒，向空中语曰：汝以我诚达春方，必请致之。我为暂责，请速鏁致之。
现代文：元兆大怒，向空中说道：你为我转告春方大神，必须请他来，我要立即责罚他，请他们赶快将他锁上带来。
English: Yuan Zhao flew into a rage and said to the sky, "Tell the Great Spring God for me, he must be invited, I will punish him immediately, please lock him up and bring him here quickly."

古文：言讫，又向空中语曰：召二双牙八赤眉往要，不去闻东方。
现代文：说完了，又向空中说：速召二位双牙将、八位赤眉将速去。不用去告诉东方大神了。
English: When he had finished speaking, he said to the sky: "Quickly summon the two double-toothed generals and the eight red-browed generals to leave. There is no need to go and tell the Great God of the East."

古文：左右咸闻有风雨之声，乃至。
现代文：元兆身旁的人都听到忽然有风雨声大作，到了近前。
English: The people around Yuan Zhao suddenly heard a loud wind and rain, and it was getting closer.

古文：兆大笑曰：汝无形相，画之妍致耳，有何恃而魅生人也。
现代文：元兆大笑说：你本来没有身形的，画得还挺好的呢。你仗恃着什么来迷惑生人？
English: Yuan Zhao laughed loudly and said, "You don't have a body originally, but your paintings are quite good. What do you rely on to confuse strangers?"

古文：兆谓其父曰：汝自辨其状形。
现代文：又对患邪病的女孩说：你自己辨认一下，是不是他？
English: And he said to the girl with the evil disease, "Detect for yourself, is it he?"

古文：兆令见形，左右见三神皆丈余，各有双牙长三尺，露于唇口外，衣青赤衣。
现代文：于是，他又命令这些神灵们现出原形。元兆身旁的人看见有三位神灵在他们面前，身高一丈多，每个神灵都长着三尺长的双牙，露在口外，穿青红色的衣裳。
English: The people around Yuan Zhao saw that there were three gods in front of them, taller than he was, each god had three-foot-long teeth, exposed mouth, and wore a blue-and-red robe.

古文：又见八神俱衣赤，眼眉并殷色，共扼其神，直逼轩下。
现代文：又看见有八位身穿红色衣裳、长着红眉毛的神灵也站在那儿。
English: He also saw eight deities dressed in red and with red eyebrows standing there.

古文：蓬首目赤，大鼻方口，牙齿俱出，手甲如鸟，两足皆有长毛，衣若豹鞹。
现代文：他们一块儿抓住春方大神迫使他到屋门口这边来。这位春方大神头发蓬乱，双眼通红，鼻大口方，牙齿都露在外面，手上的指甲象鸟爪，两脚长着长毛，身上穿的衣服象是拔掉毛的豹皮。
English: Together, they grabbed Harukata no Okami and forced him to come to the door. This Harukata no Okami had unkempt hair, red eyes, a wide-set nose, his teeth were all exposed, his fingernails were like bird claws, his feet had long hair, and the clothes he was wearing looked like the flayed skin of a leopard.

古文：其家人谓兆曰：此正女常见者。
现代文：病女孩的父亲说：这个灵怪正是我女儿常见到的那个。
English: The sick girl's father said: 'This spirit is the same one my daughter used to see.

古文：兆令前曰：尔本虚空，而画之所作耳，奈何有此妖形？
现代文：元兆命令春方大神到跟前来，说：你本来是没有形体的，只是在墙壁上将你画出来了。怎么会有了这种妖形呢？
English: Yuan Zhao ordered the great god of the Spring Festival to come to him and said, "You originally had no form, but you were drawn on the wall. How did you come to have this demonic form?

古文：其神应曰：形本是画，画以象真，真之所示，即乃有神。
现代文：春方大神回答说：形就是画，画得跟真的一样。真，就是有神了。
English: Harukata Okami replied, "A shape is a picture, and a picture is the same as the real thing. The real thing is to have a god."

古文：况所画之上，精灵有凭可通，此臣所以有感。
现代文：况且，又画在墙壁上了，精灵有了可以凭依附体的东西。
English: Moreover, it was painted on the walls that the elves had something to cling to.

古文：感之幻化，臣实有罪。
现代文：这样，具备了形体的同时也具备了情感；而情感又让我迷上了这位女孩。
English: Thus, having a body, I also had an emotion; and the emotion made me fall in love with this girl.

古文：兆大怒。
现代文：罪臣实在是有罪啊？
English: Is the sinner really guilty?

古文：命侍童取罐瓶受水，淋之尽，而恶神之色不衰。
现代文：元兆大怒，让服侍他的童仆用罐瓶盛水浇这位春方大神。水浇完了。
English: Enraged, Yuan Zhao ordered his servant to pour water into the jar containing the god of the Spring Festival. The watering was finished.

古文：兆更怒，命煎汤以淋，须臾神化，如一空囊。
现代文：这位春方大神神色依然。元兆越发愤怒，又让童仆将水烧开了再浇，转眼间这位恶神化为乌有，地上只留下一个状如空袋子的东西。
English: Yuan Zhao became more and more angry, and asked the boy servant to boil the water and then pour it again. In a blink of an eye, the evil god vanished, leaving only an empty bag on the ground.

古文：然后令掷去空野，其女于座即愈，而父载归邺。
现代文：元兆让童仆将这件东西扔到空野里去。那位患邪病的女孩也马上坐起来，病也好了。
English: Yuan Zhao told the servant boy to throw the object into the empty field. The girl with the evil disease also immediately sat up and recovered from her illness.

古文：复于黄花寺寻所画之处，如水之洗，因而骇叹称异。
现代文：女孩的父亲带领女孩回到邺郡后，又来到黄花寺里画壁画的东墙前。他看到画春方大神的地方，象被水浇过似的。大为吃惊，连声说：真是怪事，真是怪事！
English: After the girl's father led the girl back to Lixian County, he came to the east wall of the mural painting in Huanghua Temple. He saw the place where the god of the Spring Festival was painted, as if it had been watered. He was very surprised and said in unison: What a strange thing, what a strange thing!

古文：僧云敬见而问曰：汝此来见画叹称，必有异耶，可言之。
现代文：寺内僧人云敬看见他，问：你这次来见到壁画称怪，一定有特殊原因，请你说说。
English: Yun Jing, a monk at the temple, saw him and asked, "You must have a special reason for seeing the strange murals this time. Please tell me about it."

古文：其人曰：我女患疾，为神所扰。
现代文：女孩的父亲说：我女儿患的邪病，是受到神怪的骚扰。
English: The girl's father said: "My daughter's illness is the result of harassment by a supernatural being.

古文：今元先生称是此寺画作妖。
现代文：元先生说，就是你们这幅壁画上的春方大神骚扰的。
English: Mr. Yuan said that it was Harukata Okami who was harassing you in this mural.

古文：乃指画处所洗之神，僧大惊曰：汝亦异人也。
现代文：说着，用手指向壁画上被水浇洗的地方。云敬僧人大惊，说：你也是个怪异的人。
English: Pointing with his finger to the spot on the mural where the snake had been doused with water, the monk was shocked and said, "You are a strange person, too."

古文：此寺前月中，一日昼晦，忽有恶风玄云，声如雷震，绕寺良久，闻画处如擒捉之声。
现代文：上个月有一天，大白天的，忽然寺院内变得昏暗如晦，狂风大作，黑云奔涌，响声如雷，绕着寺院转了好长时间。而且隐约听到壁画这里象有人被捉拿的声音。
English: One day last month, in broad daylight, it suddenly became dark and gloomy inside the temple. A strong wind, black clouds, and thunderous noises swirled around the temple for a long time, and the sound of someone being caught could be faintly heard in the mural.

古文：有一人云，势力不加元大行，不如速去。
现代文：有个声音说：我们的势力压不过元大行，不如赶快去吧。
English: There was a voice saying: Our forces cannot suppress the Yuan Dynasty, so let's go quickly.

古文：言讫，风埃乃散。寺中朗然，晚见此处一神如洗。
现代文：说完了，狂风才散去，寺院内又跟原先一样晴朗了。待到了晚上，才发现这壁画上有一具神像象被水洗去了似的。
English: When it was over, the wind had died down and the temple was as bright as ever. It was only in the evening that I noticed that one of the statues on the mural looked as if it had been washed away.

古文：究汝所说，正符其事。
现代文：考究一下你刚才说过的事，正相符合。
English: If you look at what you just said, it fits.

古文：兆即寇谦之师也。
现代文：元兆，就是寇谦的老师。
English: Yuan Zhao is Kuo Qian's teacher.

