古文：又东至乘氏县西，分为二，《春秋左传》傅公三十一年，分曹地东傅，于济。
现代文：又往东流到乘氏县西，分为两条。《春秋左传》：嘻公三十一年前，分割了曹国的土地，东边直到济水。
English: It also flows eastward to the west of Jingshi County and is divided into two parts. "Spring and Autumn Left: Hip Gong" Thirty-one years ago, the land of Cao was divided, east to Jishui.

古文：济水自是东北流，出巨泽。
现代文：济水从这里往东北流，从巨泽流出去。
English: Feeding water flows from here to the northeast and flows out from Kouzawa.

古文：其一水东南流，其一水从县东北流，入巨野泽。
现代文：一条往东南流，一条从乘氏县往东北流，注人巨野泽。
English: One flows to the southeast, one flows from Jouji County to the northeast, and flows into Konozawa.

古文：南为菏水，北为济读，径乘氏县与济渠、濮渠合。
现代文：南边的一条是菏水；北边的一条是济水，流经乘氏县，与济渠淮渠相汇合。
English: The southern one is Surabaya; the northern one is Jishui, flowing through Jishi County and merging with the Jizhi Canal and Huai Canal.

古文：北济自济阳县北，东北径煮枣城南。
现代文：北济水从济阳县北面往东北流经煮枣城南面。
English: The North Jishui River flows from the north of Jiyang County to the northeast, passing through the south of Boiling Date City.

古文：《郡国志》曰：冤朐县有煮枣城。即此也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：冤胸县有煮枣城，就是此城。
English: "County History" said: There is a boiled jujube city in Guanzhong County, which is this city.

古文：汉高祖十二年，封革朱为侯国。
现代文：汉高祖十二年十月，狂风暴雨，河水泛滥冲进酸枣城墙。
English: In October of the twelfth year of Henkel's ancestor, there was a violent storm and rain, and the overflowing river rushed into the citadel wall.

古文：《汉官仪》曰：旧河堤谒者居之城西，有韩王望气台，孙子荆《故台赋叙》曰：酸枣寺门外，夹道左右有两故台，访之故老云：韩王听讼观台，高十五仞，虽楼榭泯灭，然广基似于山岳。
现代文：汉时堵住决口，所以班固说：文帝填补酸枣溃堤，淮水现在已经无水了。旧河道往东北通过南棣城与北棣城之间。《左传》襄公五年树作郡名，酸枣以多刺的枣树为名号，《汉官仪》说：过去河堤渴者就驻在这里。城西有韩王望气台，孙子荆《故台赋叙》说：酸枣寺门外，道路两边有两座古台，访问老人们，说是韩王听讼观台，高十五切，虽然楼榭都已荡然无存了，但宏伟的台基还像山岳一样高大。
English: The Han Dynasty blocked the outlet, so Pan Gu said: Emperor Wen filled the broken dike with sour jujube, and the Huai Shui is now without water. The old river went to the northeast and passed between Nanluocheng and Beiluncheng. "Zo Zhuan" Xiangong five-year tree as the county name, sour jujube with thorny jujube as the name, "Han Guan Yi" said: In the past, those who were thirsty for the river dike resided here. To the west of the city, there is Han Wang Wang Qi Tai, grandson Jing "Former Tai Fu Xiu" said: Outside the door of the sour

古文：召公大贤，犹舍甘棠，区区小国，而台观隆崇，骄盈于世，以鉴来今，故作赋曰：蔑丘陵之逦迤，亚五岳之嵯峨。言壮观也。
现代文：召公是大贤，还在甘棠树下住宿；而小小的韩国，却造了这么宏伟的台观，韩王的骄奢为举世瞩目，可以作为后人的鉴戒。所以作赋说：逃迹的丘陵微不足道，磋峨的五岳也低了一截，极言其壮观。
English: Zhao Gong was a great sage, and he also stayed under the neem tree; but little Korea has created such a magnificent tableau, the arrogance of King Han has attracted worldwide attention, and can be used as a warning to future generations. Therefore, Fu said: the hills where he fled are insignificant, and the five mountains where he fled are also low, and they are spectacular.

古文：城北韩之市地也。聂政为濮阳严仲子刺韩相侠累，遂皮面而死，其姊哭之于此。
现代文：城北是韩国市场的所在地，聂政为淮阳严仲子刺杀韩国承相侠累，接着就用刀割裂自己的面皮自杀了。
English: North of the city is the location of the Korean market. Hao Zheng committed suicide by slitting his own face with a knife after he was tired of assassinating the Korean chengxiang for Huaiyang Yanzhongzi.

古文：城内有后汉酸枣令刘孟阳碑。
现代文：他姐姐就在这里为他哀哭。城内有后汉酸枣令刘孟阳碑。
English: His sister cried for him right here. There is a monument to Liu Mengyang in the city.

古文：濮水北积成陂，陂方五里，号曰同池陂。又东径胙亭东注。故胙国也。富辰所谓邢茅昨祭周公之胤也。
现代文：淮水北流，积储成阪塘，破塘方圆五里，叫同池破；又东经肺亭往东流奔，这里原是从前的昨国，富辰所说的邢、茅、炸、祭，都是周公的后裔―炸就指这里。
English: The north stream of Huai Shui accumulates into the Xiangtang, and the pond is five miles in circumference, so it is called the same pond. It also flows eastward through the Lung Ting, which was once the country of yesteryear. The dragonfly, the maypole, the fried chicken, and the festival mentioned by Fuchen are all descendants of Zhou Gong - fried chicken refers to here.

古文：濮渠又东北径燕城南。
现代文：淮渠又往东北流经燕城南面。
English: The Huai Canal also flows to the northeast through the south of Yancheng.

古文：《陈留风俗传》曰：县有防垣，故县氏之。
现代文：《战国策》中说的酸枣、虚、桃―桃，就是桃城。
English: The sour jujube, virtual, peach-peach mentioned in "Strategy of Warring States" is peach city.

古文：孝安帝以建光元年封元舅宋俊为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝十二年把这地方封给他的大舅宋俊，立为侯国。
English: In the 12th year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao gave this place to his brother-in-law Song Jun and established it as a vassal state.

古文：县有祭城，濮渠径其北。郑大夫祭仲之邑也。
现代文：县里有祭城，淮渠流经城北，这是郑大夫祭仲的采邑。
English: There is a festival city in the county, and the Huaiqu River flows through the north of the city. This is the hometown of Dr. Zheng Saizhong.

古文：杜预曰：陈留长垣县东北有祭城者也。
现代文：杜预说：陈留长垣县东北有祭城。
English: Du Yu said: Chen Liu, there is a festival city in the northeast of Nagagaki County.

古文：圈称又言长垣县有罗亭，故长罗县也，汉封后将军常惠为侯国。
现代文：圈称又说长垣县有罗亭，是旧时的长罗县，汉时把这地方封给后将军常惠，立为侯国。
English: The circle also says that there is a Luoting in Nagagaki County, which is the old Chora County. During the Han Dynasty, this place was given to the general Chang Hui and established as a principality.

古文：《地理志》曰：王莽更长罗为惠泽，后汉省并。
现代文：《地理志》说：王莽把长罗改名为惠泽，后汉时撤县，把它并入长垣县。
English: "Geography" said: Wang Mang changed the name of Chang Luo to Huizhe, and later Han Dynasty to Xiyu County, and merged it into Nagagaki County.

古文：长垣有长罗泽，即吴季英牧猪处也。
现代文：县里有长罗泽，就是吴季英牧猪的地方。
English: In the county, there is Changroze, which is the place where Wu Jiying herds pigs.

古文：又有长罗冈、蘧伯玉冈。
现代文：又有长罗冈，蓬伯玉冈。
English: There is also Chang Luo Gang and Pengbo Yu Gang.

古文：《陈留风俗传》曰：长垣县有蘧伯乡，一名新乡，有蘧亭伯玉祠、伯玉冢。
现代文：《陈留风俗传》说：长垣县有蓬伯乡，又名新乡，有蓬亭、伯玉祠、伯玉墓。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" said: Nagagaki County has Pengbo Township, also known as Xinxiang, with Pengting, Hougyuan Shrine, and Hougyuan Tomb.

古文：曹大家《东征赋》曰：到长垣之境界兮，察农野之居民；睹蒲城之丘墟兮，生荆棘之蓁蓁。
现代文：曹大家《东征赋》说：到了长垣县境以内，察看乡野农村的居民，眺望蒲城的丘冈，荆棘长得正茂盛。
English: Cao Dangdang, "Eastern Expedition," said: "When you get to the borders of Nagagaki County, look at the residents of the countryside, look at the hills of Putian, and the thorns are growing luxuriantly.

古文：蘧氏在城之东南兮，民亦向其丘坟；惟令德之不朽兮，身既没而名存。
现代文：蓬氏葬在城的东南，人民也都向慕他的坟莹，美德万世永垂不朽，其人虽逝而令名永存。
English: Mr. Peng was buried in the southeast of the city, and the people also paid homage to his grave. Virtue is immortal for all time, and his name will live forever even though he has passed away.

古文：昔吴季札聘上国，至卫，观典府宾亭父畴，以卫多君子也。
现代文：从前吴季札访问上国，到了卫国，参观了藏书楼和客舍，会见父老们，以为卫国有很多才德出众的人士。
English: Once upon a time, Wu Jizhak visited Shangguo, and when he came to Wei, he visited the library and the guest house, met with the patriarchs, and thought that there were many people with outstanding talents in Wei.

古文：濮渠又东分为二渎，北濮出焉。
现代文：蹼渠又东流，分为两条，北蹼于是分出。
English: The Yunnan Canal also flows eastward and is divided into two, and the North Yunnan Canal is thus separated.

古文：濮渠又东径须城北。
现代文：淮渠又往东流经项城北面。
English: The Huai Canal also flows eastward through the northern part of Xiangcheng.

古文：《卫诗》云：思须与曹也。
现代文：《卫诗》说：思念着须和曹。
English: The "Hymn to the West" says, "I miss Su and Cao."

古文：毛云：须，卫邑矣。
现代文：毛亨说：须是卫国的城邑。
English: Mao Heng said: It must be a national defense city.

古文：郑云：自卫而东径邑，故思。
现代文：郑玄说：自卫东行，要经过此城，所以思念它。
English: Zheng Xuan said, "To go east for self-defence, we have to go through this city, so I miss it.

古文：濮渠又北径襄丘亭南。
现代文：淮水又往北流经襄丘亭南面。
English: Huai Shui also flows north through the southern side of Xiangqiu Ting.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：襄王七年，韩明率师伐襄丘。九年，楚庶章率师来会我，次于襄丘者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：襄王七年前，韩明领兵去攻打襄丘；九年楚国庶章领兵来与我、军会师，驻扎在襄丘。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" says: Seven years ago, Han Ming, the king of Xiang, led an army to attack Xiangqiu; in the ninth year, the subordinate general of Chu led an army to come with me, the military association division, stationed in Xiangqiu.

古文：濮水又东径濮阳县故城南。
现代文：蹼水又往东流经淮阳县老城南面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Huaiyang County.

古文：昔师延为纣作靡靡之乐，武王伐纣，师延东走，自投濮水而死矣。
现代文：从前师延为封王作淫靡的音乐，武王讨伐封王时，师延逃往东方，最后投入淮水而死。
English: Once upon a time, Shi Yan composed lascivious music for King Wu, and when King Wu fought against King Wu, Shi Yan fled to the East, and finally fell into the Huai Shui River and died.

古文：后卫灵公将之晋，而设舍于濮水之上，夜闻新声，召师涓受之于是水也。
现代文：以后卫灵公将去晋国，下榻于淮水上，夜里听到新奇的音乐，就把师涓叫来，在这条水上学会这支乐曲。
English: Afterward, Wei Ling Gong will go to Jin Province and stay on Huai Shui. When he hears new music at night, he will call his teacher to come and learn this piece of music on this water.

古文：濮水又东径济阴离狐县故城南，王莽之所谓瑞狐也。
现代文：蹼水又东流，经济阴离狐县老城南面。这就是王莽所谓的瑞狐。
English: Surabaya also flows to the east, and the economic yin is south of the old town of Jixian. This is what Wang Mang called Rui Jixuan.

古文：《郡国志》曰：故属东郡。
现代文：《郡国志》说：离狐县，原属东郡。
English: "County History" said: from Fox County, originally from Dong County.

古文：濮水又东径霞密县故城北。
现代文：蹼水又往东流经霞密县老城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Xiami County.

古文：《竹书纪年》：元公三年，鲁季孙会晋幽公于楚丘，取葭密，遂城之。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：元公三年，鲁季孙在楚丘会见晋幽公，取得霞密，于是就去那里筑城。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lu Jisun met Jinyu in Chuqiu and obtained Xiamei, so he went there to build a city.

古文：濮水又东北径鹿城南。
现代文：淮水又往东北流经鹿城南面。
English: Huai Shui also flows to the northeast through the south of Lucheng.

古文：《郡国志》曰：济阴乘氏县有鹿县乡，《春秋》僖公二十一年，盟于鹿上。
现代文：《郡国志》说：济阴乘氏县有鹿县乡。《春秋》：嘻公二十一年前，在鹿上会盟。
English: "County National History" said: There is a Deer County Township in Jiyin-Renji County. "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-one years ago, He Gong was in Deer County.

古文：京、杜并谓此亭也。
现代文：京相潘、杜预都说就是此亭。
English: Beijing Minister Pan and Du Yuedu both said that it was this pavilion.

古文：濮水又东与句渎合，读首受濮水枝渠于句阳县东南，径句阳县故城南。《春秋》之谷丘也。
现代文：蹼水又东流，与句读汇合。句读上口在句阳县东南承接淮水支渠，流经句阳县老城南面，就是《春秋》中的谷丘。
English: Surabaya water flows to the east and converges with Xuan Yue. Xuan Yue upstream in the southeast of Guiyang County is connected to Huai Shui branch canal, flowing through the south of the old city of Guiyang County, which is the valley hill in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：《左传》以为句渎之丘矣。
现代文：《左传》则以为是句读之丘。
English: "Zo Zhuan" is considered to be the pinnacle of sentence reading.

古文：县处其阳，故县氏焉。
现代文：句阳县在水北，所以就以读取名。
English: Guyang County is in the north of Shuibei, so the name is read as "Chuang."

古文：又东入乘氏县，左会濮水与济同入巨野，故《地理志》曰：濮水自濮阳南入巨野，亦《经》所谓济水自乘氏县两分，东北人于巨野也。
现代文：又往东流入乘氏县境，左边汇合了淮水，与济水一同流入巨野泽。所以《地理志》说：蹼水从淮阳往南流入巨野泽。《水经》也说：济水从乘氏县分为两条，往东北流入巨野泽。
English: It also flows eastward into the border of Jishi County, where it meets Huai Water on the left and flows into Kunozawa together with Jishui. Therefore, "Geography" says: "Jishui flows from Huaiyang to the south into Kunozawa." "Shuikyo" also says: "Jishui is divided into two from Jishi County and flows into Kunozawa to the northeast."

古文：济水故渎又北，右合洪水。
现代文：济水旧渠又往北流，在右边汇合了洪水。
English: The old canal of Jishui continued to flow northward, and the floods converged on the right side.

古文：水上承巨野薛训渚，历泽西北，又北径闞乡城西。
现代文：洪水上流承接巨野的薛训清，经沼泽往西北流，又往北流经阐乡城西面。
English: The upstream flow of the flood undertook the huge fields of Xuexunqing, flowed northwest through the swamp, and flowed northward through the west side of the township.

古文：《春秋》桓公十有一年，《经》书公会宋公于阚。
现代文：《春秋》：桓公十一年前，《经》文记载：桓公在阐会见宋公。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eleven years before King Kuan, the "Ching" text records: King Kuan met with King Song during the exposition.

古文：《郡国志》曰：东平陆有阚亭。
现代文：《郡国志》说：东平陆有阐亭。
English: "County History" said: Dongping Lu has a pavilion.

古文：《皇览》曰：量尤冢在东郡寿张县阚乡城中，冢高七尺，常十月祠之，有赤气出如绛，民名为蚩尤旗。
现代文：《皇览》说：蛋尤墓在东郡寿张县阐乡城中，墓高七尺，常在十月间祭祀；墓上有赤色雾气冉冉升起，就像红绸一样，人们称为蛋尤旗。
English: The "Imperial Review" said: the Egg Yu tomb is located in the town of Jiexing, Shouzhang County, Dong County. The tomb is seven feet high and is often dedicated in October. There is a red mist rising on the tomb, just like red silk. People call it the Egg Yu flag.

古文：《十三州志》曰：寿张有蚩尤祠。
现代文：《十三州志》说：寿张有蛋尤祠。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" says: Shou Zhang has the Egg Yu Shrine.

古文：又北与济渎合，自渚迄于北口百二十里，名曰洪水。
现代文：又北流与济读汇合。 从薛训诸到北口共一百二十里，名叫洪水。
English: And the north river joined with the Jiyu, and there were a hundred and twenty leagues from Xuexunzhu to the mouth of the north river, which is called the Flood.

古文：桓温以太和四年率众北人，掘渠通济。
现代文：桓温于太和四年率领大军北上，开了一条渠道与济水相通。
English: In the 4th year of the Taihe era, Kanon led a large army to the north and opened a channel to connect with Jishui.

古文：至义熙十二年，刘武帝西入长安，又广其功。
现代文：到了义熙十三年，刘武帝西入长安，又拓宽了渠道。
English: In the 13th year of Yixi, Liu Wudi entered Chang'an from the west and broadened the channels.

古文：自洪口已上，又谓之桓公渎，济自是北注也。
现代文：从洪口起的上流一段，又叫桓公读，济水就是从这里往北流的。
English: The upstream section from Hongkou is also called Huan Gong Reading, and it is from here that Jishui flows northward.

古文：京相瑶曰：济水自巨野至济北是也。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公十八年前，《经》文载，夏天，庄公在济水西追击戎人。京相潘说：济水从巨野流到济北。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Zhuangguo eighteen years ago, "Book" written, in the summer, Zhuangguo in the west of Jishui chased the soldiers. Beijing Xiangpan said: Jishui flowed from Koya to Jibei.

古文：又东北过寿张县西界，安民亭南，汶水从东北来注之。
现代文：又往东北流过寿张县西界。安民亭以南，泣水从东北流来注人。
English: It also flowed to the northeast past the western boundary of Shouzhang County. To the south of Anmin Pavilion, weeping water poured from the northeast.

古文：济水又北，汶水注之，戴延之所谓清口也。
现代文：济水又北流，坟水注入。汇流处就是戴延之所谓清口。
English: The tributary also flows to the north, injecting grave water. The confluence is the so-called clear mouth of the Dai Yan River.

古文：郭缘生《述证记》曰：清河首受洪水，北注济。或谓清即济也。
现代文：郭缘生《述征记》说：清河上口接纳洪水，北流注入济水，也有人说清河就是济水。
English: Guo Yansheng's "Record of the Conquest" said: The upper mouth of the Qinghe River receives floods, and the north stream injects water, and some people say that the Qinghe River is water.

古文：《禹贡》：济东北会于汶。
现代文：《禹贡》：济水往东北流，与坟水汇合。
English: "Yugong": Feeding water flows to the northeast, merging with grave water.

古文：今枯渠注巨泽，巨泽北则清口，清水与汶会也。
现代文：现在枯渠注入巨泽，巨泽以北是清口，就是清水与坟水汇合的地方。
English: Now, the dry canal flows into the Kouzawa River. North of the Kouzawa River is the Kiyokuchi, the place where the clear water meets the grave water.

古文：李钦曰：汶水出太山莱芜县，西南入济是也。
现代文：李钦说：汉水发源于太山莱芜县，往西南流入济水。
English: Li Qin said: The Han River originates in Laiwu County, Taishan, and flows into Jishui in the southwest.

古文：济水又北径梁山东，袁宏《北征赋》曰：背梁山，截汶波。
现代文：济水又往北流经梁山东面。袁宏《北征赋》说：背靠梁山，横截坟水波涛，就是这地方。
English: Feeding water also flows northward through the eastern side of Mount Liang. Yuan Hong said in "Northern Expedition": Backed by Mount Liang, cutting across the grave water waves, this is the place.

古文：即此处也。刘澄之引是山以证梁父，为不近情矣。
现代文：刘澄之引梁山来论证梁父山，这是不近情理的。
English: It is unreasonable for Liu Chengzhi to bring Liang Shan to prove Liang Chizhan.

古文：山之西南有吕仲悌墓。
现代文：山的西南边有吕仲梯墓。
English: On the southwest side of the mountain, there is the tomb of Luzhong ladders.

古文：河东岸有石桥，桥本当河，河移，故厕岸也。
现代文：河水东岸有一座石桥，本来在河上，以后河道移徙，于是桥就在岸边了。
English: There is a stone bridge on the east bank of the river. Originally, it was on the river, but later the river migrated, so the bridge is now on the shore.

古文：济水西有安民亭，亭北对安民山，东临济水，水东即无盐县界也。
现代文：据老人们说，这座桥是东海吕母起兵时所造。山北三里有吕母的住宅，东边三里就是济水。济水又北流，经过须胸城西面。
English: According to the old people, this bridge was built at the time of Lvmu's army rising in the East China Sea. Three miles to the north of the mountain is Lvmu's residence, and three miles to the east is Jishui. Jishui also flows north, passing through the west of Suboxone City.

古文：山西有冀州刺史工纷碑，汉中平四年立。
现代文：城在济水旁边，就是旧时的须胸国。《春秋》：嘻公二十一年。
English: The city is located next to Jishui, which is the old Su Chest Country. "Spring and Autumn": Hip Gong twenty-one years old.

古文：济水又北径微乡东。
现代文：济水又往北流经微乡东边。
English: The Jishui River flows north through the east side of Weixiang.

古文：《春秋》庄公二十八年，《经》书冬筑郿。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公二十八年前，《经》文记载，冬天，在郡筑城。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-eight years before Zhuang Gong, the "Ching" text records, in winter, in Guzhu City.

古文：京相瑶曰：《公羊传》谓之微。
现代文：京相潘说：郡，《公羊传》称为微。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: County, "The Ram" is called micro.

古文：东平寿张县西北三十里，有故微乡，鲁邑也。
现代文：东平郡寿张县西北三十里，有旧微乡，是鲁国的城邑。
English: Dongping County, 30 miles northwest of Shouzhang County, has an old micro-township, which is the largest city in Lu.

古文：杜预曰：有微子冢。济水又北分为二水，其枝津西北出，谓之马颊水者也。
现代文：杜预说：微乡有微子墓，济水又北流，分为两条，支流往西北流出，称为马颊水。
English: Du Yu said: there are microcells in the micro-township, and the north stream is divided into two, and the tributary flows out to the northwest, which is called the horse cheek water.

古文：又北过须昌县西，京相璠曰：须朐，一国二城两名。盖迁都须昌，朐是其本。
现代文：又往北流过须昌县西面，京相蟠说：须胸，一国二城而有两个名字，这是因为该国迁都于须昌，而胸城则是本来的都城。
English: It also flowed north through the west side of Suchang County, and the Beijing-Sichuan Canal said: "Suchang, one country, two cities, but has two names. This is because the capital of the country was moved to Suchang, while the chest city is the original capital city."

古文：秦以为县，汉高帝十一年，封赵衍为侯国。
现代文：秦时设置为县，汉高帝十一年把它封给赵衍，立为侯国。
English: At the time of the Qin Dynasty, it was set up as a county. In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao gave it to Zhao Yan and established it as a vassal state.

古文：济水于县，赵沟水注之。
现代文：济水到了须昌县，有赵沟水注入。
English: Feeding water has arrived in Suchang County, and Zhao Gou water has been injected.

古文：济水又北径鱼山东，左合马颊水。
现代文：济水又往北流经鱼山东，左边汇合了马颊水。
English: The Jishui River flows northward through the east of Fish Mountain, and the Maqian River joins it on the left.

古文：水首受济，西北流，历安民山北，又西流，赵沟出焉，东北注于济。
现代文：马颊水上口接纳了济水，往西北流经安民山北，又西流，有赵沟分出，往东北注入济水。
English: Feeding water was received at the upper mouth of the Maqian River, and flowed northwest through the north of Anmin Mountain, and westward, branching out from the Zhao Ditch, and injecting feeding water to the northeast.

古文：马颊水又经桃城东。
现代文：马颊水又流经桃城东面。
English: The Ma's cheek water also flows through the east side of Taocheng.

古文：《春秋》桓公十年，《经》书公会卫侯于桃丘，卫地也。
现代文：《春秋》桓公十年前，《经》文记载：桓公在桃丘会见卫侯―桃丘是卫国地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn" Ten years before King Kan, the "Scripture" records: King Kan met with Emperor Wei in Taoku - Taoku was the place of the Emperor's defense.

古文：社预曰：济北东阿县东南有桃城，即桃丘矣。
现代文：杜预说：济北郡东阿县东南有桃城，就是桃丘。
English: Du Yu said: To the southeast of Donga County, Jiibei County, there is a peach city, that is, a peach hill.

古文：马颊水又东北流径鱼山南。
现代文：马颊水又往东北流经鱼山南。
English: The Maqian water also flows to the northeast through the south of Yushan.

古文：山，即吾山也。
现代文：鱼山就是吾山。
English: Fish mountain is my mountain.

古文：汉武帝《瓠子歌》所谓吾山平者也。
现代文：汉武帝《瓤子歌》中说的吾山被掘平，就是这座山。
English: This is the mountain that was razed to the ground in Emperor Hanwu's "Song of the Lame."

古文：山上有柳舒城，魏东阿王曹子建每登之，有终焉之志。及其终也，葬山西，西去东阿城四十里。
现代文：山上有柳舒城，魏东阿王曹子建每次登山，心头就会浮起在这里长眠的念头；待到死后，就葬在山的西麓，西距东阿城四十里。
English: On the mountain there is Liu Shu City. Every time Wei Donga Wang Cao Zi built a mountain, the thought of sleeping here would arise in his mind. When he died, he was buried at the western foot of the mountain, forty miles west of Donga City.

古文：其水又东注于济，谓之马颊口也。
现代文：马颊水又东流，注入济水，汇流处叫马颊口。
English: The horse cheek water also flows to the east, injecting water, and the confluence is called the horse cheek mouth.

古文：济水自鱼山北径清亭东。
现代文：济水从鱼山往北流经清亭东面。
English: The Jishui River flows north from Uyushan through the eastern side of Qingting.

古文：《春秋》隐公四年，公及宋公遇于清。
现代文：《春秋》：隐公四年前，隐公与宋公在清相遇。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Four years ago, Ying Gong and Song Gong met in Qing.

古文：京相瑶曰：今济北东阿东北四十里有故清亭，即《春秋》所谓清者也。
现代文：京相潘说：现在济北郡东阿县东北四十里，有旧清亭，就是《春秋》中所说的清。
English: Jing Xiangpan said: Now, forty miles northeast of Donga County, Jibei County, there is an old Qing Pavilion, which is the Qing mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：是下济水，通得清水之目焉。
现代文：从这里起，济水下流也通称清水了。
English: From here, the downstream of Jishui is also commonly known as Qingshui.

古文：亦水色清深，用兼厥称矣。
现代文：水色确也很清深，这也是兼有此名的原因。
English: The water color is also very clear and deep, which is also the reason for this name.

古文：是故燕王曰：吾闻齐有清济，浊河以为固。
现代文：所以燕王说：我听说齐国有清济、浊河可以坚守，说的就是这条水。
English: Therefore, Yan Wang said, "I heard that Qingzhi is in Qi Province, and that the Minhe River can be held fast. It is this water that I am talking about."

古文：济水又北径周首亭西。《春秋》文公十有一年，左丘明云：襄公二年，王子成父获长狄侨如弟荣如，埋其首于周首之北门，即是邑也。
现代文：又往北流过谷城县西面，济水岸边有尹卯垒，南离鱼山四十余里，在谷城县境内，就是从前《春秋》中的小谷城。齐桓公于鲁庄公二十三年王子成父俘获长狄侨如的弟弟荣如，把他的头埋在周首的北门，说的就是此城。
English: It also flows northward through the west of Guicheng County, and there is Yinwu Fort on the shore of Jishui. It is more than forty miles south of Yushan. In Guicheng County, it is the former Xiaotan City in "Spring and Autumn." In the twenty-third year of Prince Lu Zhuang's reign, the prince captured the younger brother of the elder Di Xiaorun, Rong Rong, and buried his head in the north gate of Zhou Shou. It is said to be this city.

古文：今世谓之卢子城，济北郡治也。
现代文：现在人们叫卢子城，是济北郡的治所。
English: Now people call it Luzicheng. It is the capital of Jibei County.

古文：京相瑶曰：今济北所治卢子城，故齐周首邑也。
现代文：京相潘说：现在济北郡治所卢子城，就是旧时齐国的周首城。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said, "The present Luzicheng, the administrative center of Jeibei County, is the old Zhou capital city of Qi.

古文：又北过临邑县东，《地理志》曰：县有济水祠。
现代文：又往北流过临邑县东面，《地理志》说：临邑县有济水祠。
English: It also flowed north through the eastern part of Linyi County. "Geography" said: Linyi County has Jishui Temple.

古文：王莽之谷城亭也。
现代文：临邑就是王莽的谷城亭。
English: Lin'eup is Wang Mang's Gucheng Pavilion.

古文：水有石门，以石为之，故济水之门也。
现代文：济水上有石门，用石块筑成，原是济水的门户。 
English: There is a stone gate on Jishui, which was originally the gateway to Jishui.

古文：《春秋》隐公五年，齐、郑会于石门，郑车偾济即于此也。
现代文：《春秋》：隐公五年前，齐、郑在石门会盟，郑伯在济水边翻车，就是这里。
English: "Spring and Autumn": It was here that five years ago, Qi and Zheng met at the Stone Gate, and Zheng Bo overturned his car at the edge of the Jishui River.

古文：京相璠曰：石门，齐地。
现代文：京相瑶说：石门是齐国地方。
English: Beijing's Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs said, "Shimen is the center of Qi Province.

古文：今济北卢县故城西南六十里，有故石门，去水三百步，盖水渎流移，故侧岸也。
现代文：现在济北卢县老城西南六十里有古时的石门，离水三百步，这是因为水道移徙，所以石门也在岸边了。
English: Now, there is an ancient stone gate about sixty kilometers southwest of the old town of Lu County, North Jeolla Province, and it is three hundred paces away from the water. This is because of the migration of waterways, so the stone gate is also on the shore.

古文：济水又北径平阴城西。
现代文：济水又往北流往平阴城西面。
English: Jishui also flows north to the west of Pingying City.

古文：《春秋》襄公十八年，晋侯沉玉济河，会于鲁济，寻湨梁之盟，同伐齐，齐侯御诸平阴者也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十八年前，晋侯沉玉祭河后渡水在鲁济会合，想照涅梁的盟约，和鲁一同攻打齐国，齐侯在平阴拒守。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eighteen years before Xiang Gong, the Jin princes Shen Yu and He Hou Tu Shui met in Luji, and wanted to attack Qi together with Lu, according to the covenant of Niang Liang. The Qi princes refused to defend in Pingyin.

古文：杜预曰城在卢县故城东北，非也。
现代文：杜预说：城在卢县老城东北，不对。
English: Du Yu said: The city is in the northeast of the old city of Lu County, is not right.

古文：京相璠曰：平阴，齐地也。在济北卢县故城西南十里。
现代文：京相潘说：平阴是齐国地方，在济北卢县老城西南十里。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Pingyin is a place in Qi Province, ten miles southwest of the old city of Lu County in North Jilin Province.

古文：平阴城南有长城，东至海，西至济，河道所由，名防门，去平阴三里。
现代文：平阴城南有长城，东到大海，西到济水；河道从长城通过处，名叫防门，离平阴三里。
English: There is the Great Wall to the south of Pingying City, the East to the sea, and the West to Jishui. The place where the river passes from the Great Wall is called the defense gate, three miles from Pingying.

古文：齐侯堑防门，即此也。
现代文：齐侯在防门掘壕，就是这地方。
English: This is the place where Qi Hou was hiding in the defensive trench.

古文：其水引济，故渎尚存。
现代文：壕水是由济水引过来的，旧河道还存在。
English: The ditch water was brought from Jishui, and the old river channel still exists.

古文：今防门北有光里，齐人言广，音与光同，即《春秋》所谓守之广里者也。
现代文：现在防门北边有个光里，齐语广字与光字读音相同，《春秋》说的在广里防守，广里就是光里。
English: Now there is a Guangli on the north side of the gate, and the pronunciation of the Qi language Guangzhu is the same as that of Guangzhu. "Spring and Autumn" said to defend in Guangli, and Guangli is Guangli.

古文：又云，巫山在平阴东北，昔齐侯登望晋军，畏众而归。
现代文：又说：巫山在平阴东北，从前齐侯登山观望晋军，看到晋军这么多，心中害怕起来，就回去了。
English: He also said: Wushan is in the northeast of Pingyin. Once upon a time, Qi Hou climbed the mountain to watch the Jin army. When he saw so many Jin soldiers, he was scared and went back.

古文：师旷、邢伯闻鸟乌之声，知齐师潜遁。
现代文：师旷、邢伯听到乌鸦叫，知道齐军已偷偷逃走了。
English: Shiguang and Zibo heard the crow call and knew that the Qi army had secretly fled.

古文：人物咸沦，地理昭著，贤于杠氏东北之证矣。
现代文：当时的人物早已逝去了，但地理情况还是清清楚楚，这些都比杜预认为城在卢县老城东北的说法要有力得多。
English: The characters of that time have long since passed away, but the geographical situation is still clear. These are much more powerful than Du Yuan's view that the city is in the northeast of the old city of Lu County.

古文：今巫山之上有石室，世谓之孝子堂。
现代文：现有巫山上有个石洞，人们称为孝子堂。
English: There is a stone cave on the current Wushan Mountain, which is known as the filial piety hall.

古文：济水右迤，遏为湄湖，方四十余里。
现代文：济水从右岸分流，截流蓄水形成嵋湖，方圆四十余里。
English: Feeding water is diverted from the right bank, and the intercepted water is stored to form Wuhu, with a circumference of more than forty miles.

古文：济水又东北径垣苗城西，故洛当城也。
现代文：济水又往东北流经垣苗城西面，就是旧时的洛当城。
English: Jishui also flows to the northeast through the west side of Gakiya Castle, which was the old Lotan Castle.

古文：伏韬《北征记》曰：济水又与清河合流，至洛当者也。
现代文：伏韬《北征记》说：济水又与清河合流，到洛当。
English: Fuxi's "Northern Expedition" said: The Jishui River joined the Qinghe River and flowed to Luodang.

古文：宋武帝西征长安，令垣苗镇此，故俗又有垣苗城之称。
现代文：宋武帝西征长安，命令垣苗镇守此城，所以民间又有垣苗城一名。
English: Emperor Song Wudi marched west to conquer Chang'an and ordered the town of Kakimiao to defend the city, so the people of Kakimiao had another name for the city.

古文：河水自四渎口东北流而为济。
现代文：河水从四读口往东北流，就是济水。
English: The river water flows from the fourth reading mouth to the northeast, that is, Jishui.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：盟津河别流十里与清水合，乱流而东，径洛当城北，黑白异流，泾渭殊别，而东南流注也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：盟津河分流十里与清水汇合，往东乱流，从洛当城北面流过，径渭分明，往东南奔去。
English: The "Wei Shui Ji" said: The diversion of the Meitu River is about ten miles from the confluence with the clear water, and the turbulent flow to the east flows from the north of the city of Luotang, with a clear path, and runs to the southeast.

古文：又东北过卢县北，济水东北与湄沟合，水上承湄湖，北流注济。
现代文：又往东北流过卢县北面。济水往东北与循沟汇合。循沟上流承接循湖，北流注入济水。
English: It flows to the northeast through the northern part of Lu County. The Jishui River flows to the northeast and merges with a ditch. The upper stream of the ditch follows the Jishui Lake, and the northern stream flows into the Jishui River.

古文：《尔雅》曰：水草交曰湄，通谷者微。
现代文：《尔雅》说：水与草相交叫泥，水边与山谷相通叫微。
English: "Lya" said: The intersection of water and grass is called mud, and the intersection of waterside and valley is called faint.

古文：犍为舍人曰：水中有草木文合也。
现代文：键为舍人说：循就是水中有草木相交会。
English: The key is to say: following is the intersection of plants and trees in the water.

古文：郭景纯曰：微，水边通谷也。
现代文：郭景纯说：微就是水边与山谷相通。
English: Guo Jingshun said: Weak is that the water's edge is connected to the valley.

古文：《释名》曰：湄，眉也，临水如眉临目也。
现代文：《释名》说：嵋就是眉，靠近水边，有如眉毛靠近眼睛。
English: "Explanation" said: eyelashes are eyebrows, close to the water's edge, like eyebrows close to the eyes.

古文：济水又径卢县故城北，济北郡治也。
现代文：济水又流经卢县老城北面，这是济北郡的治所。
English: Jishui also flows through the north side of the old town of Lu County, which is the seat of Jibei County.

古文：汉和帝永元二年，分泰山置，盖以济水在北故也。
现代文：汉和帝永元二年，从泰山郡划地另置该郡，因在济水以北，所以叫济北。
English: In the 2nd year of the Han and Yong Dynasty, the county was separated from Taishan County by land division. Because it is north of Jishui, it is called Jibei.

古文：济水又径什城北。城际水湄，故邸阁也。
现代文：济水又流经什城北，此城靠近水边，是旧时的仓库。
English: Feeding water also flows through the north of Shicheng. This city is close to the water's edge and is an old warehouse.

古文：祝阿人孙什，将家居之，以避时难，因谓之什城焉。
现代文：祝阿人孙什，带了一家人住在这里避难，所以叫什城。
English: I wish Sun Shih, who took a family to live here for refuge, so called Shicheng.

古文：济水又东北与中川水合，水东南出山在县之分水岭，溪一源两分，泉流半解，亦谓之分流交。半水南出大山人位，半水出山在县，西北流径东太原郡南，郡治山炉固，北与宾溪水合。
现代文：济水又往东北流，与中川水汇合。中川水发源于东南方山往县的分水岭。溪流的源头一分为二，分水处也称分流交，一条南流出太山后注入汉水，另一条出了山在县，经西北流经东太原郡南―郡治在山炉固―北流与宾溪水汇合。
English: The source of the stream is divided into two, and the watershed is also known as the watershed junction. One stream flows south out of Taishan and is injected with Han water, while the other flows out of Shan in the county, and flows northwest through the south of East Taiyuan County - Guzhi in the mountain oven - and flows north to merge with the water of Binxi.

古文：水出南格马山宾溪谷，北径卢县故城北、陈敦戍南，西北流与中川水合，谓之格马口。
现代文：宾溪水发源于南格马山宾溪谷，往北流经卢县老城以北、陈敦戍以南，往西北流，与中川水汇合，汇流处叫格马口。
English: The water of the Binxi River originates from the Binxi Valley of the South Gema Mountain, flows northward through the north of the old city of Lu County, south of Chen Dunyi, flows northwestward, and merges with the water of the Middle River. The confluence is called Gemakou.

古文：其水又北径卢县故城东，而北流入济，俗谓之为沙沟水。
现代文：水又往北流经卢县老城东面，北流注入济水，俗称沙沟水。
English: The water also flows northward through the east side of the old city of Lu County, and the north stream injects water, commonly known as sand ditch water.

古文：济水又东北，右会玉水。
现代文：济水又往东北流，右边与玉水汇合。
English: Jisui flows to the northeast, and merges with Tamamizu on the right.

古文：水导源太山朗公谷，旧名琨瑞溪。
现代文：玉水发源于太山朗公谷，旧名馄瑞溪。
English: The Jade Water originates from Langgong Valley of Taishan Mountain, formerly known as Jiu Rui Creek.

古文：有沙门竺僧朗，少事佛图澄，硕学渊通，尤明气纬，隐于此谷，因谓之朗公谷。
现代文：有个僧人叫竺僧朗，少年时拜佛图澄为师，学间渊博精通，对气和俄纬之学尤其有研究。这山谷他曾隐居过，因此叫朗公谷。
English: There was a monk named Zangzanglang. When he was a boy, he was a disciple of the Buddha Tujing. He was well versed in his studies, especially in the study of qi and Russian latitude. He once lived in seclusion in this valley, which is why it is called Langgong Valley.

古文：故车频《秦书》云：符坚时，沙门竺僧朗，尝从隐士张巨和游，巨和常穴居，而朗居琨瑞山，大起殿舍，连楼累阁，虽素饰不同，并以静外致称。
现代文：所以车频《秦书》说：符坚时，和尚竺僧朗曾与隐士张巨和同游，张巨和时常住在山洞里，但竺僧朗却住在馄瑞山，大规模兴建殿宇房舍，山间建起连片楼阁。
English: Therefore, the frequent "Qin Shu" said: When Fu Jian was at its peak, the monk Yu Sang Lang traveled with the hermit Zhang Jiuhe. Zhang Jiuhe often lived in a cave, but Yu Sang Lang lived in the Jiu Rui Mountain, built large-scale buildings, and built a multi-storey pavilion in the mountains.

古文：即此谷也。水亦谓之琨瑞水也。
现代文：他们两人虽然一个尚素朴，一个重华饰，生活作风迥然不同，但都以能与外界隔绝，闭门静修而受人称道。
English: Although their lifestyles are very different, with one being simple and the other being more ornate, both of them are praised for being able to isolate themselves from the outside world and retreat behind closed doors.

古文：故俗谓是水为祝阿涧水，北流注于济。
现代文：他们同游处就是此谷，水也叫现瑞水。水往西北流经玉符山，又叫玉水。
English: The place where they swim together is this valley, and the water is also called Gensuisui. The water flows northwest through the Jade Fushan Mountains, and is also called Gyokusui.

古文：建武五年，耿弇东击张步，从朝阳桥济渡兵，即是处也。
现代文：又往西北流经猎山以东，又往西北流经祝阿县旧城以东，野井亭以西。《春秋》昭公二十五年耿弃向东攻击张步，从朝阳架桥以供军队过河，就是这地方。
English: It also flows to the northwest to the east of the Hunting Mountain, and to the northwest to the east of the old city of Zhua County and to the west of the Noying Pavilion. "Spring and Autumn" In the 25th year of the Shogun, Geng abandoned the eastward attack on Zhangpu, and built a bridge from Chaoyang for the army to cross the river. This is the place.

古文：济水又东北，泺水入焉。
现代文：济水又往东北流，烁水注入。
English: Feeding water also flows to the northeast, sparkling water is injected.

古文：水出历城县故城西南，泉源上奋，水涌若轮。
现代文：烁水发源于历城县老城西南面，源泉上涌，水头滚滚有如车轮。
English: The sparkling water originates from the southwest of the old town of Licheng County, the source is upstream, and the head of the water is rolling like a wheel.

古文：《春秋》桓公十八年，公会齐侯于泺是也。
现代文：《春秋》：桓公十八年前，桓公在烁会见齐侯，就指此水。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eighteen years ago, when King Kan met Prince Qi in Shao, he referred to this water.

古文：俗谓之为娥姜水，以泉源有舜妃娥英庙故也。城南对山，山上有舜祠，山下有大穴，谓之舜井，抑亦茅山禹井之比矣。
现代文：俗称娥姜水，这里因为有舜的妃子娥皇女英庙的缘故，此城南面向山，山上有舜祠，山下有个大石洞，叫舜井，或许也是茅山禹井之类。
English: Commonly known as E Jiangshui, here because of the temple of the beautiful princess E, the south of the city faces the mountain. On the mountain there is a dragonfly temple, and under the mountain there is a large stone cave, called Shujing, perhaps also Maoshan Yui and the like.

古文：《书》，舜耕历山，亦云在此，所未详也。
现代文：按《尚书》舜在历山耕种，也说是在这里，不大清楚。
English: According to the "Shang Shu," the yakitori is cultivated in the Leshan Mountains, but it is also said to be here, it is not clear.

古文：其水北为大明湖，西即大明寺，寺东北两面侧湖，此水便成净他也。
现代文：水往北流就是大明湖，西边接近大明寺，寺院东北两面临湖，这一乱湖水就成了净池了。
English: The northward flow of water is Daming Lake, the west side is close to Daming Temple, and the northeast two temples face the lake. This turbulent lake water has become a clean pool.

古文：池上有客亭，左右楸桐，负日俯仰，目对鱼鸟，水木明瑟，可谓濠梁之性，物我无违矣。
现代文：池上有客亭，两边揪桐茂密，繁荫遮住阳光，仰视树上的小鸟，俯视水底的游鱼，湖水与岸树相照映，明净极了，秀丽极了。
English: There is a guest pavilion on the pool, the two sides of the pond are densely wooded, the shade covers the sun, looking up at the birds on the trees, looking down at the swimming fish under the water, the lake and the shore trees are reflected, very clear, very beautiful.

古文：湖水引渎，东入西郭，东至历城西而侧城北注，陂水上承东城，历把下泉，泉源竞发。
现代文：身临此境，真有如庄子在壕梁上那样，与整个自然环境和谐地融成一片了。湖水循着渠道支流，东流进入西边的城郭，往东到历城西面，沿城边往北注入破塘。破水上流承接东城历祠下的泉水，源泉从地下泊泊涌出，流势强劲。
English: The lake water follows the channel tributary, the east stream enters the west side of the castle, east to the west of Licheng, and along the edge of the city to the north into the pond. The spring water under the East Licheng Shrine flows over the broken water, and the source gushes out from underground, and the flow is strong.

古文：其水北流径历城东，又北，引水为流杯池，州僚宾燕，公私多萃其上。
现代文：此水往北流经历城东面，又往北流，引水蓄成流杯池，州郡官吏设宴款待宾客，常常都在这里会聚。
English: This water flows northward through the east side of the city, and then flows northward, drawing water and accumulating into a cup pool. State and county officials hold banquets to entertain guests, and they often gather here.

古文：分为二水，右水北出，左水西径历城北，西北为陂，谓之历水，与泺水会。
现代文：水分为两条：右边一条往北，左边一条往西流经历城北面。西北有一片破塘，称为历水，与冻水汇合。
English: The water is divided into two streams: one to the north on the right, and one to the west on the left, which flows through the northern part of the city. In the northwest, there is a broken pond, called Lishui, which merges with the frozen water.

古文：又北，历水枝津。首受历水于历城东，东北径东城西而北出郭，又北注泺水。又北，听水出焉。
现代文：又北流，这里有一条历水的支流，上口在历城东边承接历水，往东北流经东城西面，然后北流出城，又北流注入冻水；又北流，分出听水。
English: There is also the North Stream, a tributary of the Lishui River. The upper estuary receives the Lishui River on the east side of Licheng, flows northeast through the west side of Dongcheng, and then flows out of the city to the north. The north stream also injects frozen water; and the north stream discharges listening water.

古文：泺水又北流注于济，谓之泺口也。
现代文：涯水又北流，注入济水，汇流处称为烁口。
English: The downstream water flows to the north, and is injected into the feeder water. The confluence is called the confluence.

古文：济水又东北，华不注山单椒秀泽，不连丘陵以自高；虎牙桀立，孤峰特拔以刺天。
现代文：济水又往东北流，华不注山冈峦秀丽光润，不与丘陵相连而独自高起，孤峰峭峻耸峙，有如虎牙矗立，刺向天空。
English: Feeding water also flows to the northeast, the mountains and ridges are beautiful and bright, not connected to the hills but rising alone, the lonely peak is steep and stands like a tiger's tooth, sticking to the sky.

古文：青崖翠发，望同点黛。
现代文：青苍的石崖翠色郁然怒发，远望就像点上青黛似的。
English: The blue stone cliffs are green and sullenly angry, and the distant view is like a dotted daisy.

古文：山下有华泉，故京相璠《春秋土地名》曰：华泉，华不注山下泉水也。
现代文：山下有华泉，所以京相潘《春秋土地名》说：华泉是华不注山下的泉水。
English: There is Huaquan under the mountain, so the Beijing Sangpan "Spring and Autumn Land Names" said: Huaquan is the spring water under the mountain.

古文：《春秋左传》成公二年，齐顷公与晋郤克战于鞍，齐师败绩，逐之，三周华不注，逢丑父与公易位，将及华泉，骖絓于木而止。
现代文：《春秋左传》：成公二年前，齐顷公与晋国部克在鞍打仗，齐军败走，谷终克随后追击，绕着华不注山接连兜了三个圈子。丑父与顷公交换位置，快到华泉时，驾车的马被树绊住，停了下来。
English: "The Legend of Spring, Autumn and the Left": Two years before Cheng Gong, Qi Hao and Jin Guo Buke fought in the saddle, and the Qi army was defeated and fled. Gu Zenk then chased and made three circles around Huabu Shushan. Ugly father and Hao Gong exchanged positions, and when they were about to reach Huaquan, the driving horse was tripped by a tree and stopped.

古文：丑父使公下，如华泉取饮，齐侯以免。
现代文：丑父叫顷公下车，去华泉打水，因此齐侯得以逃脱。
English: Ugly father asked Ah Gong to get off the bus and go to Huaquan to fetch water. As a result, Qi Hou was able to escape.

古文：韩厥献丑父，郤子将戮之。
现代文：韩厥抓了逢丑父献给那克，爷卜克想要杀他。
English: Han Jue captured Feng Ugly's father and offered him to Nack, but Nack wanted to kill him.

古文：呼曰：自今无有代其君任患者，有一于此，将为戮矣。
现代文：逢丑父高叫道：从今以后，不会再有人替他的君主受难了。这里有了一个，就要被杀了！
English: Feng Ugly Father Gao shouted: From now on, no one will suffer for his monarch. If there is one here, he will be killed!

古文：郤子曰：人不难以死免其君，我戮之不祥，赦之以劝事君者。
现代文：爷转克说：别人为君主免祸而毅然赴死，我把他杀了也是不好，不如饶了他，以勉励忠于君主的人吧。
English: Grandfather Zengke said, "If someone is determined to die for the sake of the sovereign, it is not right for me to kill him. It would be better to forgive him and encourage those who are loyal to the sovereign."

古文：乃免之。
现代文：于是就放了他。
English: So they let him go.

古文：即华水也。
现代文：这里说到的华泉，就是华水。
English: The "Huaquan" mentioned here is actually "Hua Shui."

古文：北绝听渎二十里，注于济。
现代文：华水北流，穿过听读二十里，注入济水。
English: The north stream of the Huashui River flows twenty miles through Hucheng and injects into Jishui.

古文：又东北过台县北，巨合水南出鸡山西北，北径巨合故城西。
现代文：又往东北流过台县北面，巨合水发源于南边的鸡山西北，往北流经巨合老城西面。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the north of Tai County. The Jiu He Water originates from the northwest of Jishan in the south and flows northward through the west of the old town of Jiu He.

古文：耿弇之讨张步也，守巨里。即此城也。
现代文：耿弃讨伐张步，驻守在巨里，就是此城。
English: Geng abandoned the crusade and stationed in Joli, which is this city.

古文：三面有城，西有深坑，坑西即弇所营也，与费邑战，斩邑于此。
现代文：巨合三面都有城墙，西边是深坑，西面就是耿弃扎营的地方。他与费邑打仗，就在这地方杀了费邑。
English: There were walls on three sides of the mound, and on the west side was the pit, and on the west side was the place where Geng abandoned his encampment. He fought with Fei Yu, and killed Fei Yu in this place.

古文：巨合水又北合关卢水，水导源马耳山，北径博亭城西，西北流至平陵城，与武原水合。
现代文：关卢水发源于马耳一臼。往北流经博亭城西面，往西北流到平陵城，与武源水汇合。
English: The Guanlu Water originates from Malta. It flows northward through the west side of Boting City and northwestward to Pingling City, where it merges with Wuyuan Water.

古文：水出谭城南平泽中，世谓之武原渊。
现代文：武原水发源于谭城南面的平泽中，世大称为武原渊。
English: Wuhara Water originates from Pyeongtaek in the south of Tancheng. It is known as Wuhara Abyss.

古文：北径谭城东，俗谓之布城也。
现代文：往北流经谭城东面，俗称此城为布城。
English: It flows northward to the east of Tancheng, commonly known as Putian.

古文：又北径东平陵县故城西。故陵城也，后乃加平，谭国也。
现代文：又往北流经东平陵老城西面，这里就是旧时的陵城，后来才加上平字，称为平陵。
English: It also flows northward through the west side of Dongpingling Old Town, which is the old-time mausoleum city. Later, the word "ping" was added, and it was called Pingling.

古文：齐桓之出过谭，谭不礼焉，鲁庄公九年即位，又不朝，十年灭之。
现代文：谭是个小国。
English: Tan is a small country.

古文：城东门外有乐安任照先碑，济南郡治也，汉文帝十六年，置为王国，景帝二年为郡，王莽更名乐安。
现代文：齐桓公流亡时，经过谭国，谭国对他怠慢无礼。鲁庄公九年在这里设置王国，景帝二年设郡，王莽改名乐安。
English: When Qi Huan Gong was in exile, he passed through Tan Guo, and Tan Guo treated him with disrespect. In the ninth year of King Lu Zhuang, he set up a kingdom here, and in the second year of King Jing, he set up a county. Wang Mang changed his name to Le An.

古文：其水又北径巨合城东，汉武帝以封城阳顷王子刘发为侯国。
现代文：武原水又往北流经巨合城东面，汉武帝把这地方封给城阳顷王的儿子刘发，立为侯国。
English: Wuyuan water also flowed northward through the eastern side of Jiuhe City. Emperor Hanwu granted this place to Liu Fa, the son of King Chengyangha, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：其水合关卢水，西出注巨合水。
现代文：此水与关卢水汇合后，西流注入巨合水。
English: After the confluence of this water and the Guanlu water, the west stream injects the combined water.

古文：巨合水西北径台县故城南。
现代文：巨合水往西北流经台县老城南面。
English: The Jiuhe River flows northwest through the southern part of Taishan Old Town.

古文：汉高帝六年，封东郡尉戴野为侯国，王莽之台治也。
现代文：汉高帝六年把这地方封给东郡尉戴野，立为侯国，就是王莽的台治。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Han Gao, this place was given to the East County Lieutenant Daino and established as a vassal state, which is Wang Mang's Taizhi.

古文：其水西北流，白野泉水注之，水出台城西南白野泉北，径留山西北流，而右注巨合水。
现代文：水往西北流，白野泉水注入。白野泉水发源于台城西南的白野泉，往北流经留山，往西北流，然后往西注入巨合水；巨合水又北流，听水注入。
English: The water of the Shirano Spring originates from the Shirano Spring in the southwest of Taicheng, flows northward through the Ruzhan Mountains, flows northwestward, and then flows westward into the Jiuhe Water; the Jiuhe Water also flows northward and is injected into the Huanan Water.

古文：巨合水又北，听水注之；水上承泺水，东流北屈，又东北流，注于巨合水，乱流又北入于济。
现代文：听水上流承接烁水，往东流，折向北方，又往东北流，注入巨合水，然后乱流往北注入济水。
English: Listening to the water, the upstream flow receives the sparkling water, flows to the east, turns to the north, flows to the northeast, injects the giant water, and then the turbulent flow injects the water to the north.

古文：济水又东北，合芹沟水，水出台县故城东南，西北流，径台城东，又西北入于济水。
现代文：济水又往东北流，汇合了芹沟水。沟水发源于台县老城东南，往西北流经台城东面，又往西北流，注入济水。
English: The water of the ditch originates in the southeast of the old city of Taishan, flows to the northwest through the east of Taicheng, and flows to the northwest, injecting water.

古文：又东北过管县南。济水东径县故城南。
现代文：又往东北流过营县南面，济水往东流经营县老城南面。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the south of Ying County, and Jishui flows to the east through the south of the old town of Ying County.

古文：汉文帝四年，封齐悼惠王子罢军为侯国。
现代文：汉文帝四年前，把这地方封给齐悼惠王的儿子罢军，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Hanwen four years ago, this place was given to the son of Qi Yi Hui Wang and established as a vassal state.

古文：右纳百脉水，水出土鼓县故城西，水源方百步，百泉俱出，故谓之百脉水。
现代文：济水右岸接纳了百脉水，此水发源于土鼓县老城西面，水源方圆百步，百道泉流一起滚滚涌出，所以叫百脉水。
English: The right bank of the Jishui River receives Hyakudan Water. This water originates from the west side of the old town of Dugu County. The water source is a hundred paces in a circle, and hundreds of springs gush out together, so it is called Hyakudan Water.

古文：其水西北流，径阳丘县故城中。
现代文：水往西北流经阳丘县老城内。
English: The water flows northwest through the old town of Yangqiu County.

古文：汉孝文帝四年，以封齐悼惠王子刘安为阳丘侯，世谓之章丘城，非也。
现代文：汉孝文帝四年，把这地方封给齐悼惠王的儿子刘安，称为阳丘侯，世人称为章丘城是不对的。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Han Xiaowen, it was wrong to give this place to Liu An, the son of Qi Yi Hui Wang, called Yangqiu Hou, and the world called Zhangqiu City.

古文：城南有女郎山，山上有神祠，俗谓之女郎祠，左右民祀焉。
现代文：城南有女郎山，山上有神祠，俗称女郎祠，邻近一带人都去那里祭祀。
English: In the south of the city, there is the Girl's Mountain, and on the mountain there is a shrine, commonly known as the Girl's Shrine, and people from the surrounding area go there to worship.

古文：其水西北出城，北径黄巾固。盖贼所屯，故固得名焉。
现代文：百脉水往西北流出城外，北经黄巾固，因为黄巾贼曾在这里驻扎过，所以得名。
English: The water of the hundred veins flows out of the city to the northwest, passing through Huanghuagu to the north, because the Yellow Turban Thieves once stationed here, hence the name.

古文：百脉水又东北流注于济。
现代文：百脉水又往东北流，注入济水。
English: The hundred veins of water also flow to the northeast, injecting water.

古文：济水又东，有杨渚沟水，出逢陵故城西南二十里，西北径土鼓城东，又西北径章丘城东，又北径宁戚城西，而北流注于济水也。
现代文：济水又东流，有杨诸沟水发源于逢陵老城西南二十里，往西北流经土鼓城东面，又往西北流经章丘城东面，又往北流经宁戚城西面，然后北流，注入济水。
English: The Yangzhu ditch water originates 20 miles southwest of Fengling Old Town, flows northwest through the east side of Tudou City, flows northwest through the east side of Zhangqiu City, flows north through the west side of Ningqi City, and then flows north, injecting water.

古文：又东过梁邹县北，陇水南出长城中，北流至般阳县故城西，南与般水会，水出县东南龙山，俗亦谓之为左阜水，西北径其城南。王莽之济南亭也。
现代文：又往东流过梁邹县北面，陇水从南边长城中流出，往北流到般阳县老城西南，与般水汇合。般水发源于般阳县东南的龙山，民间也叫左阜水，往西流经城南，就是王莽的济南亭。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Liangyu County, flowing out of the Great Wall in the south, flowing north to the southwest of the old city of Banyang County, and merging with the Banyan Water. The Banyan Water originates from Longshan in the southeast of Banyang County, and is also called Zuo Fushui by the people. It flows westward through the south of the city, which is Wang Mang's Jinan Pavilion.

古文：应劭曰：县在般水之阳，故资名焉。
现代文：应肋说：县城在般水的北边，所以取名般阳。
English: Ying Li said: The county seat is on the north side of the water, so it was named Banyang.

古文：其水又南屈，西人陇水。
现代文：水又向南转弯，西流注入陇水。
English: The water turned south again, and the westerly flow injected brackish water.

古文：陇水北径其县，西北流至萌水口，水出西南甲山，东北径萌山西，东北入于陇水。
现代文：陇水往北流经县城，往西北流到萌水口。萌水发源于西南的甲山，往东北流经萌山西面，往东北注入陇水。
English: The Ershui River flows northward through the county seat and northwestward to the mouth of the Ershui River. The Ershui River originates in the southwest of Mount Khao, flows northeastward through the western side of Mount Ershui, and flows into the northeast of Ershui.

古文：陇水又西北至梁邹东南，与鱼子沟水合，水南出长白山东柳泉口。
现代文：陇水又往西北流，到了梁邹县东南，与鱼子沟水汇合。鱼子沟水发源于南方长白山东麓的柳泉口。
English: Surabaya water also flows northwestward, to the southeast of Liangyu County, and merges with the water of the fish gutter. The fish gutter water originates from the Liuquan mouth at the eastern foot of the Changbai Mountain in the south.

古文：陇水又西北径梁邹县故城南，又北屈径其城西。汉高祖六年，封武虎为侯国，其水北注济。
现代文：此山就是陈仲子夫妻隐居的地方。《孟子》说：陈仲子出身于齐国的仕宦之家，他的哥哥名戴，傣禄万钟，陈仲子以为不正当不肯吃他的饭，于是离开了母亲和哥哥，在于陵安下了家，就是这地方。水又流经于陵县老城西面，就是王莽的于陆。世祖建武十五年把这地方封给武虎，立为侯国。陇水往北注入济水。
English: This mountain is the place where Chen Zhongzi and his wife lived in seclusion. "Mencius" said: Chen Zhongzi was born in the Shiqian family of Qi. His elder brother was named Dai, and his fortune was great. Chen Zhongzi thought it was unfair to refuse to eat his meal, so he left his mother and brother and went to live in Ling'an, which is this place. The water also flowed through the west side of the old city of Ling County, that is, Wang Mang's land. In the fifteenth year of King Jianwu, this place was given to Wuhu and established as a principality. Surabaya water was injected to the north.

古文：城之东北，又有时水西北注焉。
现代文：县城东北又有时水往西北流去。
English: In the northeast of the county seat, the water sometimes flows to the northwest.

古文：又东北过临济县南，县，故狄邑也，王莽更名利居。
现代文：－又往东北流过临济县南面，临济县，就是旧时的狄邑，王莽改名为利居。
English: - and flowed to the northeast to the south of Linji County, Linji County, which was the old Diyun, Wang Mang changed its name to Lijun.

古文：《汉记》，安帝永初二年，改从今名，以临济故。
现代文：按《汉记》，安帝永初二年改为今名，这是因为此城濒临济水的缘故。
English: According to "Hanki," the name of the city was changed to its present name in the first two years of the Andean era, because the city was close to a water source.

古文：《地理风俗记》云：乐安太守治。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：临济是乐安太守的治所。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Linji is the seat of the governor of Le'an.

古文：晏谟《齐记》曰：有南北二城隔济水，南城即被阳县之故城也，北枕济水。
现代文：晏漠《齐记》说：济水南北两岸有二城隔水相望，南城就是被阳县旧城，北边靠近济水。
English: "Qi Ji" said: There are two cities on the north and south sides of Jishui, facing each other across the water. The southern city is the old city of Beiyang County, and the northern side is close to Jishui.

古文：《地理志》曰：侯国也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是个侯国。
English: "Geography" said: This is a vassal state.

古文：如淳曰：一作疲，音罢，军之罢也。
现代文：如淳说：被字也有写作疲字的，读作疲兵的疲。
English: For example, Jun said: "Being tired" can also be written as "疲字" and read as "疲兵的疲."

古文：《史记。建元以来王子侯者年表》曰：汉武帝元朔四年，封齐孝上子敬侯刘燕之国也。
现代文：《史记•建元以来王子侯者年表》说：汉武帝元朔四年前，这里是封给齐孝王的儿子敬侯刘燕的封国。
English: "Chronology of Princes and Marquis since the founding of the Yuan Dynasty" says: Four years before the founding of the Han Dynasty, this was the fiefdom of Liu Yan, the son of Qi Xiao Wang.

古文：今渤海侨郡治。
现代文：现在是勃海侨郡治所。
English: It is now the Bohai Overseas Chinese County Government.

古文：济水又东北，迆为渊诸，谓之平州。
现代文：济水又往东北流，分支流出，积成一片深潭，叫平州沉。
English: Feeding water also flows to the northeast, branches out, and accumulates into a deep pool, called Pingzhou sink.

古文：漯沃县侧有平安故城，俗谓之会城，非也。
现代文：漂沃县旁有座平安老城，俗称会城。这不对。
English: There is a Heian Old Town, commonly known as Kaisei Town, next to Driftwood County. This is not right.

古文：按《地理志》，千乘郡有平安县，侯国也，王莽曰鸿睦也。
现代文：按《地理志》，千乘郡有平安县，是个侯国，王莽叫鸿睦。
English: According to the "Geography," Qianren County has Heian County, which is a vassal state, and Wang Mang is called Hongmu.

古文：应劭曰：博昌县西南三十里有平安亭，故县也。世尚存平州之名矣。
现代文：应助说：博昌县西南三十里有平安亭，是个旧县城，世间还留有平州的这地名。
English: Ye Xie said: There is a Pingan Pavilion in the southwest 30 of Bochang County, which is an old county seat. This place name of Pingzhou still remains in the world.

古文：济水又东北径高昌县故城西。
现代文：济水又往东北流经高昌县旧城西面。
English: Jishui also flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Gaochang County.

古文：案《地理志》，千乘郡有高昌县，汉宣帝地节四年，封董忠为侯国。
现代文：按《地理志》，千乘郡有高昌县，汉宣帝地节四年前 ，把这里封给董忠，立为侯国。
English: According to the "Geography," Qianren County has Gaochang County. Four years before the Han Emperor's Land Festival, Dong Zhong was granted this county and it was established as a princely state.

古文：世谓之马昌城，非也。
现代文：世人称为马昌城是不对的。
English: It is not right for the world to call it Machang City.

古文：济水又东北径乐安县故城南。
现代文：济水又往东北流经乐安县老城南。
English: Jishui also flows to the northeast through the old southern part of Le'an County.

古文：伏琛《齐记》曰：博昌城西北五十里有南、北二城，相去三十里，隔时、济二水。
现代文：伏深《齐记》说：博昌城西北五十里，有南北二城，相距三十里，中间隔着时水和济水。
English: Fushin's "Qi Ji" said: 50 miles northwest of Bochang City, there are two cities in the north and south, 30 miles apart, separated by Jishui and Jishui.

古文：指此为博昌北城，非也。
现代文：把乐安当作博昌北城却弄错了。
English: Le An was mistaken for Bochang Beicheng.

古文：乐安与博昌、薄姑分水，俱同西北，薄姑去齐城六十里，乐安越水差远，验非尤明。
现代文：乐安与博昌、薄姑中间有水分隔，都在西北，薄姑则离齐城六十里，乐安过去还要远些，由实一地来验证，尤其清楚地看出这不是博昌。
English: There is a water gap between Le'an and Bochang and Bo Gu, both are in the northwest, Bo Gu is sixty miles away from Qicheng, and Le'an used to be further away. By verifying from a real place, it is particularly clear that this is not Bochang.

古文：班固曰：千乘郡有乐安县。
现代文：班固说：千乘郡有乐安县。
English: Ban Gu said: "There is a Le'an County in Qianren County.

古文：应劭曰：取休令之名矣。
现代文：应肋说：取了个美好的县名。
English: Ying Li said: It's a beautiful county name.

古文：汉武帝元朔五年，封李蔡为侯国。
现代文：汉武帝元朔五年前，把这留里封给李蔡，立为侯国。
English: Five years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo left this territory to Li Cai and established it as a principality.

古文：城西三里有任光等冢，光是宛县人，不得为博昌明矣。
现代文：城西三里有任光等墓。任光是宛县人，那末乐安不是博昌也就十分明白了。
English: There are tombs of Ren Guang and others in the west of the city. Ren Guang is from Wan County, so it is quite clear that Le An is not Bochang.

古文：济水又径薄姑城北。
现代文：济水又流经薄姑城北面。
English: The Jishui also flows through the northern side of Bo Gu City.

古文：《后汉郡国志》曰：博昌县有薄姑城。
现代文：《后汉书•郡国志》说：博昌县有薄姑城。
English: "Hou Han Shu • Gu Gu Gu Zhi" said: Bochang County has Bo Gu City.

古文：《地理书》曰：吕尚封于齐郡薄姑。
现代文：《地理书》说：吕尚封于齐郡的薄姑。
English: "The Book of Geography" says: Lv Shangfu is located in Bo Gu, Qi County.

古文：薄姑故城在临淄县西北五十里，近济水。
现代文：薄姑旧城在临淄县西北五十里，邻近济水。
English: Bo Gu Old Town is located 50 miles northwest of Linyi County, near Jishui.

古文：史迁曰：献公徙薄姑。
现代文：史迁说：献公迁移到薄姑。
English: Shi Qian said: I moved to Bo Gu out of devotion to duty.

古文：城内有高台。
现代文：城内有高台。
English: There is a hill in the city.

古文：《春秋》昭公二十年，齐景公饮于台上，曰：古而不死，何乐如之。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公二十年前，齐景公在台上饮酒，说：老了假如能不死，多么快乐啊！
English: "Spring and Autumn": Zhaogong twenty years ago, Qi Jinggong drank alcohol on stage and said: If you can not die when you are old, how happy you are!

古文：晏平仲对曰：昔爽鸠氏始屠之，季萴因之，有逢伯陵又因之，薄姑氏又因之，而后太公因之。
现代文：晏平仲道：从前爽鸡开始住在这里，季蓟接着他，有逢伯陵又接着住在这里，薄姑氏又接着住在这里，以后又传到了太公。
English: Zou Pingzhong said: Once upon a time, Shuangqian began to live here, Ji Ying followed him, Feng Boling continued to live here, the Bo Gu clan continued to live here, and later it was passed on to Taigong.

古文：臣以为古若不死，爽鸠氏之乐，非君之乐。即于是台也。
现代文：我想，人老了假如不死，那享受快乐的该是爽鸿氏，不会是您了。
English: I think that if people do not die when they are old, then it should be Mr. Shuang Hong who enjoys happiness, not you.

古文：济水又东北径狼牙固西而东北流也。
现代文：他们这些话就是在这台上谈的。济水又往东北流经狼牙固以西，然后向东北流去。
English: Their words were spoken on this very platform. The water of Kishimizu flows to the northeast, passing to the west of Wolga, and then flows to the northeast.

古文：又东北过利县西，《地理志》，齐郡有利县，王莽之利治也。
现代文：又往东北流过利县西面，据《地理志》，齐郡有利县，就是王莽的利治。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west of Li County. According to "Geography," Li County of Qi County is the Li Zhi of Wang Mang.

古文：晏谟曰：县在齐城北五十里也。
现代文：晏漠说：利县在齐城以北五十里。
English: "Li County is 50 miles north of Qicheng.

古文：又东北过甲下邑，入于河。
现代文：又往东北流过甲下邑，注人河水。
English: The river then flows northeast through Kaishimo-eup, where it discharges into the Chunin River.

古文：济水东北至甲下邑南，东历琅槐县故城北。
现代文：济水往东北流，到甲下邑南面，往东流经琅槐县老城北面。
English: Jishui flows to the northeast, to the south of Jiaxing, and flows to the east through the north of the old city of Handan.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：博昌东北八十里有琅槐乡，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：博昌东北八十里有琅槐乡，是个旧县址。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: Baochang is located in the northeast of Baizhili, which is a former county site.

古文：《山海经》曰：济水绝巨野注渤海，入齐琅槐东北者也。
现代文：《山海经》说：济水穿过巨野，注入渤海。在这一段流程中，进入齐境，流过琅槐东北。
English: "Shanhai Jing" says: Jishui crosses the huge fields and flows into the Bohai Sea. In this part of the process, it enters Qi Jie and flows through the northeast of Bohai.

古文：又东北，河水枝津注之，《水经》以为入河，非也。
现代文：又往东北流，河水支流注入。《水经》以为济水流入大河，其实不是。
English: It also flows to the northeast, and the tributaries of the river are injected. "Suikei" thought that Jishui flowed into the big river, but in fact it was not.

古文：斯乃河水注济，非济入河。
现代文：事实上是河水注入济水，而不是济水流进河水。
English: In fact, it is the river water that is injected into the water supply, rather than the water supply flowing into the river.

古文：又东北入海。
现代文：又往东北就流进大海了。
English: Further to the northeast, it flows into the sea.

古文：郭景纯曰：济自荣阳至乐安博昌入海。
现代文：郭景纯说：济水从荣阳到乐安博昌入海。
English: Guo Jingjun said: Jishui enters the sea from Rongyang to Le'an Bochang.

古文：今河竭，济水仍流不绝，《经》言入河，二说并失。
现代文：现在河水已枯竭，而济水仍长流不断。而《水经却说济水入河，与郭景纯一样都搞错了。
English: Now the water of the river has dried up, but the holy water is still flowing continuously. However, the "Water Canon" says that the holy water enters the river, just like Guo Jingjun, they are all mistaken.

古文：然河水于济、漯之北，别流注海。
现代文：但河水另有一支在济水、漂水以北注入大海。
English: However, another branch of the river flows into the sea north of Jishui and Fushui.

古文：今所辍流者，惟漯水耳，郭或以为济注之，即实非也。
现代文：现在断流的只有漂水罢了，郭景纯也许以为济水注入河水，但从实地验证并非如此。
English: At present, only the drifting water is cut off. Guo Jingshun may think that the water supply is injected into the river water, but it is not the case from the field.

古文：寻经脉水，不如《山经》之为密矣。
现代文：考察水脉的具体情况，都不如《山海经》说得贴切了。
English: Examining the specific conditions of the water veins is not as appropriate as the "Sanghaikyo."

古文：其一水东南流者，过乘氏县南，菏水分济于定陶东北，东南右合黄沟枝流，俗谓之界沟也。北径已氏县故城西，又北径景山东。《卫诗》所谓景山与京者也。
现代文：其中一条水往东南流过乘氏县南面，菏水在定陶东北从济水分出，往东南流，右边汇合了黄沟支流―俗称界沟―往北流经已氏县老城西面，又往北流经景山东面，《卫诗》里说的景山和京冈，就指这地方。
English: One of the rivers flows to the southeast through the southern part of Jishi County, the other flows to the southeast from Jishui in the northeast of Dingtao. On the right side, the tributary of Huanggou River - commonly known as Jiegou River - flows to the north through the west of the old city of Jishi County, and then flows to the north through the east of Jingshan. The Jingshan and Jinggang Mountains mentioned in the "Song of Songs" refer to this place.

古文：毛公曰：景山，大山也。
现代文：毛公说：景山是大山。
English: Mao Gong said: Jingshan is a big mountain.

古文：又北径楚丘城西。
现代文：又往北流经楚丘城西面。
English: It also flows north through the western side of the city of Chuqiu.

古文：《郡国志》曰：成武县有楚丘亭。
现代文：《郡国志》说：成武县有个楚丘亭。
English: "County History" said: There is a Chu Qiu Pavilion in Chengwu County.

古文：杜顶云，楚丘在成武县西南，卫懿公为狄所灭，卫文公东徙渡河，野处曹邑，齐桓公城楚丘以迁之。
现代文：杜预说：楚丘在成武西南。卫露公被狄所灭，卫文公东迁渡过大河，住在曹邑村野里，齐桓公在楚丘筑城，把他迁到那里去。
English: Du Yu said: Chuqiu is in the southwest of Chengwu. Wei Lu Gong was exterminated by Di, Wei Wen Gong moved east across the great river and lived in the villages and fields of Cao'i, Qi Kuan Gong built a city in Chuqiu and moved him there.

古文：故《春秋》称邢迁如归，卫国忘亡。
现代文：所以《春秋》说：刑人离乡背井他迁，就像回家一样，卫人有了安身之地，忘了亡国之痛。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" said: the executioner moved away from his hometown, just like going home, the guards had a place to settle down and forgot the pain of losing their country.

古文：即《诗》所谓升彼虚矣，以望楚矣，望楚与堂，景山与京。
现代文：《诗经》说：爬到那边的高丘上，向着楚丘眺望，眺望那楚丘和堂水，眺望那景山和京冈。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Climb to the high hill over there, look out towards Chu Qiu, look out over that Chu Qiu and the hall of water, look out over that scenic mountain and the capital hill."

古文：故郑玄言，观其旁邑及山川也。
现代文：所以郑玄说：观望旁近的城邑和山川。
English: So Zheng Xuan said: Look at the nearby cities and mountains.

古文：又东北径成武城西，又东北径郈城东。疑郈徙也，所未详矣。
现代文：又往东北流经成武城西面，又往东北流经邸城东面，推想起来是郡邑所迁的地方，但不大清楚。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the west side of Chengwu City, and to the northeast through the east side of Mansion City. It is thought to be the place where the county seat was moved, but it is not clear.

古文：又东北径梁丘城西。
现代文：又往东北流经梁丘城西面。
English: It also flows northeast through the west side of Liangqiu City.

古文：《地理志》曰：昌邑县有梁丘乡。
现代文：《地理志》说：昌邑县有梁丘乡。
English: "Geography" said: Changyi County has Liangqiu Township.

古文：《春秋》庄公三十二年，宋人、齐人会于梁丘者也。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公三十二年前，宋人、齐人在梁丘会盟。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Thirty-two years before Zhuang Gong, Song people and Qi people formed an alliance in Liangqiu.

古文：杜预曰：高平昌邑县西南有梁丘乡。
现代文：杜预说：高平昌邑县西南有梁丘乡。
English: Du Yu said: There is Liangqiu Township in the southwest of Gaoping Changyi County.

古文：又东北于乘氏县西而北注菏水，菏水又东南径乘氏县故城南。县，即《春秋》之乘丘也。
现代文：又往东北流，在乘氏县西面往北注入菏水。菏水又往东南流经乘氏县老城南面，就是《春秋》的乘丘。
English: It also flows to the northeast, injecting Surabaya water to the north in the west of Jouji County. Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the south of the old town of Jouji County, which is the "Spring and Autumn" hill.

古文：故《地理风俗记》曰：济阴乘氏县，故宋乘丘邑也。
现代文：所以《地理风俗记》说：济阴乘氏县，就是旧时宋国的乘丘邑。
English: Therefore, the "Geography and Customs" said: Jiyin Yorishi County is the old Yorishi County of Song Dynasty.

古文：汉孝景中五年，封梁孝王子买为侯国也。
现代文：汉孝景帝中五年前，把这里封给梁孝王的儿子买，立为侯国。
English: Five years ago, when Emperor Han Xiaoqing was in middle school, he bought the fief here for the son of Liang Xiao Wang and established it as a principality.

古文：《地理志》曰：乘氏县，泗水东南至唯陵入淮。
现代文：《地理志》说：乘氏县有泅水往东南流到唯陵，注入淮水。
English: "Geography" said: There is brackish water in Jingshi County flowing southeast to Weiling, injecting Huai Water.

古文：《郡国志》曰：乘氏有泗水。
现代文：《郡国志》说：乘氏县有洒水。
English: "County National History" said: There is sprinkling water in Jingshi County.

古文：此乃菏泽也。
现代文：就是菏泽。
English: That's Shibusawa.

古文：《尚书》有导菏泽之说，自陶丘北，东至于菏，无泗水之文。
现代文：《尚书》有疏导菏泽的说法，从陶丘以北，东到菏泽，但没有说到泅水。
English: "Shangshu" has the saying of guiding Heze from the north of Taoqiu to the east of Heze, but it does not mention Heze.

古文：又曰：导菏泽，被孟猪。
现代文：又说疏导菏泽淹没孟猪。
English: He also said that the diversion of Heze flooded Mengzi.

古文：孟猪在睢阳县之东北阚駰《十三州记》曰：不言入而言被者，明不常入也。水盛，方乃覆被矣。
现代文：孟猪在唯阳县东北。阐驹《十三州志》说：不说流入，而说淹没，这是表示不是经常有水流入，水大时方才能淹没。
English: Menghu is in the northeast of Weiyang County. The "History of the Thirteen States" said: not to say inflow, but to say submerged, which means that water does not often flow in, and water can only be submerged when it is large.

古文：泽水淼漫，俱钟淮泗，故志有睢陵入淮之言，以通苞泗名矣。
现代文：泽中的水浩浩茫茫，都注入淮水和洒水。古书有从唯注入淮水的话，而把洒水也包括在内了。
English: The vast expanse of water in the middle of the lake is filled with water and sprinkles. In ancient books, water is only filled with water, but sprinkles are also included.

古文：然诸水注泗者多不止此，可以终归泗水，便得擅通称也。
现代文：但注入洒水的水很多，并不止这一条，不能因为最后流入洒水，就可以滥用通称的。
English: However, there is a lot of water injected into the sprinkler, and there is more than this one. It is not possible to abuse the common name because the sprinkler finally flows into the water.

古文：或更有泗水亦可是水之兼其目，所未详也。
现代文：或者另外还有一条洒水子那还可说，但此水为何兼有泅水之名，却弄不清楚了。
English: Or there is another sprinkler that can be said, but it is unclear why this water has both the name of the sprinkler.

古文：又东过昌邑县北，菏水又东径昌邑县故城北。
现代文：又往东流过昌邑县北面，菏水又往东流经昌邑县老城北面。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Changyi County, and the Surabaya River flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Changyi County.

古文：熹平四年迁州，明年甘露复降殿前树，从事冯巡、主簿华操等相与褒树，表勒棠政。
现代文：《地理志》说：昌邑县就是旧时的梁国。汉景帝中元六年调到州里，次年，甘露又落在殿前树上。从事冯巡、主簿华操等一同立碑颂扬他的德政。
English: "Geography" said: Changyi County is the old Liangguo. In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Han Jing, he was transferred to the county. The following year, the nectar fell on the tree in front of the palace. He engaged in Fengxuan, the main book, and other activities to erect a monument to praise his German politics.

古文：次西有沇州刺史茂陵杨叔恭碑，从事孙光等以建宁四年立，西北有东太山成人班孟坚碑，建和十年，尚书右丞拜沇州刺史从事秦闰等，刊石颂德政，碑咸列焉。
现代文：稍往西，有坑州刺史茂陵杨叔恭碑，是建宁四年从事孙光等所立。西北有东太山成人班孟坚碑。班孟坚于建和十年，以尚书右垂出任沈州刺史。从事秦闰等刻碑颂扬他的德政。
English: Slightly to the west, there is a monument to Yang Shujong of the Mausoleum of Kengzhou, which was erected by Sun Guang and others in the four years of Jianning. In the northwest, there is a monument to East Taishan's adult Ban Mengjian. Ban Mengjian was in Jianhe for ten years, and served as a historian of Shenzhou with Shangshu Zhidang. He was engaged in Qin Liao and other inscribed monuments to praise his virtue.

古文：又东过金乡县南，《郡国志》曰：山阳有金乡县。菏水径其故城南，世谓之故县城北有金乡山也。
现代文：这些都还存在。又往东流过金乡县南面，《郡国志》说：山阳有金乡县，菏水流经旧城南面，世人称为老县城。北边有金乡山。
English: All of these still exist. It also flows eastward through the southern part of Jinxiang County. "County History" says: Shanyang has Jinxiang County, and the Bohai River flows through the southern part of the old city, which is known to the world as the old county seat. There is Jinxiang Mountain in the north.

古文：又东过东绢县北，菏水又东径汉平狄将军扶沟侯淮阳朱鲔冢。
现代文：又往东流过东络县北面，菏水又往东流经汉平狄将军扶沟侯淮阳朱鳍墓。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Dongluo County, and the Surabaya River flows eastward through the tomb of Huaiyang Zhu Xi, General Hanping Di's vassal.

古文：墓北有石庙。
现代文：墓北有石庙。
English: There is a stone temple to the north of the tomb.

古文：菏水又东径东缗具故城北，故宋地。
现代文：菏水又往东流经东绪县旧城北面，从前原是宋国地方。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Dongxu County, which used to be a part of Song Dynasty.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十三年，齐侯伐宋围缗。
现代文：《春秋》：禧公二十三年前，齐侯攻宋，包围了络。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-three years ago, Qi attacked Song and encircled Luo.

古文：《十三州记》曰：山阳有东缗县，邹衍曰：余登缗城以望宋都者也。
现代文：《十三州记》说：山阳有东绪县。邹衍说：我登上络城，遥望着宋都。
English: "The Records of the Thirteen Provinces" said: Shanyang has Dongxu County. Yuyan said: I boarded the network city and looked at the Song capital from afar.

古文：后汉世祖建武十一年，封冯异长子璋为侯国。
现代文：后汉世祖建武十一年，把这里封给冯异的长子冯璋，立为侯国。
English: In the eleventh year after the founding of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianwu gave this land to Feng Yi, the eldest son of Feng Yi, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又东过方与县北，为菏水。
现代文：又往东流过方与县北面，就是菏水。
English: It also flows eastward past Fang and the north of the county, that is, Surabaya.

古文：菏水东径重乡城南，《左传》所谓臧文仲宿于重馆者也。
现代文：菏水往东流经重乡城南，《左传》说的减文仲宿于重馆，就指这地方。
English: The Surabaya River flows eastward through the southern part of Chongxiang City. Zuo Zhuan said that Yanwen Zhongzhuang lived in Chongguan, which refers to this place.

古文：菏水又东径武棠亭北，《公丰》以为济上邑也。
现代文：菏水又往东流经武棠亭北面，《公羊传》称为济上邑。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north side of Wudang Pavilion. "The Ram" is called Jishang.

古文：城有台，高二丈许，其下临水，昔鲁侯观鱼于棠，谓此也。在方与县故城北十里。
现代文：城中有台，高二丈左右，台下临水。从前鲁侯在棠观鱼，就指这地方，在方与县老城以北十里。
English: There is a platform in the city, around the second floor of the high school, and the platform is adjacent to the water. In the past, Lu Hou was watching fish in Tangguan, which refers to this place, ten miles north of Fang and the county's old city.

古文：《经》所谓菏水也。
现代文：这就是《水经》所说的菏水。
English: This is what the "Water Sutra" says about the water.

古文：菏水又东径泥母亭北。
现代文：菏水又往东流经泥母亭北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north side of the mud tower.

古文：《春秋左传》僖公七年，秋，盟于宁母，谋伐郑也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：嘻公七年秋天，在宁母会盟，是、为了策划攻打郑国。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": In the autumn of He Gong's seventh year, he joined the Ningma Association to plan an attack on Zheng Guo.

古文：菏水又东与巨野黄水合，菏泽别名也。
现代文：菏水又东流，与巨野黄水汇合，这是菏泽的别名。
English: Surabaya water also flows east, merging with the huge wild yellow water, which is another name for Surabaya.

古文：黄水上承巨泽诸陂，泽有蒙淀、盲陂。
现代文：黄水上流承接巨泽的那些破塘，其中有檬淀，盲破、黄湖。
English: The upper reaches of the Yellow River are connected to the broken ponds of Kouzawa, including Lemon Lake, Blind Lake, and Yellow Lake.

古文：黄湖水东流，谓之黄水，又有薛训诸水，自渚历薛村前，分为二流，一水东注黄水，一水西北入泽，即洪水也。
现代文：水往东流，称为黄水。又有薛训诸水，自此诸流经薛村前，分为两条：一条往东注入黄水，一条往西北流入沼泽，这就是洪水。
English: The water flows eastward, and is called the Yellow Water. There is also the Xuexun Water, from which the water flows through Xuecun, and is divided into two: one flows eastward into the Yellow Water, and one flows northwest into the swamp, which is the flood.

古文：黄水东南流，水南有汉荆州刺史李刚墓。
现代文：黄水往东南流，南岸有汉朝荆州刺史李刚墓。
English: The yellow water flows to the southeast. On the south bank, there is the Han Dynasty Jingzhou Jishi Li Gang Tomb.

古文：刚字叔毅，山阳高平人，裹平元年卒。见其碑。
现代文：•李刚字叔毅，山阳高平人，死于熹平元年，事迹见碑上所载。
English: • Li Gangzhi Shu Yi, a native of Sanyang Gaoping, died in the first year of Suiping, and his deeds are recorded on the monument.

古文：有石阙、祠堂、石室三间，椽架高丈余，镂石作椽瓦屋，施平天造，方井侧荷梁柱，四壁隐起，雕刻为君臣、官属，龟龙、鳞凤之文，飞禽、走兽之像，作制工丽，不甚伤毁。
现代文：还有石墓网、祠堂、石屋三间，簿架高丈余，用石材雕成椽瓦形状，屋内顶上衬以平整的天花板，建成藻井，两侧的石柱支承着梁栋，四壁的雕刻隐约突起，镂成君臣官属、龟龙麟凤、飞禽走兽等像，工艺十分精致优美，没有受到多少破坏。
English: There are also a network of stone tombs, an ancestral hall, and three stone houses. The bookshelves are too tall and are carved with stone into the shape of tiles. The roof of the house is lined with a flat ceiling, and an algae well has been built. The stone pillars on both sides support the beams. The carvings on the four walls protrude vaguely. They are statues of officials and courtiers, turtles, dragons, and phoenixes, and birds and beasts. The craftsmanship is very delicate and beautiful, and has not suffered much damage.

古文：黄水又东径巨野县北。
现代文：黄水又往东流经巨野县北面。
English: The yellow water also flowed eastward through the northern part of Kono County.

古文：何承天曰，巨野湖泽广大，南通洙、泗，北连清、济，旧县故城正在泽中，故欲置戍于此城，城之所在，则巨野泽也。
现代文：何承天说：巨野泽湖面广阔，南通沫水、洒水，北连清水、济水，从前的老县城正在湖中，所以想在这座城中设防驻军。
English: He Chengtian said: Lake Konozawa has a vast surface, the south stream is foaming and sprinkling water, the north stream is clear water and fresh water, and the former old county seat is in the lake, so I want to set up a garrison in this city.

古文：衍东北出为大野矣，昔西狩获鳞于是处也。
现代文：城所在处是巨野泽，向东北延伸就是大野了，从前往西方狩猎，捕捉到一头麒麟，就在这地方。
English: The location of the city is Konozawa, extending to the northeast is Ohno, from going to the west hunting, catching a unicorn, it is in this place.

古文：《皇览》曰：山阳巨野县有肩髀冢，重聚大小，与髀冢等。
现代文：《皇览》说：山阳巨野县有肩脾墓，堆土的大小与阐乡城蛋尤墓一样。
English: The "Imperial Review" said: There is a shoulder spleen tomb in Sanyang Jiuye County, and the size of the heap of soil is the same as that of the Jiexiang Township egg yakitori tomb.

古文：传言蚩尤与黄帝战，克之于涿鹿之野，身体异处，故别葬焉。
现代文：传说蛋尤与黄帝打仗，在琢鹿之野战败被杀，肢体被割裂，抛散在各处，所以就地分别埋葬。
English: According to legend, Egg You fought against the Yellow Emperor and was defeated and killed in Taku Deer Field. His limbs were severed and scattered everywhere, so they were buried separately.

古文：黄水又东径咸亭北。
现代文：黄水又往东流经咸亭北面。
English: The yellow water also flows eastward through the north side of Hamding.

古文：《春秋》桓公七年，《经》书焚咸丘者也。
现代文：《春秋》：桓公七年前，《经文》记载，纵火焚烧咸丘。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Seven years before King Kan, the "scripture" records that he set fire to Hamgyu.

古文：水南有金乡山，县之东界也。
现代文：南岸有金乡山，在金乡县东部边界。
English: On the south bank is Jinxiang Mountain, which is on the eastern border of Jinxiang County.

古文：金乡数山，皆空中穴口，谓之隧也。
现代文：金乡的几座山，里面都是空的，外面有洞口，称为隧洞。
English: Several mountains in Jinxiang are empty on the inside, but have openings on the outside, known as tunnels.

古文：戴延之《西征记》曰：焦氏山北数里，汉司隶校尉鲁峻穿山得白蛇、白兔，不葬，更葬山南，凿而得金，故曰金乡山。
现代文：戴延之《西征记》说：焦氏山以北数里，有汉朝司隶校尉鲁峻墓。在山上掘墓穴时，掘出了白蛇、白龟，因而不在这里安葬，而改葬山南，掘山时却掘出了金子，所以就把山叫金乡山。
English: Dai Yan's "Record of the Western Conquest" says: A few miles north of Jiao's Mountain, there is the tomb of Lu Jun, an officer of the Han Dynasty. When digging a grave on the mountain, he dug out a white snake and a white turtle, so he was not buried here, but was buried in the south of the mountain. However, when digging the mountain, gold was dug out, so the mountain was called Jinxiang Mountain.

古文：山形峻峭，篆前有石祠、石庙，四壁皆青石隐起，自书契以来，忠臣、孝子、贞妇、孔子及弟子七十二人形像，像边皆刻石记之，文字分明，又有石床，长八尺，磨莹鲜明，叩之声闻远近。
现代文：山势很峻峭，墓前有石祠、石庙，四壁都是青石，石上隐约有浮雕，记载从契以来的忠臣、孝子、贞妇，还有孔子及七十二弟子像，像边都刻有题记，字迹清楚。又有石床，长八尺，磨得晶莹光洁，敲击时会发出清越的声音，远近都可听到。
English: The mountain is very steep, there is a stone shrine and a stone temple in front of the tomb, the four walls are bluestone, there are some reliefs on the stone, recording the loyal subjects, filial sons and daughters, chaste women, and Confucius and the seventy-two disciples since the Treaty, and there are inscriptions on the sides of the statues, and the writing is clear. There is also a stone bed, eight feet long, polished to crystal luster, and when struck, it will emit a clear sound, which can be heard from far and near.

古文：时太尉、从事中郎傅珍之咨议参军周安穆拆败石床，各取去，为鲁氏之后所讼，二人并免官。焦氏山东即金乡山也，有冢，谓之秦王陵，山上二百步得冢口，堑深十丈，两壁峻峭，广二丈，入行七十步，得埏门，门外左右皆有空，可容五六十人，谓之白马空，埏门内二丈，得外堂，外堂之后，又得内堂，观者皆执烛而行，虽无他雕镂，然治石甚精，或云是汉昌邑哀王冢，所未详也。东南有范巨卿冢，名件犹存。
现代文：有人说这是汉朝昌邑哀王墓，不知是否属实。东南方有范巨卿墓，还留有遗物。
English: Some people say that this is the tomb of King Miao of Chang'e in the Han Dynasty, but I don't know if it's true. There is a tomb of Fan Jiuqing in the southeast, and there are still relics left.

古文：巨卿名式，山阳之金乡人，汉荆州刺史，与汝南张劭、长沙陈平子石交，号为死友矣。
现代文：范巨卿，名式，山阳金乡人，是汉时荆州刺史。他和汝南张韵，长河陈平，字子石，交谊很深，号称死友。
English: Fan Jiuqing, famous for his style and a native of Shanyang Jinxiang, was a historian of Jingzhou in the Han Dynasty. He and Runan Zhang Yun, Changhe Chen Ping, and Zhizi Shi had a deep friendship and were known as "dead friends."

古文：《地理志》，东平属县也。世祖建武二年，封刘隆为侯国。
现代文：黄水又往东南流经任城郡亢父县旧城西面，任城县在老城以北，原是夏后氏的任国。
English: Huangshui also flows southeast through Rencheng County, Shichifu County, west of the old city. Rencheng County is north of the old city, and was originally the province of the Xiaguo clan.

古文：其水谓之桓公沟，南至方与县，入于菏水。
现代文：王莽时叫延寿亭。汉章帝元和元年，把这里封给刘隆，立为侯国。
English: Wang Mangshi called it Yanju Ting. In the first and second years of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Zhang gave this place to Liu Long and established it as a principality.

古文：菏水又东径秦梁，夹岸积石一里，高二丈，言秦始皇东巡所造，因以名焉。
现代文：这里的水称为桓公沟，南流到方与县，注入菏水•，菏水又往东流经秦梁，两岸堆积了二丈高的石堆，长达一里，据说是秦始皇东巡时所造，因此名秦梁。
English: The water here is called the Huan Gonggou. It flows south to Fang and Xian, where it is infused with Qin water. The Qin water then flows east through Qin Liang. On both sides of the river, there are two-meter-high stone piles that stretch for one mile. It is said that they were built when the First Emperor of Qin was on an eastern tour, hence the name Qin Liang.

古文：菏水又东过湖陆县南，东入干泗水。
现代文：菏水又往东流过湖陆县南面，东流注人泅水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the southern part of Hulud County, and the east stream is the source of Surabaya water.

古文：泽水所钟也。
现代文：菏水是泽水流积而成的。
English: Surabaya's water is formed by the accumulation of brackish water.

古文：《尚书》曰：浮于淮、泗，达于菏是也。
现代文：《尚书》说：在淮伙、洒水航行，到达菏水。
English: "Shangshu" said: sailing in Huai Gang and sprinkling water, arriving at Surabaya.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：苏茂杀淮阳太守，得其郡，营广乐，大司马吴汉围茂，茂将其精兵突至湖陵，与刘永相会，济阴山阳济兵于此处也。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：苏茂杀了淮阳太守，取书寻了他所辖的郡，兴建起广乐堡。大司马吴汉包围了苏茂，苏茂书声领精兵冲出包围圈来到湖陵，与刘永在济阴山阳相汇合，兵士 就在此处渡水。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: Sumo killed the governor of Huaiyang, took the books and found the county under his jurisdiction, and built the Guangle Fort. The commander Ma Wuhan encircled Sumo, and the elite soldiers of Sumo Shuxuan rushed out of the encirclement to Huling, and met Liu Yong in the Jiyin Mountains, and the soldiers crossed the water here.

古文：又东南过沛县东北，济与泗乱，故济纳互称矣。
现代文：又往东南流过沛县东北，济水与泅水相互横穿而过，所以济水也就与洒水互可通称了。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the northeast of Pei County. Jishui and Shishui cross each other, so Jishui and Shishui can be mutually known as each other.

古文：《东观汉记。安平侯盖延传》曰：延为虎牙大将军，与永等战，永军反走，溺水者半，复与战，连破之，遂平沛、楚，临淮悉降。
现代文：《东观汉记》安平侯《盖延传》说：盖一延当了虎牙大将军，与刘永等打仗，刘永的军队回头逃跑，半数厂在水中溺死，又打了一仗，接连把他打败，于是就平定了沛郡、楚二郡及临淮也都投降了。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" Anping Hou "Gui Yan Biography" said: "Gui Yan became General Hu Ya, fought with Liu Yong and others, Liu Yong's army turned back and fled, half of the factories drowned in the water, fought another battle, and defeated him one after another, so he leveled Pei County, Chu Er County and Linhuai also surrendered.

古文：延令沛修高祖庙，置啬夫、祝宰、乐人，因斋戒祠高庙也。
现代文：盖延命令沛郡修建高祖庙，设置音夫、祝宰、乐人，于是斋戒沐浴，祭祀了高祖庙。
English: Gai Yan ordered Pei County to build a temple for Gao Zu, and set up an announcer, celebrant, and musician, so he fasted and bathed, and dedicated the temple for Gao Zu.

古文：又东南过留县北，留县故城，翼佩泗、济，宋邑也，《春秋左传》所谓侵宋吕留也。
现代文：又往东南流过蜜县北面，留县老城靠近泅济，是宋国协城邑。《春秋左传》说到侵入宋国的吕、留二地，留，就是留县。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the north of Mixian County, and the old town of Ruxian County is close to Anji, which is a township of the Song Dynasty. "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" mentions the invasion of the Song Dynasty by Lv, Ruxian and Ruxian, and Ruxian is Ruxian County.

古文：故繁休伯《避地赋》曰：朝余发乎泗洲，夕余宿于留乡者也。
现代文：所以繁休伯《避地赋》说：早上我从泅洲动身，傍晚我住宿在留乡。
English: That's why Sheng Shubo in "Hiding Place Fu" said, "In the morning I leave from Luzhou, and in the evening I stay in the countryside."

古文：张良委身汉祖，始自此矣，终亦取封焉。
现代文：张良就是从这里开始投奔汉高祖的，最后也被封在这里。
English: It was from here that Zhang Liang began to join the Han Gaozu, and finally he was sealed here.

古文：城内有张良庙也。
现代文：城内有张良庙。
English: There is a Zhang Liang Temple in the city.

古文：又东过彭城县北，获水从西来注之。
现代文：又往东流过彭城县北面，获水欺西方流来注人。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Pengcheng County, and the water was diverted to the western part of the stream.

古文：济水又南径彭城县故城东北隅，不东过也。
现代文：济水又往南流经彭城县老城东北角，不从东边流过。
English: Jishui also flows southward through the northeast corner of the old city of Pengcheng County, and does not flow from the east.

古文：获水自西注之，城北枕水湄。
现代文：获水从西边流来，注人济水，县城北临水滨。
English: The water comes from the west to feed the people, and the waterfront is located north of the county seat.

古文：济水又南径彭城县故城东，不径其北也，盖《经》误证。
现代文：济水又往南流经彭城县老城东南，不从城北流过。《水经》却弄错了。
English: However, the "Water Sutra" got it wrong, as the water of Jishui flowed southward through the southeast of the old city of Pengcheng County, and did not flow through the north of the city.

古文：又东南过徐县北，《地理志》曰：临淮郡，汉武帝元狩五年置，治徐县，王莽更之曰淮平，县曰徐调，故徐国也。
现代文：又往东南流过徐县北面，《地理志》说：临淮郡是汉武帝元狩五年所置，治所在徐县，王莽改郡名为淮平，县叫徐调，原是旧时徐国地方。
English: It also flowed to the southeast to the north of Xu County. "Geography" said: Linhuai County was established in the fifth year of the Han Emperor Wudi Yuanjian, and its capital was located in Xu County. Wang Mang changed the name of the county to Huai Ping, and the county was called Xu Diao, which was originally a place of Xu Guo.

古文：《春秋》昭公三十年，吴子执钟吾子，遂伐徐，防山以水之，遂灭徐。
现代文：《春秋》昭公三十年前，吴子拘留了钟吾子，就去攻打徐国，拦截山水来淹城，于是就灭了徐国，徐子就逃到楚国。
English: "Spring and Autumn" Thirty years ago, when Wu Zi Tong detained Zhong Wuzi, he went to attack Xu Guo, intercepted the mountains and rivers to flood the city, and then destroyed Xu Guo. Xu Zi fled to Chu Guo.

古文：徐子奔楚，楚救徐弗及，遂城夷以处之。
现代文：楚国赶去救援徐国，但己来不及了，只得在夷筑城，来安顿徐子。
English: Chu rushed to rescue Xu, but it was too late. They had to raze the city to settle Xu.

古文：张华《博物志》录著作令史茅温所为送。
现代文：张华《博物志》记载著作令史茅温。
English: Zhang Hua's "Natural History" records the works of Shi Maowen.

古文：刘成国《徐州地理志》云：徐偃王之异言，徐君宫人娠而生卵，以为不祥，弃之于水滨。
现代文：刘成国《徐州地理志》谈到徐堰王的奇事，说是徐君的宫人怀孕生了个肉蛋，以为不祥，就把它丢在水边。
English: Liu Chengguo's "History of the Geography of Xuzhou" talked about the miracle of King Xu Yan. It was said that a concubine of King Xu was pregnant and gave birth to a meat egg. Thinking it was ominous, she threw it into the water.

古文：孤独母有犬，名曰鹄仓，猎于水侧，得弃卵，衔以来归，孤独母以为异，覆暖之，遂成儿，生时偃，故以为名。
现代文：孤独母有 一条狗，名叫鹊仓，在水边寻找猎物，看到那个肉蛋，就把它衔回家来。孤独母觉得这东西很稀奇，把它盖起来保暖，于是就变成一个婴儿，生时堰卧，所以名叫惬。
English: A lone mother had a dog, called Kamakura, who hunted for game by the water's edge. When he saw the egg, he brought it home. The lone mother thought it was very strange, covered it up to keep it warm, and it turned into a baby. When it was born, it lay in the weir, hence the name Kamakura.

古文：徐君宫中闻之，乃更录取，长而仁智，袭君徐国。
现代文：徐君在宫中听到这消息，于是又手思他收留了。
English: Xu Jun heard the news in the palace, so he decided to take him in.

古文：后鹄仓临死，生角而九尾，实黄龙也。
现代文：孩子长大后又聪明又仁厚，继承徐国国君之位。后来飞鹊仓临死时，头上长角，并有九条尾巴，原来是条黄龙。
English: When the child grew up, he was clever and kind, and succeeded to the throne of King Xu. Later, when Fei Yechang was about to die, he had a long horn on his head and nine tails, which turned out to be a yellow dragon.

古文：僵王葬之徐中，今见有狗垄焉。
现代文：堰王把它葬在徐中，现在还可以看到这座狗坟。
English: Yan Wang buried him in Xuzhong, and the dog's grave can still be seen today.

古文：偃王治国，仁义著闻，欲舟行上国，乃通沟陈、蔡之间。得朱弓矢，以得天瑞，遂因名为号，自称徐偃王，江、淮诸侯服从者三十六国。
现代文：堰王治理国家，以仁义闻空？他想乘船到上国，于是在陈蔡之间开通一条渠道，开渠时掘得；红色的弓箭，以为是上天的祥瑞之征，于是就以自己名字取号，自称徐堰王，江淮诸侯三十六国都依附他。
English: He wanted to take a boat to Shangguo, so he opened a channel between Chen Cai and dug it when he opened the canal; he thought that the red bow and arrow was the sign of heaven's auspiciousness, so he took his own name and called himself Xu Yan Wang. Thirty-six countries of the Jianghuai princes were attached to him.

古文：周王闻之，遣使至楚，令伐之，偃王爱民不斗，遂为楚败，北走彭城武原县东山下，百姓随者万数。
现代文：周王听到这消息，就派使者到楚国去，命令楚国出兵讨伐。堰王爱惜百姓，不肯叫他们去拚死打仗，于是就被楚打败，往北逃到彭城武原县东山下，百姓跟着他走的数以万计。
English: When King Zhou heard the news, he sent an envoy to Chu and ordered Chu to send troops to fight. Yan Wang cherished the people and refused to ask them to fight to the death, so he was defeated by Chu and fled north to the east of Pengcheng, Wuyuan County, with tens of thousands of people following him.

古文：因名其山为徐山，山上立石室庙，有神灵，民人请祷焉。
现代文：因此后来把那座山叫徐山，在山上建了石室庙，很有灵验，人们都去那里祈祷。
English: Therefore, the mountain was later called Mount Xu, and a stone temple was built on the mountain. It was very effective, and people went there to pray.

古文：依文即事，似有符验，但世代绵远，难以详矣。
现代文：按照文字记载，与实事相印证，似乎有相符之处，但时代久远，已很难考了。
English: According to the written record, it is confirmed by the facts, and there seems to be some consistency, but it is a long time ago, and it is difficult to test.

古文：今徐城外有徐君墓，昔延陵季子解剑于此，所谓不违心许也。
现代文：现在徐城外面，有徐君墓，从前延陵季子在坟前解下佩剑，所谓心里已经答应的事决不违背。
English: Now, outside of Xucheng, there is the tomb of Xu Jun. In the past, Yanling Jizi unsheathed his sword in front of the tomb. He would never renege on what he had promised in his heart.

古文：又东至下邳睢陵县南，入于淮。
现代文：又往东流到下那唯陵县南面。注人淮水。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of Neveiling County.

古文：济水与泗水，浑涛东南流，至角城，同入淮。
现代文：济水与洒水前波后浪相混，往东南奔流，到了角城，一同注入淮水。
English: Feeding water and sprinkling water before and after the waves mixed, running to the southeast, to the corner of the city, together with the injection of water.

古文：《经》书睢陵，误耳。
现代文：《水经》却说到达唯陵，是搞错了。
English: "Suikei," however, said that it was a mistake to arrive at Veiling.

