古文：太清之始也，和顺以寂漠，质真而素朴，闲静而不躁，推移而无故，在内而合乎道，出外而调于义，发动而成于文，行快而便于物。其言略而循理，其行侻而顺情，其心愉而不伪，其事素而不饰。
现代文：远古时代圣人治理天下，平和随顺事物本性、寂静无为，保持它们的质性纯真而不加雕饰；他闲静而不浮躁，任凭事物自然发展而不以规矩去限制；他内在精神与道体相符，外在行为与德行协调；他行为举动成顺法度，处事快捷便利事物；他的言论扼要简略而合循事理，行为洒脱简易而随顺常情；他心胸开阔愉悦而不伪作，行事朴实简约而不巧饰。
English: In ancient times, sages ruled the world. They were peaceful and went with the nature of things, silent and inactive, and kept their qualities pure and unadorned. They were idle but not impetuous, and allowed things to develop naturally without being restricted by rules. Their inner spirit was in line with the moral body, and their external behavior was in harmony with virtue. Their behavior was law-abiding, and they dealt with things quickly and conveniently. Their speech was concise and followed the facts, and their behavior was free and easy and went with the flow. They were open-hearted and joyful without pretense, and they acted with simplicity and simplicity without clever decoration.

古文：是以不择时日，不占卦兆，不谋所始，不议所终；安则止，激则行；通体于天地，同精干阴阳；一和于四时，明照于日月，与造化者相雌雄。
现代文：因此，那时候干任何事情都用不着选择良时吉日，不必占卦问卜，不必慎重考虑如何开头，也不必仔细计划结果如何；事物安静不动则随之安然停止，事物激发变化则随之行动变化。他形体和天地自然相通，精神和阴阳二气同融，中和之气和一年四季相和谐，神明和日月相辉映，整个地和自然造化相伴随，交融合和。
English: Therefore, at that time, there was no need to choose a good time and day to do anything, there was no need for divination, no need to carefully consider how to start, and no need to carefully plan what the result would be; when things were still and motionless, they would stop peacefully, and when things were stimulated to change, their actions would change accordingly. His form was naturally connected to heaven and earth, his spirit was integrated with the yin and yang of the two qi, the neutral qi was in harmony with the four seasons of the year, the gods were reflected in the sun and moon, and the whole earth was accompanied by and integrated with natural creation.

古文：是以天覆以德，地载以乐；四时不失其叙，风雨不降其虐；日月淑清而扬光，五星循轨而不失其行。
现代文：正因为这样，所以苍天将道德恩泽施予万物，大地将承载乐土养育众生；四时将不失其次序，风雨将不逞暴虐；日月清朗放射光芒，五星循轨不偏方向。
English: It is precisely because of this that the heavens will bestow moral grace on all things, the earth will carry the blessed land to nurture all beings; the four o'clock will not lose its sequence, the wind and rain will not dare to be violent; the sun and the moon are clear and radiate light, and the five stars follow the track without deviation.

古文：当此之时，玄元至汤而运照，凤麟至，蓍龟兆，甘露下，竹实满，流黄出而朱草生，机械诈伪，莫藏于心。
现代文：在这样的社会盛世下，天道光辉浩荡普照，凤凰麒麟也会翔临门庭，占蓍卜龟也显示吉兆，甘露降临，竹实饱满，流黄宝玉露显，朱草生于庭院，而机巧伪诈没法潜入人的通体透明之心体。
English: Under such a prosperous society, the glory of heaven will shine, the phoenix and the unicorn will also fly to the front yard, the divining turtle will also show good omens, the nectar will come, the bamboo will be full, the flow of the yellow treasure will be revealed, the vermilion grass will be born in the courtyard, and the cunning deception will sneak into the transparent heart of the human body.

古文：逮至衰世，镌山石，锲金玉，擿蚌蜃，消钢铁，而万物不滋。
现代文：到了道德衰败的时代，统治者开凿山石采刻金石，雕刻金玉做饰品，挑开蚌蛤采取珍珠，熔铸铜铁制造器具，这样就使自然资源大量消耗而不得繁衍。
English: In the era of moral decay, the rulers chiseled mountains and quarried precious stones, carved gold beads to make jewelry, picked up shells to take pearls, and smelted copper and iron to make utensils. In this way, they consumed a large amount of natural resources and could not reproduce.

古文：刳胎杀夭，麒麟不游：覆巢毁卵，凤皇不翔；钻燧取火，构木为台；焚林而田，竭泽而渔；人械不足，畜藏有余，而万物不繁兆，萌牙卵胎而不成者，处之太半矣。
现代文：剖开兽胎、扼杀幼兽，吓得麒麟不敢露面遨游；掀翻鸟巢、毁坏鸟卵，使得凤凰不愿出来飞翔；钻石取火，伐木造楼；焚火树林猎死禽兽，放尽池水捕捞鱼虾；人民使用的器械工具缺乏，而统治者国库内的物资储存却聚积有余；各种物类都不能繁衍，草木萌芽、鸟雀下蛋、兽类怀胎，在新生命将诞生时却遭到扼杀，中途夭折的情况占了大半。
English: They cut open animal foetuses and strangled young animals, so that the unicorn did not dare to appear and travel; they overturned bird nests and destroyed bird eggs, so that the phoenix did not want to fly out; they set fire to diamonds and cut down trees to build buildings; they set fire to forests to hunt dead animals and catch fish and shrimps; they lacked the instruments and tools used by the people, while the materials stored in the treasury of the rulers accumulated more than enough; all kinds of species could not reproduce, and the germination of plants and trees, the laying of eggs by birds and birds, and the pregnancy of animals were strangled when new life

古文：积壤而丘处，粪田而种谷；掘地而井饮，疏川而为利；筑城而为固，拘兽以为畜；则阴阳缪戾，四时失叙；雷霆毁折，雹霰降虐；氛雾霜雪不霁，而万物燋夭。
现代文：人们同时积土造山而住在山上高处，往田里施肥来播种谷物，往地下深处掘井取水，疏通河川以求水利，修筑城墙以求安全，捕捉野兽以求驯养成家畜，诸如此类便造成自然界阴阳错乱，四季气候失去次序，雷霆毁坏万物，雹霰降落造成灾害，大雾霜雪不散不停，万物因此枯萎夭折。
English: At the same time, people piled up soil to make mountains and lived high in the mountains, fertilized fields to sow grain, dug wells deep underground to obtain water, dredged rivers for water conservation, built city walls for safety, captured wild animals to domesticate them, and so on, causing the natural world to be chaotic, the four seasons of the climate lost order, thunder destroyed everything, hail caused disasters, fog and frost did not disperse, and everything withered away.

古文：菑榛秽，聚埒亩；芟野菼，长苗秀；草木之句萌衔华戴实而死者，不可胜数。
现代文：铲除丛木开扩耕种田地，割除丛草以栽种禾苗，正处萌芽、绽花和结果的草木因此被毁掉的不计其数。
English: The removal of bushes to expand the cultivated fields, the cutting of bushes to plant seedlings, and the destruction of countless plants in the process of budding, blooming and fruiting.

古文：乃至夏屋宫驾，县联房植；橑檐榱题，雕琢刻镂；乔枝菱阿，夫容芰荷；五采争胜，流漫陆离；修掞曲校，夭矫曾挠，芒繁纷挐，以相交持；公输、王尔无所错其剞劂削锯，然犹未能澹人主之欲也。
现代文：以后发展到修建高楼大厦重叠耸立，门户连绵相连，屋檐、椽头处处雕琢刻镂，绘刻着草木花纹图案，其枝条舒展修长、其枝节盘曲婉转，绘有的荷花菱角五彩争艳、绚丽斑斓；各种建筑装饰参差错落、屈伸叠曲、姿态万千、交相倚立。就是像公输、王尔那样的能工巧匠，面对这样的绝作也会不知道如何再去加上一凿一锯。然而这样还是不能满足统治者的贪欲。
English: Later, it developed into the construction of high-rise buildings with overlapping towers, portals connected continuously, eaves and steeples carved everywhere, engraved with floral patterns of plants and trees, their branches stretched long and slender, their branches twisted and twisted, and the painted lotus rhombuses were colorful and colorful; various architectural decorations were mixed and staggered, bent and stretched, with thousands of postures, and interdependent. Even a skilled craftsman like Gongyi and Wang Er would not know how to add a chisel and a saw to such a masterpiece. However, this still could not satisfy the greed of the rulers.

古文：是以松柏菌露夏槁，江河三川，绝而不流，夷羊在牧，飞蛩满野；天旱地坼，凤皇不下；句爪、居牙、戴角、出距之兽，于是鸷矣。
现代文：因此原本长青不衰的松柏竹子竟在植物繁盛的夏季枯死，原本川流不息的大河大江也竟会干涸断流。神兽夷羊出现在牧野之地，蝗虫遮天盖地，天旱地裂；凤凰不再翔临，生有勾爪、尖牙、长角、距趾的凶猛禽兽却到处肆虐，捕杀生灵。
English: As a result, the evergreen pines, cypresses, and bamboos wither and die in the summer when plants are in full bloom, and the great rivers and streams, which used to flow incessantly, dry up and stop flowing. The divine beast, the goat, appears in the pastureland, the locusts cover the sky, and the dry land is split; the phoenix no longer flies, but the ferocious beasts with hooked claws, fangs, long horns, and talons rage everywhere, hunting and killing living beings.

古文：民之专室蓬庐，无所归宿，冻饿饥寒，死者相枕席也。
现代文：百姓则拥挤在狭窄的茅房里，无家可归，受冻挨饿，以致饿死冻死者互相枕藉。
English: The people were crammed into cramped huts, homeless, freezing and starving, so that the starving and freezing dead were lying next to each other.

古文：及到分山川豁谷，使有壤界；计人多少众寡，使有分数；筑城掘池，设机械险阻以为备；饰职事，制服等，异贵贱，差贤不肖，经诽誉，行赏罚，则兵革兴而分争生；民之灭抑夭隐，虐杀不辜而刑诛无罪，于是生矣。
现代文：而后又划分山川谿谷以区别国界，计算人口多少，修建城池，设置机关险隘以作防备，整治官吏制度，制订服饰等级，分别贵贱贤愚，定出善恶，实施赏罚，于是矛盾兴起、战祸迭起，人民百姓遭受冤屈隐痛，而统治者狂杀无辜、惩治无罪之人的情况也就发生了。
English: Subsequently, mountains, rivers and valleys were divided to distinguish national boundaries, the population was calculated, cities and towns were built, institutions were set up to guard against danger, the bureaucratic system was reformed, clothing levels were established, nobles and commoners were distinguished, good and evil were determined, and rewards and punishments were implemented. As a result, contradictions arose, wars and disasters occurred, the people suffered from grievances, and the rulers killed innocent people and punished innocent people.

古文：天地之合和，阴阳之陶化万物，皆乘人气者也。
现代文：天地混合之气融汇而产生阴阳二气，阴阳二气陶冶化育万物，之所以这样，全凭这纯一之气。
English: The air that mixes heaven and earth melts and produces yin and yang, and the two airs of yin and yang potter and nurture all things. The reason for this is all due to this pure air.

古文：是故上下离心，气乃上蒸；君臣不和，五谷不为。
现代文：因此，上位和下位如离心离德，这邪气就会上升；君臣不和，五谷也不能生长。
English: Therefore, if those at the top and those at the bottom are separated from virtue by centrifugal force, this evil spirit will rise; if the ruler and the subjects are not at peace, the grain cannot grow.

古文：距日冬至四十六日，天含和而未降，地怀气而未扬，阴阳储与，呼吸浸潭，包裹风俗，斟酌殊，薄众宜，以相呕咐酝酿，而成育群生。
现代文：从立冬到冬至四十六天，天含有的阳气还未下降，地怀有的阴气还未上扬；此时阴阳二气尚未融合，各自在空间游荡徜徉，逐渐互相吸收并浸润扩散成中和之气，包裹着极大范围，准备化育生成万物，遍及芸芸众生使之各得其宜，和气抚养着酝酿着，最终将会化育众多生命。
English: From the beginning of winter to the winter solstice, forty-six days, the yang contained in the sky has not yet fallen, and the yin contained in the earth has not yet risen. At this time, the yin and yang have not yet been fused. They are wandering in space, gradually absorbing each other and infiltrating and diffusing into a neutral gas, enveloping a large area, preparing to breed and produce all things, pervading all beings to make them suitable, and brewing with qi nurturing, and will eventually breed many lives.

古文：是故春肃秋荣，冬雷夏霜，皆贼气之所生。
现代文：因此，如果春天像秋天那样肃杀，秋天像春天那样繁茂，冬天响雷，夏天降霜，这些反常气候都是由阴阳之气失调之后产生出的有害邪气所造成的。
English: Therefore, if the spring is as cold as the autumn, the autumn is as lush as the spring, the winter is thunderous, and the summer is frosty, these abnormal climates are caused by the harmful evil gas produced after the disorder of the yin and yang.

古文：由此观之，天地宇宙，一人之身也；六合之内，一人之制也。是故明于性者，天地不能胁也；审于符者，怪物不能惑也。
现代文：由此看来，宇宙天地的构成原理与运动变化法则，和人体结构与生命运动变化法则是相同的；所以也可说，明白天性道体的人，不会对天地自然的变异产生恐惧感；明察天象徵兆人事符验的人，不会对天地自然的怪异产生迷惑感。
English: From this point of view, the principle of the formation of the universe, heaven and earth and the law of change of movement are the same as the law of change of human body structure and life movement. Therefore, it can also be said that people who understand the innate moral body will not have a sense of fear about the variation of heaven and earth; people who clearly observe the signs of heaven and earth and the personality test will not have a sense of confusion about the strangeness of heaven and earth.

古文：故圣人者，由近知远，而万殊为一；古之人，同气于天地，与一世而优游。
现代文：所以圣明的人能从身边的事推知遥远的事，将万物视为一、千差万别视为无差别，他正气通天地，与整个宇宙世界一起悠闲遨游。
English: Therefore, a holy man can deduce distant things from the things around him, see all things as one, and see all differences as no difference. He is the breath of heaven and earth, and leisurely travels with the entire universe.

古文：当此之时，无庆贺之利，刑罚之威，礼义廉耻不设，毁誉仁鄙不立，而万民莫相侵欺暴虐，犹在于混冥之中。
现代文：在这样一个圣人神明治理的年代，既没有庆功奖赏的诱惑，也没有刑法惩处的威逼，更不必设置礼义廉耻，也无诽恶誉善的事情，百姓们互不侵犯欺凌残害，就像生活在混沌社会之中。
English: In an age governed by saints and gods, there is neither the temptation to celebrate and reward, nor the threat of criminal punishment, not to mention the need to set up etiquette and integrity, and there is no defamation of evil and good things. The people do not encroach on each other, bully and harm, just like living in a chaotic society.

古文：逮至衰世，人众财寡，事力劳而养不足，于是忿争生，是以贵仁。
现代文：而到了社会道德衰败的时代，人多物少，人们付出的多、获得的少，于是心生怨恨，为生活而你争我夺，这时便要借助于 仁 这道德来制止纷争。
English: But in the era of the decay of social morality, when there are more people and fewer things, people pay more and get less, so resentment arises, and you compete for life. At this time, it is necessary to use the morality of benevolence to stop disputes.

古文：仁鄙不齐，比周朋党，设诈谞，怀机械巧故之心，而性失矣，是以贵义。
现代文：同时，社会中有人仁厚，有人则不仁，不仁之人还结党营私、心怀机巧奸诈，失去原纯朴天性，这时便要借助 义 来制止这种情况。
English: At the same time, some people in the society are benevolent, while others are not benevolent. Those who are not benevolent are party-oriented, cunning and treacherous, and have lost their original pure and simple nature. At this time, we must use righteousness to stop this situation.

古文：阴阳之情莫不有血气之感，男女群居杂处而无别，是以贵礼。
现代文：还有社会中男女都有情欲，且异性相吸引起情感冲动，这样男女混杂不加分隔就会引起淫乱，这时便要借助 礼 来限制男女交往。
English: Also, in society, both men and women have sexual desires, and the opposite sex attracts emotional impulses, so that the mixing of men and women without separation will cause fornication. At this time, it is necessary to use etiquette to restrict the interaction between men and women.

古文：性命之情，淫而相胁，以不得已则不和，是以贵乐。
现代文：以及人的性情如果过分放纵宣泄就会威胁生命，心性不得平和之时，就必须借助 乐 来加以调节疏通，所以这时就产生了 礼 。
English: and if the human temperament is excessively indulgent, it will threaten life. When the mind is not peaceful, it must be adjusted and dredged with the help of music, so at this time there was a ritual.

古文：是故仁义礼乐者，可以救败，而非通治之至也。
现代文：所以，由此看来，仁、义、礼、乐这些东西，均是用来防范、制止某些方面的道德品行的衰败的，但不能说是修身养性的最佳方法。
English: Therefore, from this perspective, benevolence, righteousness, propriety, and pleasure are all used to prevent and stop the decay of certain aspects of moral conduct, but they cannot be said to be the best way to cultivate one's character.

古文：夫仁者，所以救争也；义者，所以救失也；礼也，所以救淫也；乐者，所以救忧也。
现代文：这样，社会提倡 仁 ，是用来防范纷争的；提倡 义 ，是用来纠正狡诈不讲信用的；提倡 礼 ，是用来规范淫乱的；提倡 乐 ，是用来疏通忧愁的。
English: In this way, society advocates benevolence, which is used to prevent disputes; advocates righteousness, which is used to correct cunning and not to talk about credibility; advocates etiquette, which is used to regulate fornication; advocates joy, which is used to dispel sadness.

古文：神明定于天下而心反其初，心反其初而民性善，民性善而天地阴阳从而包之，则财足而人澹矣，贪鄙忿争不得生焉。由此观之，则仁义不用矣。
现代文：依靠道体神明来安宁天下，这样人心就会返回到人类初始的那种清静无欲的质朴境界；人心一旦返回到这种境界，社会民性就会变善；民性善良就会和天地自然阴阳融会一致，这样四时阴阳和谐有序、万物繁茂、财物充裕，百姓需求一旦满足，贪婪鄙陋、怨恨争斗也就不易滋生。由此看来，以 道体 治理天下，这 仁义 就无须实施。
English: Relying on the Taoist deities to pacify the world, people's hearts will return to the pristine realm of tranquility and desirelessness that existed at the dawn of mankind. Once people's hearts return to this realm, the social and national character will change for the better. The goodness of the national character will be in harmony with the natural yin and yang of heaven and earth. In this way, yin and yang will be harmonious and orderly at all times, all things will flourish, wealth will be abundant, and once people's needs are satisfied, it will not be easy for greed, meanness, and resentment to breed. From this perspective, it is unnecessary to govern the

古文：道德定于天下而民纯朴，则目不营于色，耳不淫于声，坐俳而歌谣，被发而浮游，虽有毛嫱、西施之色，不知说也，掉羽、武象，不知乐也，淫泆无别不生焉。由此观之，礼乐不用也。
现代文：用 道 、用 德 来安定天下，百姓就会纯真朴实，这样百姓眼睛就不易受美色迷惑、耳朵就不会沉溺于淫声；人们就有可能安闲地坐着歌唱，或悠闲地走着吟唱，或飘散着长发而游荡，眼前即使有毛嫱、西施这样的美女，也引不起他们的兴趣，演奏《掉羽》、《武象》这样动人的乐曲，也引不起他们的快乐，这样，荒淫放荡、男女混杂的事情就根本不可能在这当中发生。由此看来，用 道 、用 德 安定天下，净化人心，这 礼乐 就无需实施。
English: With Tao and virtue to stabilize the world, the people will be pure and simple, so that the people's eyes will not be easily confused by beauty, the ears will not indulge in obscene sounds; people may sit and sing at ease, or walk leisurely to sing, or wander with long hair, even if there are beautiful women such as Mao Kun and Xi Shi in front of them, they will not attract their interest, and playing moving music such as "Fallen Feather" and "Wu Xiang" will not attract their happiness, so that wild debauchery and male-female mixed things cannot happen here at all. From this point of view, with Tao and virtue to stabilize the world

古文：是故德衰然后仁生，行沮然后义立，和失然后声调，礼淫然后容饰。
现代文：所以可以这样说， 德 衰以后才有 仁 产生，品行败坏后才有 义 出现，性情失去平和才会用音乐来调节，淫荡风气盛行才会有法度的整治。
English: Therefore, it can be said that it is only after moral decay that benevolence arises, only after moral corruption that righteousness appears, only when the disposition loses peace can it be adjusted with music, and only when a lewd culture prevails can it be rectified by law.

古文：是故知神明然后知道德之不足为也，知道德然后知仁义之不足行也，知仁义然后知礼乐之不足修也。
现代文：因此，知道用 道体 来治理天下，这 德 就不值得提倡，明白 德 能净化人心，这 仁义 就不值得实施，懂得 仁义 有救败的作用，这 礼乐 就不值得修订。
English: Therefore, if you know that the world is governed by morality, then this virtue is not worth advocating; if you know that morality can purify people's hearts, then this benevolence is not worth implementing; if you know that benevolence has a saving effect, then this ritual music is not worth revising.

古文：今背其本而求其末，释其要而索之于详，未可与言至也。
现代文：但如今却是相反：背弃了 道体 根本而去追求仁义礼乐这些末枝，放弃了简要的东西而去用繁琐的东西，这样的人是不能和他谈论高深的道理的。
English: But now it's the other way around: a person who has abandoned the fundamentals of morality to pursue the little branches of benevolence, righteousness, and ritual, and who has given up the simple things to use the cumbersome things, can't talk about profound principles with such a person.

古文：天地之大，可以矩表识也；星月之行，可以历推得也；雷震之声，可以鼓钟写也；风雨之变，可以音律知也。
现代文：天地之大，可以用矩尺和圭表来测量；星球月亮的运行，可以用历法来推算；雷霆的声音，可以用钟鼓来模仿；风雨的变化，可以按音律来了解。
English: The size of the heavens and the earth can be measured with a micrometer and a gyroscope; the movement of the planet moon can be calculated with a calendar; the sound of thunder can be imitated with a bell and a drum; the changes in wind and rain can be understood according to a musical rhythm.

古文：是故大可睹者，可得而量也；明可见者，可得而蔽也：声可闻者，可得而调也；色可察者，可得而别也。
现代文：因此，庞大而能看见的东西，总是能够测量的；明亮而能看清的东西，也总是能够观察的；声音能听到的，也总是能够调节把握的；颜色能看到的，也总是能够区别分辨的。
English: Therefore, what is large and can be seen can always be measured; what is bright and can be seen can always be observed; what can be heard can always be adjusted; what can be seen in color can always be distinguished.

古文：夫至大，天地弗能含也；至微，神明弗能领也。
现代文：但是，那种大到没有极限的东西，天地也就包容不下了；细到不能再细微的东西，神明也就领略不了了。
English: However, that which is too big to be limited cannot be contained by heaven and earth; that which is too small to be understood by gods.

古文：及至建律历，别五色，异清浊，味甘苦，则朴散而为器矣。立仁义，修礼乐，则德迁而为伪矣。
现代文：等到制定律历、区分五色、五音清浊、辨别甘苦以后，这至大至微的纯朴之道就散逸了，也就所谓的 朴散为器 ；而到提出仁义、制定礼乐以后，这 德 也被遗弃而成为虚伪了。
English: After the creation of the lunar calendar, the distinction of the five colors, the five tones, and the distinction of sweet and bitter, this simple way of the greatest to the least dissipated, and the so-called simplicity became a tool; and after the introduction of benevolence and righteousness, and the creation of liturgical music, this virtue was also abandoned and became hypocrisy.

古文：及伪之生也，饰智以惊愚，设诈以巧上，天下有能持之者，有能治之者也。
现代文：当虚伪产生，就有以智谋来愚弄人、以诈术来蒙骗君王的事发生。在这样的情况下，尽管有人能占有天下，却未能治理好天下。
English: For when there is hypocrisy, there is craftiness to deceive, and deceitfulness in princes: so that though one may possess the whole world, yet he cannot govern the world well.

古文：昔者苍颉作书，而天雨粟，鬼夜哭；伯益作井，而龙登玄云，神栖昆仑，能愈多而德愈薄矣。
现代文：以前苍颉创造文字，上天担心从此诈伪萌生、去本趋末、弃耕作而务锥刀、天下缺粮，于是降粟雨；鬼恐怕被书文所揭发，故夜哭。伯益发明掘井，龙担心水源干枯而登空离去，山川百神也迁移昆仑栖身。这正是智能越多，德行越薄。
English: In the past, the heron created the characters, and the heaven was worried about the emergence of frauds and fakes, abandoning the principle and going to the end, abandoning farming and doing the cone knife, the world was short of grain, so the corn rain fell; the ghost was afraid of being exposed by the book, so he cried at night. Bo Yi invented the well, the dragon worried about the dryness of the water source and left the sky, and the hundred gods of the mountains and rivers also migrated to Kunlun to live. This is precisely the more intelligence, the thinner the virtue.

古文：故周鼎著倕，使衔其指，以明大巧之不可为也。
现代文：所以周朝制造的鼎上铸着巧匠倕的图像，让他衔着自己的手指，以说明过分的智巧是不可取的。
English: Therefore, the crown made by the Zhou Dynasty has an image of a skilled craftsman on the top, and he is holding his fingers to show that excessive cleverness is not desirable.

古文：故至人之治也，心与神处，形与性调；静而体德，动而理通；随自然之性，而缘不得已之化；洞然无为而天下自和，憺然无欲而民自朴；无机祥而民不夭，不忿争而养足；兼包海内，泽及后世，不知为之者谁何。
现代文：所以，至人对天下的治理，心与神相依处，形与性相谐调；静处时依照 德 ，行动时合附 理 ；顺随事物的自然本性、遵循事物的自身规律；他浑然无为，而天下却自然和顺；他恬澹无欲，而百姓纯朴无华；他不用求神祈福，百姓生命不会夭折；人们间不必怨恨纷争而给养充足；他的德泽遍及海内外，并延及后世，但人们却不知道施予恩德的是谁。
English: Therefore, when a person governs the world, his heart depends on God, and his form is in harmony with his nature; when he is at rest, he follows virtue, and when he acts, he follows reason; he follows the natural nature of things and follows the laws of things themselves; he does nothing, but the world is naturally harmonious; he has no desire, but the people are simple and unadorned; he does not have to pray for God's blessing, and the people's life will not die young; there is no need for resentment and strife among people, and there is sufficient supply; his virtue pervades at home and abroad, and extends to future generations, but people do not

古文：是故生无号，死夫谥，实不聚而名不立，施者不德，受者不让，德交归焉，而莫之充忍也。
现代文：所以，这样的至人活着没有名号，死后没有谥号；他不聚敛财物，也不追求名誉，施恩的人不自以为有恩德而求报答，受恩惠者也不故作姿态而谦让；美德聚集归附于他身上，却不显出盈满。
English: Therefore, such a man lives without a name, and dies without a title; he does not accumulate wealth, nor does he seek fame; the one who gives grace does not think he has grace and ask for reward, and the one who receives grace does not pretend to be humble; virtues are gathered to him, but they do not show fullness.

古文：故德之所总，道弗能害也，智之所不知，辩弗能解也。
现代文：所以，德行聚集的人，说三道四是伤害不了他的；智慧所不能明了的事，能说会道也无法解释清楚的。
English: Wherefore, it cannot hurt a virtuous man that he should speak words of knowledge: for what wisdom knoweth not, neither can knowledge declare it.

古文：不言之辩，不道之道，若或通焉，谓之天府。取焉而不损，酌焉而不竭，莫知其所由出，是谓瑶光。
现代文：不说话的辩才、不能具体规定的 道 ，如若有人能通达这种境界，那就叫做进入到天府，这里面取之不尽，用之不竭，无法知道它产生的缘由，这就是瑶光。
English: If someone can reach this realm, it is called entering the heavenly palace. It is inexhaustible, and it is impossible to know the cause of it. This is enlightenment.

古文：瑶光者，资粮万物者也。
现代文：所谓瑶光就是养育万物的意思。
English: The so-called enlightenment is the meaning of nurturing all things.

古文：振困穷，补不足，则名生；兴利除害，伐乱禁暴，则功成。
现代文：赈济生活贫困的人，补助食用不足的人，这样名声就会树立起来；兴办利民之事，消除社会弊病，讨伐叛乱，禁止凶暴，这样功业就会成功。
English: To give relief to the destitute, to assist the undernourished, is to gain renown; to do good to the people, to remove social evils, to crush rebellion, to restrain violence, is to succeed.

古文：世无灾害，虽神无所施其德；上下和辑，虽贤无所立其功。
现代文：如果世上没有灾害，那么即使是神也无处表现他的德泽；如果上下和睦团结，那么即使是贤人也无法建树他的功业。
English: If there are no disasters in the world, then even God has nowhere to show his virtue; if there is harmony and unity from top to bottom, then even a wise man cannot build his merits.

古文：昔容成氏之时，道路雁行列处，托婴儿于巢上，置余粮于亩首，虎豹可尾，虺蛇可跟，而不知其所由然。
现代文：以前古帝容成氏的时代，人们像大雁一样有序地在大道上行走，干农活时将婴儿放在巢里也没危险，余粮放在田头也不会丢失；可以尾随虎豹、可以脚踩毒蛇而不受其害，人们也不知道为什么能够这样太平。
English: Before the era of the ancient emperor Rongcheng, people walked on the avenue in an orderly manner like geese. When doing farm work, it was not dangerous to put babies in the nest, and surplus grain would not be lost at the head of the field. You could follow tigers and leopards, and you could step on poisonous snakes without being harmed. People do not know why it is so peaceful.

古文：逮至尧之时，十日并出，焦禾稼，杀草木，而民无所食。
现代文：而到了尧帝的时代，十个太阳一起出来，烤焦了庄稼禾苗，晒死了树木花草，使百姓没有可吃的食物。
English: But in the time of Emperor Qian, ten suns came out at the same time, scorched the crops and seedlings, and dried up the trees, flowers and plants, leaving the people without edible food.

古文：猰貐、凿齿、九婴、大风、封豨、修蛇皆为民害。
现代文：猰貐、凿齿、九婴、大风、封豨、修蛇这些凶猛禽兽一起出来残害百姓。
English: Dragonflies, chisel teeth, nine babies, strong winds, sealing cocoons, and repairing snakes - these ferocious beasts came out together to maim the people.

古文：尧乃使羿诛凿齿于畴华之野，杀九婴于凶水之上，缴大风于青丘之泽，上射十日而下杀猰貐，断修蛇于洞庭，禽封豨于桑林，万民皆喜，置尧以为天子。
现代文：于是尧帝让羿在畴华这地方杀死凿齿，在凶水这地方杀死九婴，在青丘泽射死了大风，又往天射落九个太阳，在地下杀死猰貐，在洞庭斩断修蛇，在桑林擒获了封豨。这样，百姓都高高兴兴，推举尧为天子。
English: So Emperor Qian let Yao kill the chisel in the place of Zhenhua, kill nine babies in the place of fierce water, shoot the wind in Qingqiuze, shoot nine suns into the sky, kill Yao in the underground, cut and repair snakes in the cave garden, and win the seal in the mulberry forest. In this way, the people were very happy and elected Yao as the son of heaven.

古文：于是天下广陕险易远近始有道里。
现代文：于是天下不管是广阔的地方还是险峻的地方、不管是远的地方还是近的地方，都有了道路和村落。
English: As a result, all over the world, whether it is a vast place or a steep place, whether it is far away or near, there are roads and villages.

古文：舜之时，共工振滔洪水，以薄空桑，龙门未开，吕梁未发，江淮通流，四海溟涬，民皆上丘陵，赴树木。
现代文：舜帝的时代，共工兴起洪水，大水逼近空桑，这时龙门尚未凿开，吕梁还没挖通，长江、淮河合流泛滥，天下四海一片汪洋，百姓都逃往山上，爬上大树。
English: In the era of Emperor Qianlong, the flood arose from the joint work, and the flood approached the empty mulberry. At that time, the gantry had not yet been excavated, the Luliang had not been dug through, the confluence of the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River had flooded, and the world was flooded with the sea. The people fled to the mountains and climbed up the trees.

古文：舜乃使禹疏三江五湖，辟伊阙，民廛涧，平通沟陆，流注东海。
现代文：于是舜便让禹疏通三江五湖，开辟伊阙，疏导廛水和涧水，整治疏通大小沟渠，使水流入东海。
English: Therefore, he asked Yu to dredge the three rivers and five lakes, open up the Yili River, divert water from the Yili River and the Yili River, and rectify and dredge the large and small ditches, so that the water would flow into the East Sea.

古文：鸿水漏，九州干，万民皆宁其性。
现代文：洪水排泄了，九州大地平静了，百姓们都能各安其生。
English: The floodwaters have receded, the land of Kyushu has calmed down, and the people can live their lives in peace.

古文：是以称尧、舜以为圣。
现代文：所以他们都称尧舜为圣人。
English: That's why they all call him a saint.

古文：晚世之时，帝有桀、纣，为琁室、瑶台、象廊、玉床，纣为肉圃、酒池，燎焚天下之财，罢苦万民之力，刳谏者，剔孕妇，攘天下，虐百姓。
现代文：近代的时候，出了桀、纣两个暴君，夏桀修建了琁室、瑶台、象廊、玉床；商纣设置了肉圃、酒池，并耗尽了天下财物，使百姓精疲力尽；纣王还挖出比干的心脏，剖开孕妇的胎腹，正是天下受到骚扰，百姓受到残害。
English: In modern times, there were two tyrants, the Dragon King and the Dragon Queen. Xia Yao built the Dragon King's chamber, the Dragon King's table, the Elephant Gallery, and the Jade Bed. The merchants set up the meat garden and the wine pool, and exhausted the wealth of the world, exhausting the people. The Dragon King also dug out the heart of the dragon and cut open the womb of the pregnant woman. It was the world that was harassed and the people that were mutilated.

古文：于是汤乃以革车三百乘，伐桀于南巢，放之夏台；武王甲卒三千，破纣牧野，杀之于宣室。
现代文：于是商汤率三百兵车在南巢讨伐夏桀，最终将夏桀放逐囚禁在夏台；周武王率三千甲卒在牧野征伐纣王，在宣室杀死了纣王。
English: As a result, Shang Tang led three hundred chariots to fight against Xia Yao in Nanxun and eventually exiled Xia Yao to be imprisoned in Xatai; King Zhou Wu led three thousand soldiers to fight and conquer Xia Yao in Makino and killed Xia Yao in Xuanwu.

古文：天下宁定，百姓和集，是以称汤、武之贤。
现代文：这样天下才得以安定，百姓得以和乐。因此他们都称商汤、武王为贤人。
English: This is how the world can be stable and the people can be at peace. Therefore, they all call Shang Tang and King Wu as wise men.

古文：由此观之，有贤圣之名者，必遭乱世之患也。
现代文：由此可见，有贤圣名声的人，必定遭逢过乱世的祸患。
English: From this, it can be seen that a person with a reputation for virtue and holiness must have encountered the scourge of the chaotic world.

古文：至人生乱世之中，含德怀道，拘无穷之智，钳口寝说，遂不言而死者众矣，然天下莫知贵其不言也。
现代文：现在至人生活在乱世之中，胸怀道德，藏匿着无数的智慧，闭口不说，一直到死，所以这世上没有将智慧表露出来而死去的人多着呢！然而天下却没有人懂得珍重这种不喜言说的行为。
English: Nowadays, people live in the midst of a chaotic world, with morality in their hearts, hiding countless wisdom, keeping their mouths shut until they die, so there are many people in this world who do not reveal their wisdom and die! However, no one in the world knows how to value this behavior that does not like to speak.

古文：故道可道，非常道，名可名，非常名，著于竹帛，镂于金石，可传于人者，其粗也。
现代文：所以说，可以用言词表达的 道 并非常 道 ，可以用文字叙述的 名 并非常 名 ；而那些写在竹帛上刻在金石上、可传后人的文字内容，都是粗糙简单不完整的。
English: Therefore, the Tao that can be expressed in words is not very Tao, the name that can be described in words is not very famous; and those written on bamboo shoots and engraved on gold and stone, which can be passed down to future generations, are rough, simple and incomplete.

古文：五帝三王，殊事而同指，异路而同归。
现代文：五帝三王，他们做的事情不一样，但宗旨是相同的，所走的道路不一样，但归宿却是一致的。
English: The five emperors and three kings, they do things differently, but the purpose is the same, the path they take is different, but the destination is the same.

古文：晚世学者，不知道之所一体，德之所总要，取成之迹，相与危坐而说之，鼓歌而舞之，故博学多闻而不免于惑。
现代文：近代求学问的人，不懂得混元一体之 道 、总括精要之 德 ，而只是拿取一些已经成功了的事迹，相聚在一起，正襟危坐而津津乐道，奏着鼓乐、跳着古舞，彼此歌功颂德。所以他们自称博学多闻，但却不能免于糊涂和困惑。
English: Modern scholars do not know the way of blending elements into one, the virtue of summing up the essentials, but only take some of the successful deeds, get together, sit close together and enjoy music, play drums, dance ancient dances, and sing praises to each other. So they claim to be knowledgeable, but they are not immune to confusion and confusion.

古文：诗云： 不敢暴虎，不敢冯河。
现代文：《诗经》说： 不敢徒手打虎，不敢无舟渡河。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Do not dare to fight a tiger with bare hands, do not dare to cross a river without a boat.

古文：人知一，莫知其他。 
现代文：人只知道这一类事，却不知道其他的事还多着呢！ 
English: People only know this kind of thing, but they don't know that there are many other things!

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：这正是说的那些所谓的博学多闻之徒。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝者体太一，王者法阴阳，霸者则四时，君者用六律。
现代文：称帝者应遵循天道，无为而治；称王者应效法阴阳，实施仁义；称霸者应以四季为准则，依法治理；而那些小国君则应以刑律法制管理国家。
English: Those who claim to be emperors should follow the heavenly way and rule without doing anything; those who claim to be kings should follow the law of yin and yang and implement benevolence and righteousness; those who claim to be overlords should govern according to the four seasons; and those small kings should manage the country according to the criminal law system.

古文：秉太一者，牢笼天地，弹压山川；含吐阴阳，伸曳四时；纪纲八极，经纬六合；覆露照导，普汜无私；蠉飞蠕动，莫不仰德而生。
现代文：所谓天道，它以纯朴元气包裹牢笼天地，控制山川，含蕴阴阳二气，调和四季，经纪八极，管理六合，覆盖润滋，昭示引导万物，广泛无私而遍施物类，各种生物无不仰承它的德泽而生长发展。
English: The so-called heavenly way, it wraps heaven and earth in a cage with pure and simple energy, controls mountains and rivers, contains yin and yang, harmonizes the four seasons, mediates the eight poles, manages the six conjunctions, covers and moisturizes, shows and guides all things, is widely selfless and pervades all things, and all kinds of creatures grow and develop by inheriting its virtue.

古文：阴阳者，承天地之和，形万殊之体；含气化物，以成埒类；赢缩卷舒，沦于不测；终始虚满，转于无原。
现代文：所谓阴阳二气，承受着天地自然中和之气，形成万物千差万别的形体，含蕴着的和气能化育万物；它伸缩舒卷，深入到无法测度的境域，开始时虚空、终至于盈满，周转于没有终始的时空中。
English: The so-called yin and yang, bearing the air of the natural balance of heaven and earth, form a wide variety of shapes of all things, and contain and nurture all things; it expands and contracts, penetrates into immeasurable territory, begins with emptiness and ends with fullness, and circulates in a time and space without end.

古文：四时者，春生夏长，秋收冬藏；取予有节，出入有时；开阖张歙，不失其叙；喜怒刚柔，不离其理。
现代文：所谓四时，春主生育、夏主成长，秋主收敛、冬主藏纳；予取有节，出入有时；它开张合闭不失次序，喜怒刚柔不违原理。
English: The so-called four o'clock, the spring main birth, the summer main growth, the autumn main convergence, the winter main containment; there is a section for taking, and there are times for entering and exiting; it opens and closes without losing order, and it does not violate the principle of joy and anger.

古文：六律者，生之与杀也，赏之与罚也，予之与夺也，非此无道也。
现代文：所谓六律，是指 生与杀、赏与罚、予与夺 这六种；除此之外，别无他道。
English: The so-called six principles refer to the six principles of life and death, reward and punishment, and giving and taking; there is no other way.

古文：故谨于权衡准绳，审乎轻重，足以治其境内矣。
现代文：所以，谨慎地持守这些权衡准绳、审察这些法度的轻重，就足以治理好所管辖的国家了。
English: Therefore, it is enough to manage the country under one's jurisdiction well by carefully adhering to these standards and examining the weight of these laws.

古文：是故体太一者，明于天地之情，通于道德之伦；聪明耀于日月，精神通于万物；动静调于阴阳，喜怒和于四时；德泽施于方外，名声传于后世。
现代文：因此遵循天道、无为而治天下的人，则能明白天地之性情，通晓道德之条理；他的聪明能照耀日月，精神与万物相通；动静与阴阳协调，喜怒与四时和谐；他的德泽施及四方以外的区域，名声流传到子孙后代。
English: Therefore, a person who follows the heavenly way and rules the world without doing anything can understand the disposition of heaven and earth and know the principles of morality; his wisdom can shine the sun and the moon, and his spirit can communicate with all things; his movement and stillness can harmonize with yin and yang, and his joy and anger can harmonize with the four seasons; his virtue can reach regions beyond the four directions, and his fame will be passed on to future generations.

古文：法阴阳者，德与天地参，明与日月并，精与鬼神总；戴圆履方，抱表怀绳；内能治身，外能得人；发号施令，天下莫不从风。
现代文：效法阴阳的人，他的德行和天地相配，英明与日月同辉，精气与鬼神相合；他头顶天穹、脚踏大地，手握圭表墨绳等法度，内能修养心性，外能获得人心，发号施令，天下百姓无不闻风而动。
English: A person who emulates yin and yang, his virtue is compatible with heaven and earth, his wisdom is the same as that of the sun and moon, and his essence is compatible with ghosts and gods. He has the sky above his head, the earth under his feet, and the ink rope of the Gui watch in his hand. He can cultivate his inner nature and win the hearts of people on the outside, give orders, and the people all over the world are moved by the wind.

古文：则四时者，柔而不脆，刚而不鞼；宽而不肆，肃而不悖；优柔委从，以养群类；其德含愚而容不肖，无所私爱。
现代文：效仿四季的人，柔顺而不脆弱，刚强而不折断；宽缓而不放纵，急速而不紊乱；优柔宽容，以养育各种物类。他的德行可以容纳愚昧不贤之人，没有私心和偏爱。
English: A person who emulates the four seasons, soft but not fragile, tough but not broken; gentle but not indulgent, rapid but not disorderly; gentle and tolerant to nurture all kinds of species. His virtue can accommodate the ignorant and the wicked, without selfishness and favoritism.

古文：用六律者，伐乱禁暴，进贤而退不肖；扶拨以为正，坏险以为平，矫枉以为直；明于禁舍开闭之道，乘时因势，以服役人心也。
现代文：使用六律的人，则能讨伐叛乱、禁止强暴，进用贤才而贬斥不贤者，扶拨以为正，除险以持平，矫枉以成直；懂得禁止、赦免、开启、关闭的道理，顺应时势以驾驭人心。
English: Those who use the six principles can fight against rebellion, prohibit violence, promote the wise and disparage the unwise, support the right, eliminate the danger, keep the balance, and rectify the wrong; understand the principles of prohibition, pardon, opening, and closing, and conform to the current situation to control the hearts of the people.

古文：帝者体阴阳则侵，王者法四时则削，霸者节六律则辱，君者失准绳则废。
现代文：假如称帝者效法阴阳，就会受到诸侯的侵侮；称王者依循四季，就会被削弱国力；称霸者使用六律，就会受到凌辱；那些小国君如失去准绳法度，就会被废黜。
English: If those who claim to be emperors imitate yin and yang, they will be insulted by the lords; if those who claim to be kings follow the four seasons, their national power will be weakened; if those who claim to be overlords use the six laws, they will be insulted; if those minor sovereigns lose the criterion of law, they will be deposed.

古文：故小而行大，则滔窕而不亲；大而行小，则狭隘而不容；贵贱不失其体，而天下治矣。
现代文：所以，由此得出，小国国君实施大国方略，就会显得空疏失体而百姓不会亲附。大国国君实行小国方略，就会显得狭隘紧迫而无法包容天地社会。应当是贵贱都不失自己的体统，这样天下就容易治理了。
English: Therefore, it can be deduced from this that if a small country's ruler implements a big country's strategy, it will appear empty and hollow, and the people will not be attached to it. If a big country's ruler implements a small country's strategy, it will appear narrow and urgent, and it will not be able to accommodate the society of heaven and earth. It should be that both the high and the low do not lose their dignity, so that the world will be easy to govern.

古文：天爱其精，地爱其平，人爱其情。
现代文：天爱惜它的精气，地爱惜它的平静，人爱惜他的性情。
English: Heaven cherishes his spirit, earth his calm, man his temper.

古文：天之精，日月星辰雷电风雨也；地之平，水火金木土也；人之情，思虑聪明喜怒也。
现代文：天之精是指日月、星辰、雷电、风雨；地之平是指水火金木土；人之情是指思虑、聪明、喜怒等。
English: The spirit of heaven refers to the sun, moon, stars, thunder and lightning, wind and rain; the level of the earth refers to water, fire, metal, wood and soil; human feelings refer to thoughts, intelligence, emotions and so on.

古文：故闭四关，止五遁，则与道沦，是故神明藏于无形，精神反于至真，则目明而不以视，耳聪而不以听，心条达而不以思虑；委而弗为，和而弗矜；冥性命之情，而智故不得杂焉。
现代文：所以闭目塞耳、缄口静心，防止精神因物欲而散逸，这样就和 道 融合了。因此，将神明保存于一种静穆虚无的状态中，精气就会返回到至真纯朴的本性内，就可以做到眼睛尽管明亮却什么也不去看，耳朵尽管聪敏却什么也不去听，心体透亮而什么也不去想；委顺事物而不作为，保持平和而不骄矜，冥性命之精，不思虑、不喜怒，不运用聪明，保持心体平静，这样智巧就难以混杂在其中了。
English: Therefore, by closing the eyes, plugging the ears, shutting the mouth, and meditating, and preventing the mind from being dissipated by material desires, it is fused with the Tao. Therefore, by preserving the gods in a state of tranquil nothingness, the essence will return to the true and pure nature. It is possible to make the eyes, although bright, see nothing, the ears, although intelligent, hear nothing, the mind and body are transparent and do not think about anything; let things go and do nothing, keep peace and not be proud, the essence of life, do not think, do not get angry, do not use intelligence, keep the mind and body calm. It is difficult to

古文：精泄于目，则其视明；在于耳，则其听聪；留于口，则其言当；集于心，则其虑通。
现代文：人之精通于眼睛，这视觉就明亮；通于耳朵，这听觉就聪敏；滞于口中，这言词就恰当；聚集在内心，这思虑就通达。
English: If one is skillful in the eye, the sight will be bright; if skillful in the ear, the hearing will be keen; if skillful in the mouth, the speech will be appropriate; if skillful in the heart, the mind will be clear.

古文：故闭四关则身无患，百节莫苑，莫死莫生，莫虚莫盈，是谓真人。
现代文：所以，闭塞目、耳、心、口这四道关口，人体就无忧虑，周身经络畅通不会萎缩。这不死不生、不虚不实，叫做真人。
English: Therefore, if the four gates of eyes, ears, heart, and mouth are blocked, the human body will not worry, and the meridians around the body will not atrophy.

古文：凡乱之所由生者，皆在流遁。
现代文：大凡祸乱产生的原因，都在于国君的放荡淫逸。
English: The causes of the great calamity all lie in the licentiousness of the sovereign.

古文：流遁之所生者五。大构驾，兴宫室；延楼栈道，鸡栖井干；标株欂栌，以相支持；木巧之饰，盘纤刻俨；赢镂雕琢，诡文回波；尚游瀷淢，菱抒紾抱；芒繁乱泽，巧伪纷挐，以相摧错，此遁于木也。
现代文：放纵淫逸的地方表现在五个方面：大兴上木，兴建宫室亭阁，群楼并起，栈道相通；层层如鸡栖，方正如并栏，梁上短柱相互支撑，木头上雕有奇巧的装饰。有弯曲的盘龙，以及浮首虎头之类。雕绘精巧，文饰奇特。有象水纹波涛，荡漾起伏；菱花芋草，互相纠缠在一起。着色细密巧妙，可以扰乱真正的色泽。构思奇巧，互相牵持，而交错成一个整体。
English: The place of indulgence and lasciviousness is manifested in five aspects: the large-scale construction of the upper floor, the construction of the palace room pavilion, the group of buildings side by side, the footpaths are connected; the layers are like chicken roosts, the squares are like parallel columns, the short columns on the beams support each other, and the wood is carved with fanciful decorations. There are curved coiled dragons, and floating tiger heads and the like. The carving is exquisite and the decoration is peculiar. There are waves like water ripples, rippling and undulating; the taro, entangled with each other. The coloring is fine and ingenious,

古文：本立而道行，本伤而道废。
现代文：根本确立了，而大道就可以行得通，根本破坏了，而大道就会被破坏。
English: Fundamentally establish, and the avenue can work, fundamentally destroy, and the avenue will be destroyed.

