古文：《易》曰： 天垂象，圣人则之。 
现代文：◆宦者列传序，《周易》说： 上天垂示法象，圣人效法它。 
English: The "I Ching" says: Heaven reveals the image, and sages imitate it.

古文：宦者四星，在皇位之侧，故《周礼》置官，亦备其数。
现代文：天上有四颗宦星，在帝座星的旁边，因此《周礼》设宦官，也以之充数。
English: There are four stars in the sky, next to the star of the Empire, so "Zhou Li" has eunuchs, and they are also used to make up the number.

古文：阍者守中门之禁，寺人掌女宫之戒。
现代文：阍者守王宫中门之禁，寺人掌守女宫之戒命。
English: The eunuch guards the ban of the middle gate of the royal palace, and the priest guards the precepts of the female palace.

古文：又云 王之正内者五人 。
现代文：《周礼》还说： 王的卧室有内侍五人。 
English: "Zhou Li" also said: The king's bedroom has five servants.

古文：《月令》： 仲冬，命阉尹审门闾，谨房室。 
现代文：《月令》记载说： 隆冬时季，命令主管宦者的官吏检查门闾，谨守门户的开闭。 
English: "The Monthly" records that: In the middle of winter, the officials in charge of the gatekeepers were ordered to check the latches and keep the gates open and closed.

古文：《诗》之《小雅》，亦有《巷伯》刺谗之篇。
现代文：《诗经·小雅》里也有宦者所作讽刺周幽王听信谗言的《巷伯》一诗。
English: There is also a satirical poem "Xiangbo" in the "Shijing·Xiao Ya" by a poet.

古文：然宦人之在王朝者，其来旧矣。
现代文：可见宦官在朝廷里任事，由来已久了。
English: It can be seen that eunuchs have been working in the imperial court for a long time.

古文：将以其体非全气，情志专良，通关中人，易以役养乎？
现代文：大概是因为他们身体阳气不全，性情专一，心无邪念，和宫内人易于来往，便于使唤吧？
English: Probably because they are physically yang incomplete, single-minded, innocent, and easy to communicate with the people in the palace, easy to use, right?

古文：然而后世因之，才任稍广，其能者，则勃貂、管苏有功于楚、晋，景监、缪贤著庸于秦、赵。
现代文：然而后世沿袭这种制度，任用他们范围渐渐扩大，他们中间有才能的如勃貂、管苏有功于晋国和楚国，景监、缪贤因为各自推荐了商鞅和蔺相如而为秦国与赵国立了功。
English: However, later generations followed this system, and the scope of their appointment gradually expanded. Among them, the talented ones such as Bourgogne and Guan Su contributed to Jin and Chu, and Jing Guan and Miao Xian contributed to Qin and Zhao because they recommended Shang and Zhou respectively.

古文：及其敝也，则竖刁乱齐，伊戾祸宋。
现代文：至于宦官造成的祸害，竖刁乱齐国，伊戾祸宋国，是很明显的例证。
English: As for the evils caused by eunuchs, it is a clear example that the eunuchs caused the chaos in Qi and the calamity in Yili and Song.

古文：汉兴，仍袭秦制，置中常侍官。
现代文：汉兴，仍用秦朝的制度，设置了中常侍这一官职。
English: Han Xing, still using the system of the Qin Dynasty, set up the official position of Vice-Regent.

古文：然亦引用士人，以参其选，皆银珰左貂，给事殿省。
现代文：但也引用士人参加中常侍的选拔。他们都戴着装饰有银铛、垂着貂尾的帽子，在宫中和台省工作。
English: However, nobles were also cited to participate in the selection of the middle-ranking attendants. They all wore hats decorated with silver braid and hanging appendages, and worked in the palace and Taiwan Province.

古文：及高后称制，乃以张卿为大谒者，出入卧内，受宣诏命。
现代文：到了吕后临朝称制，便用张卿为大谒者，出入她的卧室，接受传达她的命令。
English: When Lv Hou's accession to the throne was announced, he used Zhang Jing as his chief courier, entering and leaving her bedroom and receiving orders from her.

古文：文帝时，有赵谈、北宫伯子，颇见亲幸。
现代文：文帝时，有赵谈、北宫伯子，很得亲幸。
English: At the time of Emperor Wen, there were Zhao Dan and Beigu Hanzi, which was very fortunate.

古文：至于孝武，亦爱李延年。
现代文：到汉武帝，也爱李延年。
English: Emperor Hanwu also loved Li Yanzhong.

古文：帝数宴后庭，或潜游离馆，故请奏机事，多以宦人主之。
现代文：武帝多次在后宫宴饮，或者悄悄地到离宫别馆游玩，所以上奏机密事，多用宦官主持。
English: Emperor Wu repeatedly held banquets in the harem, or quietly visited the palace annex, so he often used eunuchs to preside over secret affairs.

古文：至元帝之世，史游为黄门令，勤心纳忠，有所补益。
现代文：到元帝时，史游为黄门令，忠心勤谨，对政事多有补益。
English: By the time of Emperor Yuan, Shiyu was the Yellow Gate, loyal and diligent, and had much to contribute to politics.

古文：其后弘恭、石显以佞险自进，卒有萧、周之祸，损秽帝德焉。
现代文：后来弘恭、石显靠着阴险谄媚升迁，终于导致了萧望之的被杀、周堪的废锢，使帝德遭到了损害和玷污。
English: Later, Honggong and Shi Xian were promoted with the help of insidious flattery, which finally led to the killing of Xiaowanzhi and the dethronement of Zhou Kan, and caused damage and defilement to Teide.

古文：中兴之初，宦官悉用阉人，不复杂调他士。
现代文：东汉重建王朝之初，宦官全用阉人，不再杂用其他士人。
English: At the beginning of the reconstruction of the Eastern Han Dynasty, eunuchs were all eunuchs, no longer mixed with other eunuchs.

古文：至永平中，始置员数，中常侍四人，小黄门十人。
现代文：到永平年间，开始定员：中常侍四人，小黄门十人。
English: By the Yongping era, the number of attendants began to be limited to four for the middle-ranking attendants and ten for the lower-ranking attendants.

古文：和帝即祚幼弱，而窦宪兄弟专总权威，内外臣僚，莫由亲接，所与居者，唯庵宦而已。
现代文：和帝幼年即位，窦宪兄弟把持朝政，内外官员无法接近和帝，与和帝在一起生活的只有宦官而已。
English: Emperor He ascended to the throne at a young age, the Dou brothers held the reins of government, and domestic and foreign officials could not get close to Emperor He. Only eunuchs lived with Emperor He.

古文：故郑众得专谋禁中，终除大憝，遂享分土之封，超登宫卿之位。
现代文：因此宦官郑众能够在禁宫中独自与和帝出谋划策，终于诛除了大奸臣窦宪，于是郑众被封为巢阝乡侯，位在宫卿。
English: Therefore, the eunuch Zheng Zong was able to work out strategies with the emperor alone in the Forbidden City, and finally expelled the great traitor Dou Xian, so Zheng Zong was named the prince of the county and the lord of the palace.

古文：于是中官始盛焉。
现代文：宦官的势力开始强盛起来。
English: The power of the eunuchs began to grow.

古文：自明帝以后，迄乎延平，委用渐大，而其员稍增，中常侍至有十人，小黄门二十人，改以金珰右貂，兼领卿署之职。
现代文：从明帝以后，直到延平年间，对宦官任用范围渐渐扩大，名额也稍为增加，中常侍增到十人，小黄门二十人，帽子上的装饰全改为金右貂，兼任九卿等外朝官的职务。
English: From the Ming Dynasty until the Yanping Dynasty, the scope of appointment of eunuchs gradually expanded, and the number of eunuchs was slightly increased. The number of middle-ranking attendants increased to ten, and the number of minor eunuchs increased to twenty. The decorations on the hats were all changed to gold right hoops, and they also served as foreign imperial officials such as the nine nobles.

古文：邓后以女主临政，而万机殷远，朝臣国议，无由参断帷幄，称制下令，不出房闱之间，不得不委用刑人，寄之国命。
现代文：邓太后以女主身份主持朝政，政事纷繁，朝臣议处国家大事，没有办法进内宫参加谋划，下达诏令，不超出皇后所居的地方，因此，不得不任用宦官，把国家的命运寄托于宦官身上。
English: Empress Dowager Deng presided over the government of the dynasty as the head of the family. Due to the complicated political situation, the courtiers were unable to enter the inner palace to participate in the planning and issue the edict without going beyond the place where the empress lived. Therefore, she had to appoint eunuchs and entrust the fate of the country to the eunuchs.

古文：手握王爵，口含天宪，非复掖廷永巷之职，闺牖房闼之任也。
现代文：他们手操封爵大权，口含王法诏命，不再只是担任宫廷、永巷的职务了。
English: They wield the power of knighthood in their hands and the king's edict in their mouths, and they no longer just hold positions at the court and in Yongxiang.

古文：其后孙程定立顺之功，曹腾参建桓之策，续以五侯合谋，梁冀受钺，迹因公正，恩固主心，故中外服从，上下屏气。
现代文：后来宦官孙程立了拥立顺帝的大功，曹腾参加了拥立桓帝的谋划，继之以单超、徐璜、具瑗、左忄官、唐衡五个侯爵的合谋，使外戚梁冀受到诛杀。他们所作所为公允正大，恩情在皇帝心中，所以朝廷内外都服从，上上下下不敢非议。
English: Later, eunuch Sun Chengli played a great role in supporting Emperor Shun, and Cao Tengli took part in the plan to support Emperor Huan, followed by the conspiracy of five marquesses, namely, Shanchao, Xu Xi, Gu Xi, Zuo eunuch, and Tang Heng, which led to the assassination of his maternal relative, Liang Ji. Their actions were fair and just, and they had the emperor's favor in their hearts, so both inside and outside the imperial court obeyed, and they dared not criticize anyone.

古文：或称伊、霍之勋，无谢于往载；或谓良、平之画，复兴于当今。
现代文：有的人称赞他们有伊尹、霍光一样的功勋，无愧于前代；有的说张良、陈平的谋略，又出现在今天。
English: Some people praise them for having the same merits as Yi Yin and Huo Guang, which is worthy of the previous generation; some say that the strategy of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping has reappeared today.

古文：虽时有忠公，而竟见排斥。
现代文：虽然当时也有忠心为公之臣，终归遭到排斥。
English: Although he was a loyal public servant at the time, he was eventually ostracized.

古文：举动回山海，呼吸变霜露。
现代文：他们的举动移山倒海，呼吸变霜化露。
English: Their actions move mountains, their breath turns frost into dew.

古文：阿旨曲求，则光宠三族；直情忤意，则参夷五宗。
现代文：对他们的索求，想方设法满足的，就光耀三族；直情不隐、违背他们心意的，则远近亲族都要遭到夷灭。
English: If their demands are met in any way, the three clans will be glorified; if their demands are not met in a straightforward manner, but go against their wishes, then their relatives, both near and far, will be destroyed.

古文：汉之纲纪大乱矣。
现代文：汉朝的朝纲法纪乱到了极点。
English: The chaos of the Han Dynasty's legal code reached its climax.

古文：若夫高冠长剑，纡朱怀金者，布满宫闱；苴茅分虎，南面臣人者，盖以十数。
现代文：那些戴高冠挂长剑，佩朱绶怀金印的宦官，布满宫中；封列侯拜郡守，南面统治他人的宦官，大抵数以十计。
English: Those eunuchs wearing high crowns and long swords, wearing scarves and bearing gold seals, are all over the palace; the eunuchs who are the governors of Houbei County and rule others in the south are mostly dozens.

古文：府署第馆，棋列于都鄙；子弟支附，过半于州国。南金、和宝、冰纨、雾縠之积，盈仞珍藏；嫱媛、侍兒、歌单、舞女之玩，充备绮室。狗马饰雕文，土木被缇绣。
现代文：他们的府署馆第，星罗棋布于大小城市；子弟宗族及其依附的，超过了州国的一半；南方的黄金、和氏璧、细薄透明的绢纱之类，装满了宝库；姬妾侍女，歌童、舞女一类的 玩物 ，充斥着华丽的房室；狗马用花绸子装饰，土木建筑用锦绣绸缎裱糊。
English: Their prefectural and local government offices are scattered in cities large and small; descendants of the clan and their dependents, more than half of the state; southern gold, Japanese brocade, thin transparent crepe, etc., are filled with treasure; concubines, singers, dancers and other toys are filled with gorgeous rooms; dogs and horses are decorated with floral silk, and civil engineering buildings are embroidered with brocade.

古文：皆剥割萌黎，竞恣奢欲。
现代文：他们掠夺剥削黎民百姓，穷奢极欲。
English: They plundered and exploited the Lebanese people, and had an insatiable appetite for luxury.

古文：构害明贤，专树党类。
现代文：他们陷害贤良，专门树立党羽。
English: They set up the good and the virtuous, and specially set up the party wing.

古文：其有更相援引，希附权强者，皆腐身熏子，以自炫达。
现代文：甚至有相互拉扯，趋类附势，不惜自腐其身，以自炫耀。
English: There is even mutual tugging and pulling, tending to be attached to each other, at the risk of self-destruction, to show off.

古文：同敝相济，故其徒有繁，败国蠹败之事，不可单书。
现代文：他们同敝相济，臭味相投，所以党羽人数越来越多，败坏国家，祸害朝政的罪行，不可尽书。
English: They are in bed with each other and share the same stench, so the number of party members is increasing. The crimes of corrupting the country and harming the government of the DPRK are inexhaustible.

古文：所以海内嗟毒，志士穷栖，寇剧缘间，摇乱区夏。
现代文：因而全国处处叹息怨恨，志士无处容身，寇盗巨贼乘机而起，扰乱了华夏。
English: As a result, the whole country is full of sighs and resentment, there is no place for heroes, and robbers and thieves have taken advantage of the opportunity to disturb Huaxia.

古文：虽忠良怀愤，时或奋发，而言出祸从，旋见孥戮。
现代文：虽然忠良之士心怀愤怨，有时奋起痛斥宦官，但言出祸来，立刻遭到逮捕杀戮。
English: Though the loyal and good-hearted sometimes rose up in anger to denounce the eunuchs, they were arrested and killed as soon as they uttered a word.

古文：因复大考钩党，转相诬染。
现代文：又大兴党锢之狱，获罪的转相诬告。
English: In addition, Daxing Party members were sent to prison, and those who were found guilty were falsely accused.

古文：凡称善士，莫不离被灾毒。
现代文：凡是称为好人的，没有不遭到迫害的。
English: For there is no one who is called a good man who does not come under persecution.

古文：自曹腾说梁冀，竟立昏弱。
现代文：虽然袁绍恭行天罚，把宦官斩杀无余，然而用暴虐取代祸乱，哪里说得上达到了安定汉朝的目的！
English: Although Yuan Shao Gong carried out divine punishment and killed eunuchs to no avail, replacing the calamity with tyranny, he achieved the goal of a stable Han Dynasty!

古文：魏武因之，遂迁龟鼎。所谓 君以此始，必以此终 ，信乎其然矣！
现代文：自从曹腾劝说梁冀立了个昏君桓帝，魏武帝曹操就沿用这个办法，挟制昏弱的天子，终于使皇帝的宝器为曹魏所有。所谓 你从这里开始的，也必定在这点上结束。 汉朝开始宠信宦官，终因宦官而灭亡，其情况的确是这样啊！
English: Ever since Cao Teng persuaded Liang Ji to set up a weak emperor, Emperor Huan, the Wei emperor Cao Cao used this method to coerce the weak emperor, and finally made the emperor's treasure the property of Cao Wei. What you call starting from here, must also end at this point. The Han Dynasty began to favor eunuchs, and eventually perished because of eunuchs, which is indeed the case!

古文：郑众字季产，南阳犨人也。
现代文：◆郑众传，郑众字季产，南阳郡韜县人。
English: ◆ Zheng Zhong Chuan, Zheng Zhong Zi Ji Jian, from Min County, Nanyang County.

古文：为人谨敏有心几。
现代文：为人谨慎机敏有心计。
English: He is prudent, quick-witted and resourceful.

古文：永平中，初给事太子家。
现代文：永平中，开始在太子家做事。
English: In Yongping Middle School, she began to work in the prince's household.

古文：肃宗即位，拜小黄门，迁中常侍。
现代文：肃宗即位，授小黄门，升中常侍。
English: Su Zong ascended the throne, was given the title of Little Yellow Gate, and was promoted to junior high school attendant.

古文：和帝初，加位钩盾令。
现代文：和帝初，加位钅句盾令。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor He, the position of 句盾令 was added.

古文：时窦太后秉政，后兄大将军宪等并窃威权，朝臣上下莫不附之，而众独一心王室，不事豪党，帝亲信焉。
现代文：这时，窦太后秉政，太后的哥哥大将军窦宪等人都窃取威权，朝廷上上下下的官员，没有不依附他的，只有郑众一心向着王室，不巴结豪党，皇帝非常亲信他。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Dou, her brother General Dou Xian and others were stealing authority. There was no official in the imperial court who did not adhere to him. Only Zheng Zong was devoted to the royal family and did not hesitate to form a high-ranking party. The emperor was very close to him.

古文：及宪兄弟图作不轨，众遂首谋诛之，以功迁大长秋。
现代文：窦宪兄弟图谋不轨时，郑众首先谋划诛杀了他们，因功升大长秋。
English: When Dou Xian's brothers plotted to commit crimes, Zheng Zong first plotted to kill them, and was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：策勋班赏，每辞多受少。
现代文：皇上论功赐赏，每每辞多受少。
English: In the Emperor's speech on the awarding of merits and rewards, every word counts.

古文：由是常与议事。
现代文：由此皇上常与他议事。
English: As a result, the Emperor often conferred with him.

古文：中官用权，自众始焉。
现代文：宦官用权，自郑众开始。
English: The right to use eunuchs began with Zheng Zong.

古文：十四年，帝念众功美，封为鄛乡侯，食邑千五百户。
现代文：永元十四年，皇上念郑众功著，封他为巢阝乡侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the 14th year of the Yongyuan era, the emperor cited Zheng Zong's great achievements and appointed him as a county magistrate, with a total of 1,500 households.

古文：永初元年，和熹皇后益封三百户。
现代文：永初元年，和熹皇后增封他三百户。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, the Empress Dowager Cixi granted him an additional 300 households.

古文：元初元年卒，养子闳嗣。闳卒，子安嗣。
现代文：元初元年逝世，养子郑宏继承侯位，郑宏死，子郑安继位。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he died, and his adopted son Zheng Hong succeeded to the throne. Zheng Hong died, and his son Zheng An succeeded to the throne.

古文：后国绝。
现代文：后国绝。
English: After that, the country was no more.

古文：桓帝延熹二年，绍封众曾孙石雠为关内侯。
现代文：桓帝延熹二年，诏封郑众曾孙石雠为关内侯。
English: In the second year of Emperor Kan's reign, Zheng Zong's great-grandson, Shijun, was posthumously made the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：蔡伦字敬仲，桂阳人也。
现代文：◆蔡伦传，蔡伦字敬仲，桂阳郡人。
English: ◆Cai Lun Chuan, Cai Lun Zi Jing Zhong, from Guiyang County.

古文：以永平末始给事宫掖，建初中，为小黄门。
现代文：汉明帝永平末年，开始在皇宫内廷作事。章帝建初年间，为小黄门。
English: In the last years of Emperor Hanming Yongping, he began to work in the inner court of the imperial palace. In the first years of Emperor Zhang Jian, he was a small yellow gate.

古文：及和帝即位，转中常侍，豫参帷幄。
现代文：到和帝即位，蔡伦转为中常侍，参加政令的制定。
English: When Emperor Go-Daigo ascended the throne, Tsai Lun was transferred to the position of a middle-ranking attendant and took part in the formulation of government orders.

古文：伦有才学，尽心敦慎，数犯严颜，匡弼得失。
现代文：蔡伦有才学，尽心公事，敦厚谨慎。多次触犯皇帝的意旨，辅佐匡正皇帝的得失。
English: Cai Lun was talented in learning, devoted to public affairs, and prudent. He repeatedly violated the emperor's will, and assisted the emperor's gains and losses.

古文：每至休沐，辄闭门绝宾，暴体田野。
现代文：每到休假的日子，常闭门不接待宾客，微行田野。
English: Whenever he is on vacation, he often closes the door, does not receive guests, and goes to the fields.

古文：后加位尚方令。
现代文：后来升任尚书令。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shang Shuling.

古文：永元九年，监作秘剑及诸器械，莫不精工坚密，为后世法。
现代文：和帝永元九年，蔡伦监督制造皇室丧葬所用的刀剑和其他器械，都很精美坚固，为后世效法。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yongle, Cai Lun oversaw the manufacture of swords and other instruments used for royal funerals, all of which were exquisite and sturdy, for future generations to emulate.

古文：自古书契多编以竹简，其用缣帛者谓之为纸。
现代文：自古文字，大多刻在竹简上，然后编成册；那些用缣帛写字的人，把缣帛叫做纸。
English: Since ancient times, most of the characters are carved on bamboo strips and then compiled into books; those who write with ink are called paper.

古文：缣贵而简重，并不便于人。
现代文：缣贵而竹简笨重，都不方便。
English: It is inconvenient to have expensive bamboo and cumbersome bamboo strips.

古文：伦乃造意，用树肤、麻头及敝布、鱼网以为纸。
现代文：蔡伦于是创造设计，用树皮、麻头和破布、渔网造纸。
English: Cai Lun then created a design, using tree bark, hemp and rags, and fishing nets to make paper.

古文：元兴元年奏上之，帝善其能，自是莫不从用焉，故天下咸称 蔡侯纸 。
现代文：和帝元兴元年，他把造出来的纸奏上和帝，和帝赞赏蔡伦的才能。自此之后，大家都使用这种纸，天下叫做 蔡侯纸 。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor He, he played the made paper on Emperor He, and Emperor He appreciated Cai Lun's talent. Since then, everyone has been using this kind of paper, which is called Cai Hou paper.

古文：元初元年，邓太后以伦久宿卫，封为龙亭侯，邑三百户。后为长乐太仆。
现代文：汉安帝元初元年，邓太后以蔡伦在内廷时间长了，封他为龙亭侯，赏赐封地三百户，后来为长乐宫太仆。
English: At the beginning of the 1st year of the Han Dynasty, the Empress Dowager Deng gave Cai Lun a long time in the Inner Court. He was named the Prince of Longting, awarded three hundred fiefs, and later became the servant of the Changle Palace.

古文：四年，帝以经传之文多不正定，乃选通儒谒者刘珍及博士良史诣东观，各校家法，令伦监典其事。
现代文：元初四年，安帝因经传文字错误没有正定，于是选派精通儒学的谒者刘珍和博士良史到东观，各以自家经师的学说校勘典籍，命令蔡伦去监督管理其事。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, An Di did not have a positive conclusion due to the error of the text transmitted, so he sent Liu Zhen and Dr. Liang Shi, both of whom were proficient in Confucianism, to Dongguan, each with their own scholar's academic school of classics, and ordered Cai Lun to supervise and manage the matter.

古文：伦初受窦后讽旨，诬陷安帝祖母宋贵人。
现代文：蔡伦起先接受窦太后暗示的旨意，诬陷安帝祖母宋贵人。
English: At first, Cai Lun accepted the implied will of Empress Dowager Dou and framed Emperor An's grandmother, Song Guijin.

古文：及太后崩，安帝始亲万机，敕使自致廷尉。
现代文：等到窦太后去世，安帝开始亲自掌管朝政，命令蔡伦自己向廷尉认罪。
English: After Empress Dowager Dou passed away, Emperor An personally took charge of the imperial government and ordered Cai Lun to confess his guilt to the courtier.

古文：伦耻受辱，乃沐浴整衣冠，饮药而死。
现代文：蔡伦耻于受狱吏的侮辱，于是洗浴，整衣冠，服药自杀而死。
English: Cai Lun was ashamed of being insulted by the warden, so he took a bath, changed his clothes, and took medicine to commit suicide.

古文：国除。
现代文：所封侯国被取消了。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：孙程字稚卿，涿郡新城人也。
现代文：◆孙程传，孙程字稚卿，琢郡新城人。
English: ◆Sun Cheng Chuan, Sun Cheng Zizhichengqing, a native of Xincheng, Taku County.

古文：安帝时，为中黄门，给事长乐宫。
现代文：安帝时，为中黄门，在长乐宫做事。
English: When he was An Di, he worked for Zhonghuangmen in Changle Palace.

古文：时邓太后临朝，帝不亲政事。
现代文：当时，邓太后临朝，皇帝不管政事。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Deng was on the throne, and the emperor did not care about politics.

古文：小黄门李闰与帝乳母王圣常共谮太后兄执金吾悝等，言欲废帝，立平原王翼，帝每忿惧。
现代文：小黄门李闰与皇帝的奶娘王圣经常诽谤太后的哥哥执金吾邓悝等，说他们想废掉皇上，另外立平原王翼为帝，安帝又怕又恨。
English: Little Huangmen Li Li and the emperor's wet nurse Wang Shengru often slandered the empress dowager's brother Zhi Jinwu and Deng Xi, saying that they wanted to abolish the emperor and set up Pingyuan Wang Ying as the emperor. An Di was both feared and hated.

古文：及太后崩，遂诛邓氏而废平原王，封闰雍乡侯；又小黄门江京以谗谄进，初迎帝于邸，以功封都乡侯，食邑各三百户。
现代文：太后逝世后，就诛杀邓氏，废平原王，封李闰为雍乡侯；又小黄门江京用花言巧语陷害别人，首先迎帝于邸，因功封都乡侯，食邑各三百户。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, he killed the Deng clan, dethroned the king of the plains, and appointed Li Li as the prince of Yongxiang; and Xiao Huangmen Jiangjing used flowery language to frame others, first welcoming the emperor at his residence, and because of his efforts, he was awarded the title of prince of townships, with three hundred households in each food village.

古文：闰、京并迁中常侍，江京兼大长秋，与中常侍樊丰、黄门令刘安、钩盾令陈达及王圣、圣女伯荣扇动内外，竞为侈虐。
现代文：李闰、江京都升中常侍，江京兼任大长秋，与中常侍樊丰、黄门令刘安、钩盾令陈达及王圣、王圣的女儿伯荣鼓动王室内外，争着为虐。
English: Li Li and Jiang Jiao were promoted to the rank of Junior Chamberlain, and Jiang Jiao concurrently held the post of Grand Chamberlain. They and Junior Chamberlain Zou Feng, Yellow Gate Warden Liu An, Hook and Shield Warden Chen Da, and Wang Sheng and Wang Sheng's daughter Bo Rong agitated the king inside and outside the palace, and fought viciously.

古文：又帝舅大将军耿宝、皇后兄大鸿胪阎显更相阿党，遂枉杀太尉杨震，废皇太子为济阴王。
现代文：又帝舅大将军耿宝、皇后的哥哥大鸿胪阎显互相结党营私，枉杀太尉杨震，废皇太子为济阴王。
English: In addition, Emperor's uncle Geng Bao and the Empress's brother, Dahong Qian Yanxian, formed a party to fight against each other, unjustly killed First Lieutenant Yang Zhen, and deposed the crown prince as the King of Jilin.

古文：明年帝崩，立北乡侯为天子。
现代文：第二年皇上逝世，立北乡侯为天子。
English: The emperor died the following year, and Kita gosho was established as the son of heaven.

古文：显等遂专朝争权，乃讽有司奏诛樊丰，废耿宝、王圣，及党与皆见死徙。
现代文：阎显等人就专朝政，争权夺利，于是暗示管事的人杀樊丰，废耿宝、王圣及他们的党羽，谪徙的谪徙，诛死的诛死。
English: Yan Xian and others were dedicated to the government, competing for power and profit, so they implied that the people in charge would kill Zifeng, waste Geng Bao, Wang Sheng and their party members, and kill the dead.

古文：十月，北乡侯病笃。
现代文：十月，北乡侯病重。
English: In October, Hokusho fell seriously ill.

古文：程谓济阴王谒者长兴渠曰： 王以嫡统，本无失德，先帝用谗，遂至废黜。
现代文：孙程对济阴王谒者长兴渠说： 济阴王是嫡统，本来就没有什么失德的地方，先帝信用谗言，就把他废黜了。
English: Sun Cheng said to Chang Xingqiu, the person who had deposed the King of Jijin: The King of Jijin was the legitimate heir, and there was nothing immoral about him in the first place. The former emperor trusted him, and deposed him.

古文：若北乡疾不起，共断江京、阎显，事乃可成。 
现代文：如果北乡侯的病不能好，大家把江京、阎显干掉，大事可以有成。 
English: If Hokkien Hou's illness doesn't get better, everyone should get rid of Jiangjing and Yanxian, and great things can be accomplished.

古文：渠等然之。
现代文：兴渠等人认为对。
English: Xingqiu and others think this is right.

古文：又中黄门南阳王康，先为太子府史，自太子之废；常怀叹愤。
现代文：又中黄门南阳王康，先是太子府史，自太子被废，常怀恨、叹息。
English: In addition, Wang Kang of Nanyang in Huangmen, the first is the history of the prince's palace, since the prince was abolished, he often holds grudges and sighs.

古文：又长乐太官丞京兆王国，并附同于程。
现代文：又长乐太官丞京兆王国，都赞同孙程的主意。
English: In addition, the Changle Grand Empress Dowager and the Prince of Jingzhao Kingdom all agreed with Sun Cheng's idea.

古文：至二十七日，北乡侯薨。
现代文：到二十七日，北乡侯病死。
English: On the 27th, Hokusho died of illness.

古文：阎显白太后，征诸五子简为帝嗣。
现代文：阎显告诉太后，征召诸王子简为帝的继承人。
English: Yan Xian told the empress dowager to recruit princes to be the emperor's successor.

古文：未及至，十一月二日，程遂与王康等十八人，聚谋于西钟下，皆戴单衣为誓。
现代文：未到，十一月二日，孙程就与王康等十八人在西钟下集合谋划，都截单衣立誓。
English: Before arriving, on November 2, Sun Cheng gathered with Wang Kang and other eighteen people under the West Clock to plan, and they all took an oath.

古文：四日夜，程等共会崇德殿上，因入章台门。
现代文：四日夜，孙程等共会崇德殿上，并进章台门。
English: On the evening of the fourth day, Sun Cheng and others gathered at the Chongde Hall and entered the Zhangdai Gate.

古文：时，江京、刘安及李闰、陈达等俱坐省门下，程与王康共就斩京、安、达，以李闰权势积为省内所服，欲引为主，因举刃胁闰曰： 今当立济阴王，无得摇动。 
现代文：这时，江京、刘安及李闰、陈达等人都坐在省门下，孙程与王康因共斩江京、刘安、陈达，因为李闰的权势大，为宫中所服，想以他为主，举刀威胁李闰说 ：现在应当立济阴王，不得动摇。 
English: At this time, Jiang Jing, Liu An, Li Li, Chen Da, and others were all sitting under the provincial gate. Sun Cheng and Wang Kang jointly killed Jiang Jing, Liu An, and Chen Da, because Li Li's power was great and he was accepted by the court. They wanted to make him the master, and they raised their swords to threaten Li Li and said, "Now it is time to set up a Jixi Yin king, we must not waver."

古文：闰曰： 诺。 
现代文：李闰说： 是。 
English: Li Li said: Yes.

古文：于是扶闰起，俱于西钟下迎济阴王立之，是为顺帝。
现代文：于是扶起李闰，大家在西钟下迎济阴王继王位，是为顺帝。
English: Therefore, Li Li was supported, and everyone welcomed the succession of King Jiyin to the throne under the western clock, which was for Shunde.

古文：召尚书令、仆射以下，从辇幸南宫云台，程等留守省门，遮扞内外。
现代文：召尚书令、仆射以下，跟着皇上的车子去南宫云台，孙程等人留守宫门，断绝内外。
English: Zhao Shuling, Zhu Ya and others followed the emperor's carriage to the South Palace of Yuntai, while Sun Cheng and others stayed at the palace gate, cutting off both inside and outside.

古文：阎显时在禁中，忧迫不知所为，小黄门樊登劝显发兵，以太后诏召越骑校尉冯诗、虎贲中郎将阎崇，屯朔平门，以御程等。
现代文：阎显这时在殿中，忧愁紧急不知怎么办，小黄门樊登劝阎显发兵，用太后诏召越骑校尉冯诗、虎贲中郎将阎崇，驻朔平门，以抵御孙程等人。
English: At this time, Yan Xian was in the palace, sad and anxious, and did not know what to do. Xiao Huangmen Xuan advised Yan Xian to send an army, and used the Empress Dowager's edict to summon Yue cavalry captain Feng Shi and Tigress middle commander Yan Chong, stationed at Shuo Pingmen, to resist Sun Cheng and others.

古文：诱诗入省，太后使授之印，曰： 能得济阴王者封万户侯，得李闰者五千户侯。 
现代文：引诱冯诗入宫，太后使人授印给他，说： 能够捉得济阴王的封万户侯，捉得李闰的封五千户侯。 
English: He lured Feng Xi into the palace, and the Empress Dowager had him awarded the seal, saying, "If you can capture the King of Jieyin, you can capture ten thousand households, and if you can capture Li Li, you can capture five thousand households."

古文：显以诗所将众少，使与登迎吏士于左掖门外。
现代文：阎显因冯诗带的兵不多，使他同樊登迎吏士于左掖门外。
English: Yan Xian did not have many soldiers because of Feng Shizhe, so he and his comrades went to greet the officials outside the Zuoying Gate.

古文：诗因格杀登，归营屯守。
现代文：冯诗杀了樊登，归营驻守。
English: Feng Shi killed Zhen Deng and returned to the camp.

古文：显弟卫尉景遽从省中还外府，收兵至盛德门。
现代文：阎显的弟弟卫尉阎景匆忙从宫中回外府，收兵至盛德门。
English: Yan Xian's younger brother, Guard Lieutenant Yan Jing, hurriedly returned to the capital from the palace and gathered troops at Shengde Gate.

古文：程传召诸尚书使收景。
现代文：孙程传召诸尚书收捕阎景。
English: Sun Cheng summoned all the monks to collect and capture Yanjing.

古文：尚书郭镇时卧病，闻之，即率直宿羽林出南止车门，逢景从吏士，拔白刃，呼白： 无干兵。 
现代文：尚书郭镇这时有病在身，听了孙程的命令，马上带领值宿羽林出南止车门，遇上阎景的随从人员，拔出白刃，大呼说： 不得用兵。 
English: Shang Shuguo, who was ill at the time, listened to Sun Cheng's order and immediately led the duty officer, Yu Lin, out of the southbound car door. When he met Yan Jing's entourage, he pulled out a white blade and shouted: "You must not use soldiers."

古文：镇即下车，持节诏之。
现代文：郭镇立即下车，拿着符诏令他。
English: Guo Zhen immediately got off the bus and ordered him to leave.

古文：景曰： 何等诏？ 
现代文：阎景说： 什么诏？ 
English: Yan Jing said, "What edict?

古文：因听镇，不中。镇引剑击景墯车，左右以戟叉其匈，遂禽之，送廷尉狱，即夜死。
现代文：因举刀斫郭镇，没有斫中，郭镇引剑击阎景堕车下，左右的人用戟叉了阎景的胸部，于是捉了阎景，送到廷尉监狱，当天晚上死了。
English: Because Guo Zhen raised his sword to strike Guo Zhen, and there was no anchor, Guo Zhen drew his sword to strike Yan Jing, who fell under the car. The people around him stabbed Yan Jing in the chest with a pickaxe, so they caught Yan Jing and sent him to Tingfu Prison, where he died that evening.

古文：旦日，令侍御史收显等送狱，于是遂定。
现代文：第二天早上，命令侍御史收捕阎显等人送狱，这样就安定了。
English: The next morning, he ordered his attendants to arrest Yan Xian and others and send them to prison, thus stabilizing the situation.

古文：下诏曰：夫表功录善，古今之通义也。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：表扬有功，奖励善行，古今的通义。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: "Praise meritorious deeds, reward good deeds, this is the common sense of the past and the present."

古文：故中常侍长乐太仆江京、黄门令刘安、钩盾令陈达与故车骑将军阎显兄弟谋议恶逆，倾乱天下。
现代文：前中常侍长乐太仆江京、黄门令刘安、钩盾令陈达与前车骑将军阎显兄弟阴谋恶逆，叛乱颠覆天下。
English: Former Vice Admiral Chang Le Taipu Jiangjing, Yellow Gate Commander Liu An, Hook Shield Commander Chen Da and former Cavalry General Yan Xian's brothers plotted evil and rebellion to subvert the world.

古文：中黄门孙程、王康、长乐太官丞王国？中黄门黄龙、彭恺、孟叔、李建、王成、张贤、史汎、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚、魏猛、苗光等，怀忠愤发，戮力协谋，遂埽灭元恶，以定王室。
现代文：中黄门孙程、王康、长乐太官丞王国、中黄门黄龙、彭恺、孟叔、李建、王成、张贤、史汛、马国、王道、李元、杨佗、陈予、赵封、李刚、魏猛、苗光等，心怀忠义，激昂慷慨，努力同心，得以扫灭大恶，安定王室。
English: Zhonghuangmen Suncheng, Wang Kang, Changle Taikanjo Kingdom, Zhonghuangmen Huanglong, Peng Quan, Meng Shu, Li Jian, Wang Cheng, Zhang Xian, Shi Quan, Ma Guo, Wang Dao, Li Yuan, Yang Quan, Chen You, Zhao Feng, Li Gang, Wei Meng, Miao Guang, etc. were loyal, impassioned and generous, and made concerted efforts to eliminate evil and stabilize the royal family.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 无言不雠，元德不报。 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗 ：没有不对答的话，没有不报答的德。 
English: Didn't "Poetry" say: There is no such thing as an unanswerable word, no such thing as an unrequited virtue?

古文：程为谋首，康、国协同。
现代文：孙程作谋主，王康、王国协同一致。
English: Sun Cheng was the mastermind, and Wang Kang and the kingdom acted in concert.

古文：其封程为浮阳侯，食邑五户；康为华容侯，国为郦侯，各九千户；黄龙为湘南侯，五千户；彭恺为西平昌侯，孟叔为中庐侯，李建为复阳侯，各四千二百户；王成为广宗侯，张贤为祝阿侯，史汎为临沮侯，马国为文平侯，王道为范县侯，李元为褒信侯，杨佗为山都侯，陈予为下侯，赵封为析县侯，李刚为枝江侯，各四千户；魏猛为夷陵侯，二千户；苗光为东阿侯，千户。
现代文：现在封孙程为浮阳侯，食邑万户；王康为华容侯，王国为郦侯，各九千户；黄龙为湘南侯，五千户，彭恺为西平昌侯，孟叔为中庐侯，李建为复阳侯，各四千二百户；王成为广宗侯，张贤为祝阿侯，史汛为临沮侯，马国为广平侯，王道为范县侯，李元为褒信侯，杨佗为山都侯，陈予为下隽侯，赵封为析县侯，李刚为枝江侯，各四千户；魏猛为夷陵侯，二千户；苗光为东阿侯，千户。 
English: At present, Fongsun Cheng is the lord of Fuyang, with 10,000 households in the food village; Wang Kang is the lord of Huarong, with 9,000 households in the kingdom; Huanglong is the lord of Shonan, with 5,000 households; Peng Yao is the lord of Xipingchang, Meng Shou is the lord of Zhongyao, Li Jian is the lord of Fuyang, with 4,200 households in each; Wang is the lord of Guangzong, Zhang Xian is the lord of Zhu'a, Shi Yan is the lord of Lin De, Ma Guo is the lord of Guangping, Wang Dao is the lord of Fan County, Li Yuan is

古文：是为十九侯。
现代文：是为十九侯。
English: He was the 19th lord.

古文：加赐车、马、金、银、钱、帛，各有差。
现代文：加赐车马金银钱帛多少有别。
English: There is a difference in how much money is made by adding cars, horses, gold and silver.

古文：李闰以先不豫谋，故不封。
现代文：李闰因先前没有参加谋划，故不封。
English: As Li Li did not previously participate in the planning, she was not arrested.

古文：遂擢拜程骑都尉。
现代文：升授孙程为骑都尉。
English: Sun Cheng was promoted to cavalry captain.

古文：永建元年，程与张贤、孟叔、马国等为司隶校尉虞诩讼罪，怀表上殿，呵叱左右。
现代文：永建元年，孙程与张贤、孟叔、马国等替司隶校尉虞诩申诉，拿着表文上殿，呵叱左右。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, Sun Cheng, together with Zhang Xian, Meng Shu, Ma Guo, and other deputies, appealed to the officer-in-charge, Colonel Yu Qi, took the form to the palace, and scolded him.

古文：帝怒，遂免程官，因悉遣十九侯就国，后徙封程为宜城侯。
现代文：皇上发怒，因免了孙程的官职，所封十九侯统统遣送归封地，后来徙封孙程为宜城侯。
English: The emperor was so angry that he relieved Sun Cheng of his official position, and all of the nineteen feudal lords were sent back to their fiefdoms. Later, Sun Cheng became the feudal lord of Yicheng.

古文：程既到国，怨恨恚怼，封还印绶、符策，亡归京师，往来山中。
现代文：孙程到封地之后，愤愤怨恨，封还印绶、符节，逃归京师，往来山中。
English: After Sun Cheng arrived at the fief, he was angry and resentful, returned the seal and seal, fled to Beijing, and went back and forth in the mountains.

古文：诏书追求，复故爵士，赐车马衣物，遣还国。
现代文：诏书追召他，恢复原来的爵土，赐车马衣物，遣送归国。
English: The imperial edict summoned him, restored his former lands, gave him a carriage, horses, and clothing, and sent him back to his country.

古文：三年，帝念程等功勋，悉征还京师。
现代文：三年，皇上念及孙程等人的功勋，都征回京师。
English: In three years, the emperor recalled the merits of Sun Cheng and others, and they were all conscripted back to Beijing.

古文：程与王道、李元皆拜骑都尉，余悉奉朝请。
现代文：孙程与王道、李元都授骑都尉，其余的为奉朝请。
English: Sun Cheng, Wang Dao, and Li Yuan were all given the rank of cavalry captain, and the rest were asked to serve the emperor.

古文：阳嘉元年，程病甚，即拜奉车都尉，位特进。
现代文：阳嘉元年，孙程病得厉害，就授他奉车都尉，位特进。
English: In the first year of the Yang Jia era, Sun Cheng was seriously ill, so he was awarded the rank of Fengche Duifeng and promoted to the special rank.

古文：及卒，使五官中郎将追赠车骑将军印绶，赐谥刚侯。
现代文：死后，使五官中郎将追赠车骑将军印绶，赐谥刚侯。
English: After his death, so that the five officials in the middle will be posthumously awarded the chariot and cavalry general's seal, and will be awarded the crown prince.

古文：侍御史持节监护丧事，乘舆幸北部尉传，瞻望车骑。
现代文：侍御史持节监护丧事，皇上去北部尉传言，看望车骑。
English: The palace attendant, Shi Jichijie, oversaw the funeral, and the emperor went to see the carriage ride.

古文：程临终，遗言上书，以国传弟美。
现代文：孙程临终时，遗言上书，把封国传给弟弟孙美。
English: When Sun Cheng was on his deathbed, he wrote his last words, passing the fief to his brother Sun Mei.

古文：帝许之，而分程半，封程养子寿为浮阳侯。
现代文：皇上答应了他的请求，但分孙程封地一半，封孙程养子孙寿为浮阳侯。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, but he gave half of the fief to Cheng's grandson, and made Cheng's grandson and his son-in-law Fuyang Hou (浮阳侯).

古文：后诏书录微功，封兴渠为高望亭侯。
现代文：后来诏书奖励微功，封兴渠为高望亭侯。
English: Later, the imperial edict rewarded feeble efforts, and Fong Xingqiu became the prince of Gaowangting.

古文：四年，诏宦官养子悉听得为后，袭封爵，定著乎令。
现代文：四年，诏令宦官养子都得为宦官后代，袭封爵，著为法令。
English: In four years, the Imperial Edict decreed that the adopted sons of eunuchs had to be the descendants of eunuchs, and they had to be knighted.

古文：王康、王国、彭恺、王成、赵封、魏猛六人皆早卒。
现代文：王康、王国、彭恺、王成、赵封、魏猛六个人都死得早。
English: Wang Kang, Wang Guo, Peng Yao, Wang Cheng, Zhao Feng and Wei Menglu, all six died prematurely.

古文：黄龙、杨佗、孟叔、李建、张贤、史汎、王道、李元，李刚九人与阿母山阳君宋娥更相货赂，求高官增邑，又诬罔中常侍曹腾、孟贲等。
现代文：黄龙、杨佗、孟叔、李建、张贤、史汛、王道、李元、李刚九人与阿母山阳君宋娥更相贿赂，求高官，增加食邑，又诬罔中常侍曹腾、孟贲等。
English: Huang Long, Yang Hui, Meng Shou, Li Jian, Zhang Xian, Shi Min, Wang Dao, Li Yuan and Li Gang, together with Amo Sanyangjun Song E, bribed each other, solicited high-ranking officials, increased the number of food villages, and falsely accused the middle-ranking attendants Cao Teng and Meng Jun.

古文：永和二年，发觉，并遣就国，减祖四分之一。
现代文：永和二年，发觉，都被遣送就国，减租四分之一。
English: Two years later, when they were discovered, they were all sent back to their home countries and their rent was reduced by a quarter.

古文：宋娥夺爵归田舍。
现代文：宋娥被夺爵归田舍。
English: Song E was stripped of her title and returned to her farm.

古文：唯马国、陈予、苗光保全封邑。
现代文：只有马国、陈予、苗光保全封邑。
English: Only Ma Guo, Chen You and Miao Guang were able to keep their fiefs.

古文：初，帝见废，监太子家小黄门籍建、傅高梵、长秋长赵熹、丞良贺、药长夏珍皆以无过获罪，建等坐徙朔方。
现代文：先时，帝被废黜，监太子家小黄门籍建、傅高梵、长秋长赵熹、丞良贺、药长夏珍都以无过获罪，籍建等因徙朔方。
English: Previously, when the emperor was deposed, the procurators of the prince's family, Xiao Huangmen, Qi Jian, Fu Gaobang, Changqiu, Zhao Wei, Zheng Lianghe, and Yaochang, Xia Zhen, were all found guilty of no fault, and Qi Jian and others were exiled.

古文：及帝即位，并擢为中常侍。
现代文：及帝即位，都升为中常侍。
English: Upon the enthronement of the emperor, they were all promoted to the rank of middle-ranking attendants.

古文：梵坐臧罪，减死一等。
现代文：高梵犯赃罪，减死一等。
English: Gao Fan was given a first-class commutation of death sentence for the crime of sedition.

古文：建后封东乡侯，三百户。
现代文：籍建后来封东乡侯，三百户。
English: He was born and raised in Fongdong Township, which has 300 households.

古文：贺清俭退厚，位至大长秋。
现代文：良贺清俭谦退又厚重，位至大长秋。
English: Lianghe's purity, frugality, modesty and humility are profound, reaching as far as the Great Changchun.

古文：阳嘉中，诏九卿举武猛，贺独无所荐。
现代文：阳嘉中，诏令九卿举武猛人才，良贺独无所推荐。
English: In Yangjia, the emperor ordered the nine generals to raise the military talent, and Lianghe alone has nothing to recommend.

古文：帝引问其故，对曰： 臣生自草茅，长于宫掖，既无知人之明，又未尝交知士类。
现代文：皇上召见他问是什么原因，良贺回答说 ：我生于农村，在宫廷中成长，既无知人之明，又没有与知识分子交朋友。
English: The emperor summoned him to ask what the reason was, and Ryoga replied: "I was born in the countryside and grew up in the court. I am ignorant and have not made friends with intellectuals.

古文：昔卫鞅因景监以见，有识知其不终。
现代文：从前卫鞅因景监得见秦王，有识的人知道他不会有好结果。
English: From the avant-garde to the scene inspector, people with insight know that he will not have a good result.

古文：今得臣举者，匪荣伊辱。 
现代文：现在得臣举荐的，不是光荣，而是可辱。 
English: To be recommended by a vassal now is not an honor, but a disgrace.

古文：固辞之。
现代文：坚决不举。
English: Resolutely not.

古文：及卒，帝思贺忠，封其养子为都乡侯，三百户。
现代文：死后，帝思良贺忠诚，封他的养子为都乡侯，三百户。
English: After his death, Emperor Lianghe was loyal and made his adopted son the lord of 300 households in the capital.

古文：曹腾字季兴，沛国谯人也。
现代文：◆曹腾传，曹腾字季兴，沛国谯县人。
English: ◆Cao Teng Chuan, Cao Teng Zi Jixing, a native of Peiguo County.

古文：安帝时，除黄门从官。
现代文：安帝时，授黄门从官。
English: At the time of Emperor An, Huangmen was given an official post.

古文：顺帝在东官，邓太后以腾年少谨厚，使侍皇太子书，特见亲爱。
现代文：顺帝做皇太子时，邓太后因曹腾年轻谨慎厚重，使他侍候皇太子读书，特别亲爱。
English: When Emperor Shun was crown prince, Empress Dowager Deng, because Cao Teng was young and prudent, made him wait for the crown prince to study. He was especially dear to her.

古文：及帝即位，腾为小黄门，迁中常侍。
现代文：顺帝即位，曹腾任小黄门，升中常侍。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended the throne, Cao Teng was appointed as a minor Huangmen and promoted to the rank of junior attendant.

古文：桓帝得立，腾与长乐太仆州辅等七人，以定策功，皆封亭侯，腾为费亭侯，迁大长秋，加位特进。
现代文：桓帝立，曹腾与长乐太仆州辅等七人，因定策有功，都封为亭侯，曹腾为费亭侯，升大长秋，加位特进。
English: Seven people, including Huan Dili, Cao Teng and Changle Taipuzhou Fu, were awarded the title of Prince, Cao Teng was awarded the title of Fei Ting Hou, and Changqiu was promoted to a higher rank.

古文：腾用事省闼三十余年，奉事四帝，未尝有过。
现代文：曹腾在宫中任事三十余年，事四帝，从来没有过错。
English: Cao Teng has been working in the palace for more than 30 years and has never done anything wrong.

古文：其所进达，皆海内名人，陈留虞放、边韶、南阳延固、张温、弘农张奂、颍川堂谿典等。
现代文：他所推荐的，都是海内名人，陈留虞放、边韶、南阳延固、张温、弘农张奂、颍川堂奚谷典等。
English: The ones he recommended were all famous people from overseas, such as Chen Liugufang, Bianluo, Nanyang Yenggu, Zhang Wen, Hongnong Zhang Rong, and Shichuan Hall Shigetan.

古文：时蜀郡太守因计吏赂遗于腾，益州刺史种暠于斜谷关搜得其书，上奏太守，并以劾腾，请下廷尉案罪。
现代文：当时蜀郡太守因计吏向曹腾行贿，益州刺史种詗于斜谷关搜得太守给曹腾的信，上奏蜀郡太守，并因此劾曹腾，请下廷尉治罪。
English: At that time, the governor of Shu County, because of the bribe paid to Cao Teng by the accountant, sent a letter to the governor of Shu County, and impeached Cao Teng, and asked the courtier to punish him.

古文：帝曰： 书自外来，非腾之过。 
现代文：桓帝说： 书自外面来，不是曹腾的过。 
English: Emperor Kantei said: The book came from outside, it was not Cao Teng's fault.

古文：遂寝暠奏。
现代文：就没有准种詗的奏。
English: There is no such thing as a perfect harp.

古文：腾不为纤介，常称暠为能吏，时人嗟美之。
现代文：曹腾不把它放在心中，经常说种詗是个能干的官吏，当时人赞美曹腾的为人。
English: Cao Teng did not take it to heart and often said that Zeng Yao was an able official. At that time, people praised Cao Teng as a person.

古文：腾卒，养子嵩嗣。
现代文：曹腾逝世，养子曹嵩继嗣。
English: Cao Teng died and was succeeded by his adopted son Cao Song.

古文：种暠后为司徒，告宾客曰： 今身为公，乃曹常侍力焉。 
现代文：种詗后来做司徒，告诉宾客说： 现在我为公，是曹常侍出的力啊。 
English: Later, when he became a magistrate, he told the guests: "Now I am a public servant, and it is Cao Chang who has served me.

古文：嵩灵帝时货赂中官及输西园钱一亿万，故位至太尉。
现代文：曹嵩在灵帝时，贿赂中官及输西园钱一亿万，故位太尉。
English: When Cao Song was the spiritual emperor, he bribed a middle-ranking official and lost a hundred million yuan of money in the West Park. He was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：及子操起兵，不肯相随，乃与少子疾避乱琅邪，为徐州刺史陶谦所杀。
现代文：儿子曹操起兵，曹嵩不肯相从，于是与少子曹疾避乱琅邪，被徐州刺史陶谦所杀。
English: Cao Cao's son raised an army, but Cao Song refused to obey, so Cao Cao and his younger son Cao Ji avoided the chaos and evil, and were killed by the Xuzhou assassin Tao Qian.

古文：单超，河南人；徐璜，下邳良城人；具瑗，魏郡元城人；左悺，河南平阴人；唐衡，颍川郾人也。
现代文：◆单超传，单超，河南人；徐璜，下邳良城人，具瑗，魏郡元城人；左忄官，河南平阴人；唐衡，颍川郾人。
English: ◆ Shan Chaofeng, Shan Chaofeng, from Henan Province; Xu Luo, from Liangcheng, Lower Henan Province; Gu Gu, from Yuancheng, Wei County; Zuo Yukan, from Pingyin, Henan Province; Tang Heng, from Qianchuan, Hebei Province.

古文：桓帝初，超、璜、瑗为中常侍，悺、衡为小黄门史。
现代文：桓帝初年，超、璜、瑗任中常侍，忄官、衡任小黄门史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Kan, Cho, So, and So were appointed to the posts of middle and regular attendants, eunuchs, and Heng was appointed to the post of minor Huangmenshi.

古文：初，梁冀两妹为顺、桓二帝皇后，冀代父商为大将军，再世权威，威振天下。
现代文：起先，梁冀的两个妹妹是顺帝、桓帝二帝的皇后，梁冀代父亲梁商任大将军，两世权威，威震天下。
English: At first, the two younger sisters of Liang Jie were the empresses of Emperor Shun and Emperor Huan, and Liang Jie's father Liang Shang was the general, the authority of two generations, and the world.

古文：冀自诛太尉李固、杜乔等，骄横益甚，皇后乘势忌恣，多所鸩毒，上下钳口，莫有言者。
现代文：梁冀自从杀了太尉李固、杜乔之后，更加骄傲横暴，皇后也乘势嫉忌放肆，在宫里毒杀不少人，上下的人都不敢说话。
English: Since Liang Jie killed the first lieutenants Li Gu and Du Qiao, he became even more arrogant and violent. The empress also took advantage of her cynicism and arrogance to poison many people in the palace. People at all levels were afraid to speak out.

古文：帝逼畏久，恒怀不平，恐言泄，不敢谋之。
现代文：帝被逼畏惧，常怀不平，害怕事机泄漏，不敢谋划处理他们。
English: The emperor was afraid of being forced, often complained, was afraid of things leaking out, and did not dare to plan to deal with them.

古文：延熹二年，皇后崩，帝因如厕，独呼衡问： 左右与外舍不相得者皆谁乎？ 
现代文：延熹二年，皇后逝世，帝借上厕所的时机，独喊了唐衡问道： 左右的人与皇后家不好的是谁呢？ 
English: Two years later, when the empress passed away, the emperor took the opportunity to go to the toilet and called Tang Heng to ask: Who are the bad people around the empress?

古文：衡对曰： 单超、左悺前诣河南尹不疑，礼敬小简，不疑收其兄弟送洛阳狱，二人诣门谢，乃得解。
现代文：唐衡回答说 ：单超、左忄官以前去河南尹不疑，送的礼物不多，不疑收捕了他们的兄弟送洛阳狱，二人跑到他那里认错，才得没有治罪。
English: Tang Heng replied, "There is no doubt that Shanchao and Zuo Yukan went to Henan before Yin, but they did not give many gifts. There is no doubt that they arrested their brother and sent him to Luoyang Prison. The two of them ran to him to confess their mistakes, but they were not punished.

古文：徐璜、具瑗常私忿疾外舍放横，口不敢道。 
现代文：徐璜、具瑗经常痛恨皇后家人横暴，只是口不敢说。 
English: Xu Yao and Gu Yao often hated the violence of the empress's family, but they dared not say so.

古文：于是帝呼超、悺入室，谓曰： 梁将军兄弟专固国朝，迫胁外内，公卿以下从其风旨。今欲诛之，于常侍意何如？ 
现代文：于是帝叫了单超、左忄官到他的室内，说： 梁将军兄弟专权朝廷，压迫威胁内外，公卿以下都跟着他们跑，现在我想诛杀他们，常侍的意思怎么样？ 
English: Then the emperor called Shanchao and Zuoyuan to his room and said, "General Liang and his brothers are the absolute power of the imperial court, oppressing and threatening both at home and abroad, and the nobles and others are running after them. Now I want to fight and kill them. What is the meaning of the regular attendants?"

古文：超等对曰： 诚国奸贼，当诛日久。
现代文：单超等人回答道 ：真正是国家的奸贼，早当诛杀的。
English: Shanchao and the others replied, "They are truly traitors to the country and should have been killed long ago."

古文：臣等弱劣，未知圣意何如耳。 
现代文：我们懦弱无能，不知皇上的意思如何罢了。 
English: We are weak and incompetent, and do not know what the Emperor wants.

古文：帝曰： 审然者，常侍密图之。 
现代文：帝说 ：既然是这样的，常侍秘密进行好了。 
English: The emperor said, "Since this is the case, it is best for the regular attendants to keep it a secret."

古文：对曰： 图之不难，但恐陛下复中狐疑。 
现代文：回答说： 进行不难，只怕皇上再狐疑反复。 
English: He replied, "It is not difficult to do, but I am afraid that the emperor will hesitate again and again.

古文：帝曰： 奸臣胁国，当伏其罪，何疑乎！ 
现代文：帝说： 奸臣威胁国家，应当伏罪，有什么犹疑啊！ 
English: The emperor said, "If a traitor threatens the country, he should be ambushed. What hesitation!

古文：于是更召璜、瑗等五人，遂定其议，帝啮超臂出血为盟，于是超收冀及宗亲党与悉诛之。
现代文：于是再召集徐璜、具瑗等五人，就定了诛杀梁氏之议。帝咬单超臂出血为盟。于是下诏收捕梁冀及宗室党羽，统统杀掉。
English: Therefore, five people, including Xu Xi and Gu Xi, were called together again, and they decided to kill the Liang clan. The emperor was a great ally. Therefore, the imperial edict was issued to arrest Liang Jie and his family members, and they were all killed.

古文：悺、衡迁中常侍。封超新丰侯，二万户，璜武原侯，瑗东武阳侯，各万五千户，赐钱各千五百万；悺上蔡侯，衡汝阳侯，各万三千户，赐钱各千三百万。
现代文：左忄官、唐衡升中常侍，封单超新丰侯，二万户，徐璜武原侯，具瑗东武阳侯，各万五千户，赐钱各千五百万，左忄官上蔡侯、唐衡汝阳侯，各万三千户，赐钱各千三百万。
English: The left eunuch, Tang Heng Sheng's middle-ranking attendant, had a list of more than 20,000 households in the new Feng Hou, 15,000 households each in the Xu Xi Wu Yuan Hou, and 15,000 households each in the East Wuyang Hou Hou, and granted money of 15 million each, and 3,000 households each in the upper eunuch Cai Hou and Tang Heng Ruyang Hou, and granted money of 13 million.

古文：五人同日封，故世谓之 五侯 。
现代文：五人同日封，所以当时叫做 五侯 。
English: Five people were knighted on the same day, so people called them the Five Knights.

古文：又封小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人为乡侯。
现代文：又封小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人为乡侯。
English: Xiao Huangmen Liu Pu, Zhao Zhong and eight others were also named as townspeople.

古文：自是权归宦官，朝廷日乱矣。
现代文：从此权归宦官，朝廷一天一天地乱了。
English: From this time on, power reverted to the eunuchs, and the imperial court became more and more chaotic.

古文：超病，帝遣使者就拜车骑将军。
现代文：单超病了，帝派使者授他为车骑将军。
English: When he fell ill, the emperor sent an envoy to give him the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：明年薨，赐东园秘器，棺中玉具，赠侯将军印绶，使者理丧。
现代文：第二年逝世，赐棺木，棺中玉具，赠侯将军印绶，使者办丧事。
English: He died the following year, and was given a coffin, a jade object in the coffin, the general's seal as a gift, and an emissary to handle the funeral.

古文：及葬，发五营骑士，侍御史护丧，将作大匠起冢茔。
现代文：下葬时，发五营骑士、侍御史保护丧车，将作大匠筑冢茔。
English: At the time of burial, five battalions of knights and attendants will be sent to protect the hearse, and a great craftsman will be made to build the coffin.

古文：其后四侯转横，天下为之语曰： 左回天，具独坐，徐卧虎，唐两墯。 
现代文：后来四侯横暴，天下流行这样的话： 左回天，具独坐，徐卧虎，唐两惰。 
English: Later, the four towns were violent, and the following words became popular: Zu Haotian (左回天), Gu Duxian (具独坐), Xu Crouching Tiger (徐卧虎), Tang Two Lazy (唐两惰).

古文：皆竞起第宅，楼观壮丽，穷极伎巧。
现代文：都争着盖住宅，楼观壮丽，穷极技巧。
English: They are all competing to build residences, magnificent buildings, and extreme skills.

古文：金银罽耳毛，施于犬马。
现代文：金银毛织品，装饰大马。
English: Gold and silver wool fabric, decorated with horses.

古文：多取良人美女以为姬妾，皆珍饰华侈，拟则宫人，其仆从皆乘牛车而从列骑。
现代文：又多娶良人美女以为姬妾，都打扮得华丽奢侈，比拟宫人。他们的仆从都乘车马，列骑随从。
English: And many married fine and beautiful women, who were thought to be concubines, were dressed in magnificent luxury, comparable to courtiers. Their servants all rode in chariots and on horses, and followed them in cavalcades.

古文：又养其疏属，或乞嗣异姓，或买苍头为子，并以传国袭封。
现代文：又养他们的疏属，有的还求嗣异姓，有的买奴仆为儿子，都能传国袭封。
English: They also brought up their distant relatives, some of whom also asked for an heir with a different surname, and some of whom bought a slave as a son, all of whom were able to inherit the country.

古文：兄弟姻戚皆宰州临郡，辜较百姓，与盗贼无异。
现代文：兄弟姻戚都是州郡大吏，剥夺百姓，与盗贼没有什么分别。
English: Brothers and relatives by marriage are all state and county officials, depriving the people, and there is no difference between them and thieves.

古文：超弟安为河东太守，弟子匡为济阴太守，璜弟盛为河内太守，悺弟敏为陈留太守，瑗兄恭为沛相，皆为所在蠹害。
现代文：单超的弟弟单安为河东太守，弟弟的儿子单匡为济阴太守，徐璜的哥哥徐盛为河内太守，左忄官的弟弟左敏为陈留太守，具瑗的哥哥具恭为沛相，都是当地的害虫。
English: Shanchao's brother Shan'an was the governor of Hedong Province, his brother's son Shankuang was the governor of Jiyin Province, Xu Yao's brother Xu Sheng was the governor of Hanoi Province, Zu Min, the brother of Zu Yao, was the governor of Chenlu Province, and Gu Xiong, the brother of Gu Yao, was the governor of Peixiang Province. They were all local pests.

古文：璜兄子宣为下邳令，暴虐尤甚。
现代文：徐璜的兄子徐王宣任下邳令，特别暴虐。
English: Xu Yao's brother, Xu Wang Xuan, was appointed to issue the imperial edict, which was particularly tyrannical.

古文：先是，求故汝南太守下邳李暠女不能得，及到县，遂将吏卒至暠家，载其女归，戏射杀之，埋著寺内。
现代文：先时求前汝南太守下邳李詗女不得，到县时就派吏卒到李詗家，用车把女弄回来，射死她开玩笑，埋在官舍里。
English: At the request of the former Runnan governor-general, when he arrived at the county, he sent an officer to Li Yan's house, brought her back by car, shot her to death as a joke, and buried her in the official residence.

古文：时，下邳县属东海，汝南黄浮为东海相，有告言宣者，浮乃收宣家属，无少长悉考之。
现代文：当时下邳县属东海，汝南黄浮为东海相，有人告发徐王宣的事，黄浮于是收捕了徐王宣家属，不管老少，都拷打审问。
English: At that time, Heshan County belonged to the East China Sea, and Runan Huangfu was the East China Sea Minister. Someone reported the matter of Xu Wangxuan. Huangfu then arrested the family members of Xu Wangxuan, both old and young, and tortured and interrogated them.

古文：掾史以下固谏争。浮曰： 徐宣国贼，今日杀之，明日坐死，足以瞑目矣。 
现代文：掾史以下竭力劝阻黄浮，黄浮说： 徐王宣国贼，今天杀了他，明天坐罪死，可以闭目了。 
English: Zou Shi then tried his best to dissuade Huang Fu. Huang Fu said, "Xu Wang Xuan is a traitor, kill him today, he will die tomorrow, you can close your eyes now."

古文：即案宣罪弃市，暴其尸以示百姓，郡中震栗。
现代文：就根据徐王宣的罪行弃市，暴露他的尸体，使百姓看，郡中震惊害怕。
English: According to the crimes of Xu Wangxuan, he abandoned the city, exposed his body, and made the people see. The county was shocked and afraid.

古文：璜于是诉怨于帝，帝大怒，浮坐髡钳，输作右校。
现代文：徐璜于是向皇上诉苦，皇上大怒，剃去黄浮的头发，用铁圈束着他的颈，送右校劳改。
English: Xu Xi then appealed to the emperor, and the emperor was furious, shaved off his yellow hair, tied his neck with an iron collar, and sent him to the Right School for Reform through Labor.

古文：五侯宗族宾客虐遍天下，民不堪命，起为寇贼。
现代文：五侯宗族宾客危害天下，老百姓无法活命，被迫起来为寇贼。
English: The guests of the Five Princes and their families endanger the whole country. The common people cannot survive and are forced to rise up as bandits.

古文：七年，衡卒，亦赠车骑将军，如超故事。
现代文：七年，唐衡死了，也赠车骑将军，与单超一样。
English: In the seventh year, Tang Heng died, and he was also given a car to ride the general, the same as the single super.

古文：璜卒，赙赠钱布，赐冢茔地。
现代文：徐璜死了，送吊仪钱布，赐冢茔地。
English: When Xu Yao died, he was given a hanging device, money, and land.

古文：明年，司隶校尉韩演因奏悺罪恶，及其兄太仆南乡侯称请托州郡，聚敛为奸，宾客放纵，侵犯吏民。
现代文：第二年，司隶校尉韩演因奏左忄官罪恶，和他的哥哥太仆南乡侯称请托州郡，拉关系，聚敛为奸，宾客放纵，侵害官吏百姓。
English: In the second year, Sili Captain Han Rong, because of the sin of the left eunuch, and his brother Nan Xiangwu, called Toshou County, pulled relations, gathered as a traitor, indulged guests, and infringed on officials and the people.

古文：悺、称皆自杀。
现代文：左忄官、左称都自杀。
English: Both the left eunuch and the left prelate committed suicide.

古文：演又奏瑗兄沛相恭臧罪，征诣廷尉。
现代文：韩演又奏具瑗的哥哥沛相具恭贪赃，征召至廷尉。
English: Han Yun's elder brother, Pei Xiang, who also played the role of Gong, was conscripted as a court lieutenant.

古文：瑗诣狱谢，上还东武侯印绶，诏贬为都乡侯，卒于家。
现代文：具瑗去廷尉狱请罪，上还东武侯印绶，诏令贬为都乡侯，死在家里。
English: Gu Ying went to the imperial lieutenant prison to plead guilty, and he was returned to the Dongwu marquis, and the imperial decree was reduced to the capital township marquis, and he died at home.

古文：超及璜、衡袭封者，并降为乡侯，租入岁皆三百万，子弟分封者，悉夺爵土。
现代文：单超及徐璜、唐衡袭封的都降为乡侯，租入岁都三百万，子弟分封的，都剥夺爵土。
English: Shanchao, Xu Xi, and Tang Heng, who inherited the fiefs, were all reduced to the status of townspeople, with a rent of three million years, and their children were all deprived of the land.

古文：刘普等贬为关内侯。
现代文：刘普等贬为关内侯。
English: Liu Pu and others were relegated to the position of Guanai Hou.

古文：侯览者，山阳防东人。
现代文：◆侯览传，侯览，山阳防东人。
English: ◆Hoshang Chuan, Hoshang, Shanyang Dongren.

古文：桓帝初为中常侍，以佞猾进，倚势贪放，受纳货遗以巨万计。
现代文：桓帝初年为中常侍，善于谄媚狡猾，得到桓帝宠信。倚靠权势贪污无度，接受贿赂以巨万计。
English: In the first year of Emperor Kuan, he was a middle-ranking attendant. He was good at being charming and cunning, and was favored by Emperor Kuan. He relied on his power to commit corruption, and accepted bribes in the millions.

古文：延熹中，连岁征伐，府帑空虚，乃假百官奉禄，王侯租锐。
现代文：延熹中，连年征伐用兵，国家空虚，于是借百官的俸禄，王侯的租税。
English: In the middle of the Yangtze River, successive years of conscription and the use of soldiers, the country was empty, so he borrowed the salaries of hundreds of officials and the taxes of princes.

古文：览亦上缣五千匹，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：侯览也拿出缣五千匹来，赐爵关内侯。
English: The Marquis also brought out five thousand yakitori to bestow a peerage on the Marquis of Kansai.

古文：又托以与议诛梁冀功，进封高乡侯。
现代文：又借口与议诛梁冀有功，晋封高乡侯。
English: On the other hand, Liang Jie was promoted to Gao Xianghou on the pretext that he had made great contributions.

古文：小黄门段珪家在济阴，与览并立田业，近济北界，仆从宾客侵犯百姓，劫掠行旅。济北相滕延一切收捕，杀数十人，陈尸路衢。
现代文：小黄门段王圭家在济阴，同侯览都置田业，接近济北界，仆从宾客侵扰百姓，抢劫行旅，济北相滕延把他们全部收捕，杀了数十人，暴尸道路。
English: Xiao Huangmen Duan Wang Gui's family is in Jilin, and he and his concubine have set up a farm, close to the northern border of Jilin Province. The servants of the guests harassed the people, robbed and traveled, and the north side of Jilin Province arrested them all, killed dozens of people, and the road was full of dead bodies.

古文：览、珪大怨，以事诉帝，延坐多杀无辜，征诣廷尉，免。
现代文：侯览、段王圭怨恨到了极点，把这事告诉了皇上，滕延以多杀无罪，征召至廷尉，免了他的济北相。
English: Hou Zhan and Duan Wang Gui were extremely resentful and told the emperor about this. Teng Yan was found not guilty of multiple homicide and was conscripted as a court lieutenant, but his position as Jibei minister was exempted.

古文：延字伯行，北海人，后为京兆尹，有理名，世称为长者。
现代文：滕延字伯行，北海人，后为京兆尹，有善治理的好名声，人叫他为长者。
English: Teng Yan's character was Bo Xing, a man from the North Sea, later known as Jing Zhaoyun. He had a good reputation for good governance, and people called him the Elder.

古文：览等得此愈放纵。
现代文：侯览等因此更加放纵，胡作非为。
English: As a result, hoshangs and the like are more indulgent and indulge in illegal activities.

古文：览兄参为益州刺史，民有丰富者，辄诬以大逆，皆诛灭之，没入财物，前后累亿计。
现代文：侯览的哥哥侯参任益州刺史，老百姓富裕一点的，动辄诬陷他大逆不道，都诛杀掉，然后没收他的财物，前前后后加起来以亿计。
English: Hou Zhan's brother, Hou Zhan, was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou. The people, who were more affluent, often framed him as a traitor, killed him, and then confiscated his property, adding up to hundreds of millions.

古文：太尉杨秉奏参，槛车征，于道自杀。
现代文：太尉杨秉奏侯参，用囚车征召，在路上自杀。
English: Second Lieutenant Yang Bingsuo, called up in a prisoner transport vehicle, committed suicide on the road.

古文：京兆尹袁逢于旅舍，阅参车三百余两，皆金银锦帛珍玩，不可胜数。
现代文：京兆尹袁逢在旅舍看了侯参的三百余辆车子，都是载的金银锦帛珍玩，不可胜数。
English: Jing Zhaoyun Yuanfeng saw more than three hundred cars of Hou Zhan in the hostel, all of which were loaded with gold, silver, brocade and precious stones, countless.

古文：览坐免，旋复复官。
现代文：侯览因罪免官，没有多久，又官复原职。
English: Hoshang was removed from office for his crime, but was reinstated not long after.

古文：建宁二年，丧母还家，大起茔冢。
现代文：建宁二年，因母亲逝世回家，大起坟墓。
English: In the second year of Jianning, due to the death of his mother, he came home and dug up the grave.

古文：督邮张俭因举奏览贪侈奢纵，前后请夺人宅三百八十一所，田百一十八顷。
现代文：督邮张俭因举奏侯览贪污奢侈，无所不为，前后夺人住宅三百八十一所，田百一十八顷。
English: Zhang Jian, the postmaster-general, was accused of corruption and extravagance, and he did not hesitate to do anything. He owned 381 houses and 118 hectares of farmland.

古文：起立第宅十有六区，皆有高楼池苑，堂阁相望，饰以绮画丹漆之属，制度重深，僭类宫省。
现代文：建筑第宅十有六区，都有高楼池苑，堂阁相望，用绮画丹素装饰起来，制度重深，类似宫殿。
English: There are six districts in the 10th house of architecture, all of which have high-rise ponds, courtyards and pavilions overlooking each other, decorated with paintings and sculptures, with a deep system, similar to a palace.

古文：又豫作寿冢，石椁双阙，高庑百尺，破人居室，发掘坟墓。
现代文：又预先作生人坟墓，石椁双阙，堂下周屋，高达百尺，打破人家的住宅，发掘别人坟墓。
English: They also built tombs for the living in advance, with double-height stone coffins and side-by-side houses, up to a hundred feet high. They broke down people's houses and excavated other people's graves.

古文：虏夺良人，妻略妇子，及诸罪衅，请诛之。
现代文：掳夺良人，抢掠妇女，以及各种罪恶，请即诛杀他。
English: Take him and kill him at once, for kidnapping lovers, for robbing women, and for all kinds of evil.

古文：而览伺候遮截，章竟不上。
现代文：侯览打听了消息，阻截了张俭的上奏。
English: Hou Xiang inquired about the news and cut off Zhang Jian's upbeat.

古文：俭遂破览冢宅，藉没资财，具言罪状。
现代文：张俭于是打破侯览的冢宅，没收了他的资财，全部揭露侯览罪状。
English: Zhang Jian then broke into Houshan's house, confiscated his money and property, and exposed all of Houshan's crimes.

古文：又奏览母生时交通宾客，干乱郡国。复不得御。
现代文：又奏侯览的母亲在生时交通宾客，干乱郡国，奏书又不得进。
English: In addition, the mother of So-ho-chan was a traffic guest during her lifetime, which disturbed the county and the country. So-ho-chan was not allowed to enter.

古文：览遂诬俭为钩党，及故长乐少府李膺、太仆杜密等，皆夷灭之。
现代文：侯览于是诬陷张俭是钩党，与前长乐少府李膺、太仆杜密等，一起杀灭。
English: Therefore, Hou Xiang framed Zhang Jian as a hook party and killed him together with the former Changle minor prefect Li Xi and the eunuch Du Mi.

古文：遂代曹节领长乐太仆。
现代文：因代曹节领长乐太仆。
English: On the occasion of Cao Si's birthday, Chang Le Taibu led the parade.

古文：熹平元年，有司举奏览专权骄奢，策收印绶，自杀。阿党者皆免。
现代文：熹平元年，官吏举奏侯览专权骄奢，诏令收了他的印绶，侯览自杀，同党都免去了官职。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the government officials arrogantly claimed the exclusive power of Houcheng, the imperial edict confiscated his seal, Houcheng committed suicide, and his party members were removed from their official positions.

古文：曹节字汉丰，南阳新野人也。
现代文：◆曹节传，曹节字汉丰，南阳新野人。
English: ◆ Cao Jie Chuan, Cao Jie Zi Han Feng, Nanyang Xinshan Ren.

古文：其本魏郡人，世吏二千石。
现代文：他原来是魏郡人，家庭世代二千石。
English: He was originally from Wei County, and his family was 2,000 koku.

古文：顺帝初，以西园骑迁小黄门。
现代文：顺帝初年，以西园骑升小黄门。
English: In the first year of Emperor Shun, Xiao Huangmen ascended to the West Garden.

古文：桓帝时，迁中常侍，奉车都尉。
现代文：桓帝时，升中常侍，奉车都尉。
English: At the time of Emperor Kantei, he was promoted to junior high school attendant, and became a lieutenant in charge of a carriage.

古文：建宁元年，持节将中黄门虎贲羽林千人，北迎灵帝，陪乘入宫。
现代文：建宁元年，持节将中黄门虎贲羽林千人，北迎灵帝，陪灵帝的车辆入宫。
English: In the first year of Jianning, the festival will be held in the middle of the Yellow Gate, the Tiger and the Thousand Feather Forest, the North Yingling Emperor, and the vehicle accompanying the Emperor into the palace.

古文：及即位，以定策封长安乡侯，六百户。
现代文：灵帝即位，因定策有功封长安乡侯、六百户。
English: When Emperor Lingdi ascended the throne, six hundred households in Chang'an Township were enfeoffed as a result of his decision.

古文：时，窦太后临朝，后父大将军武与太傅陈蕃谋诛中官，节与长乐五官史朱瑀、从官史共普、张亮、中黄门王尊、长乐谒者腾是等十七人，共矫诏以长乐食监王甫为黄门令，将兵诛武、蕃等，事已具《蕃》、《武传》。
现代文：这时，窦太后临朝掌权，太后的父亲大将军窦武与太傅陈蕃商议诛杀宦官，曹节与长乐五官史朱王禹、从官史共普、张亮、中黄门王尊、长乐谒者腾是等十七人，共同诈称皇帝的诏令以长乐食监王甫为黄门令，带兵杀了窦武、陈蕃等人，事已经载在《陈蕃》、《窦武》传。
English: At this time, the Dowager Empress Dowager Dou was in power in the Lin Dynasty. The Dowager Empress's father, the General Dou Wu, and the Grand Master Chen Yao discussed the killing of the eunuchs. Cao Si and the five officials of the Changle School, Zhu Wang Yu, the officials from the school, Zhang Liang, the middle Huangmen Wang Zun, and the Changle School, Teng Zhe, were seventeen people. They jointly falsely claimed that the emperor's edict was the Huangmen Order with the Changle School food inspector Wang Fu, and led the soldiers to kill Dou Wu, Chen Yao and others. The story has been recorded in

古文：节迁长乐卫尉，封育阳侯，增邑三千户；甫迁中常侍，黄门令如故；瑀封都乡侯，千五百户；普、亮等五人各三百户；余十一人皆为关内侯，岁食租二千斛。
现代文：曹节升长乐卫尉，封育阳侯，增邑三千户；王甫升中常侍，仍为黄门令；朱王禹封都乡侯，千五百户；共普、张亮等五人各三百户；其余十一人都为关内侯，岁食租二千斛。
English: Cao Jie was promoted to the rank of Changle Weiwei and was assigned to the Yiyang marquis, increasing the number of villages by 3,000; Wang Fu was promoted to the rank of Zhongzheng and was still assigned to the Huangmen marquis; Zhu Wang Yu was promoted to the rank of Duxiang marquis, increasing the number of villages by 1,500; a total of five people, including Pu and Zhang Liang, increased the number of villages by 300; and the remaining eleven people were assigned to the rank of Guanai marquis, with an annual rent of 2,000 baht.

古文：先是，瑀等阴于明堂中祷皇天曰： 窦氏无道，请皇天辅皇帝诛之，令事必成，天下得宁。 
现代文：先时朱王禹等人暗地里在明堂中祷告皇天说 ：窦氏无道，请皇天辅佐皇帝把他杀了，好事必成，天下得安宁。 
English: Earlier, Zhu Wangyu and others secretly prayed to the emperor in the Ming Hall, saying: Dou has no way, please ask the emperor to kill him, good things will come to pass, and the world will be at peace.

古文：既诛武等，诏令太官给塞具，赐瑀钱五千万，余各有差，后更封华容侯。
现代文：窦武等被诛之后，诏令太官给报祠具，赐朱王禹钱五千万，其余的人各有多少差别，后来更封华容侯。
English: After Dou Wu and others were arrested, the emperor ordered the eunuch to give the newspaper to the temple, and gave Zhu Wang Yu 50 million yuan, and the rest of the people had different amounts, and later they were given the title of Hua Rong Hou.

古文：二年，节病困，诏拜为车骑将军。
现代文：二年，曹节病得厉害，诏令为车骑将军。
English: In the second year, Cao Jie fell seriously ill and was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：有顷疾瘳，上印绶，罢，复为中常侍，位特进，秩中二千石，寻转大长秋。
现代文：没有多久，病好了，上印绶，罢，再为中常侍，位特进，秩中二千石，不久调大长秋。
English: It didn't take long for the illness to get better, for the seal to be stamped, and then for him to be promoted to the rank of middle attendant, promoted to the rank of special advance, ranked in the middle with two thousand koku, and soon promoted to the rank of senior vassal.

古文：熹平元年，窦太后崩，有何人书朱雀阙，言 天下大乱，曹节、王甫幽杀太后，常侍侯览多杀党人，公卿皆尸禄，无有忠言者。 
现代文：熹平元年，窦太后逝世，不知是什么人在朱雀阙写着： 天下大乱，曹节、王甫幽杀太后，常侍侯览多杀党人，公卿都是一些尸位素餐的人，没有说忠话的。 
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Empress Dowager Dou died. I don't know who wrote in Zhuge Lian: The world is in turmoil. Cao Si and Wang Fu killed the Empress Dowager, the attendant Hou Xian killed many party members, and the nobles are all corpse-eaters. They are not loyal.

古文：于是诏司隶校尉刘猛逐捕，十日一会。
现代文：于是诏令司隶校尉刘猛逐一搜捕，十日一汇报。
English: As a result, the commanding officer ordered Lieutenant Liu Meng to search and arrest them one by one, and report on the 10th.

古文：猛以诽书言直，不肯急捕，月余，主名不立。
现代文：刘猛认为诽书说的是直话，不肯急于捕捉，一个多月，主犯没有捉到。
English: Liu Meng believed that the defamatory book was telling the truth, and refused to rush to catch it. For more than a month, the main culprit was not caught.

古文：猛坐左转谏议大夫，以御史中丞段颎代猛，乃四出逐捕，及太学游生，系者千余人。
现代文：刘猛获罪降职为谏议大夫，用御史中丞段代替刘猛，于是四处搜捕，以及太学游生，逮捕千多人。
English: Liu Meng was found guilty and demoted to the post of the chief of the Political Consultation Department, replacing Liu Meng with Gu Shi Zhongzheng Duan. As a result, thousands of people were rounded up and arrested.

古文：节等恕猛不已，使颎以他事奏猛，抵罪输左校。
现代文：曹节等人怨恨刘猛，使段用别的事奏刘猛，抵罪输左校劳改。
English: Cao Jie and others resented Liu Meng, and made Duan use other things to play Liu Meng, to atone for losing the left school reform.

古文：朝臣多以为言，乃免刑，复公车征之。
现代文：朝廷里的人多为他说话，乃免刑，再用公车征召他。
English: Many people in the imperial court spoke for him, but he was pardoned, and then he was called up by bus.

古文：节遂与王甫等诬奏桓帝弟勃海王悝谋反，诛之。
现代文：曹节就与王甫等诬奏桓帝的弟弟勃海王悝谋反，刘悝被诛杀。
English: Cao Jie plotted a rebellion with Wang Fu and others against Bo Hai Wang Yao, the younger brother who played the role of Emperor Huan, and Liu Yao was killed.

古文：以功封者十二人。
现代文：因功封了十二人。
English: Twelve people were awarded for their achievements.

古文：甫封冠军侯。
现代文：王甫封冠军侯。
English: Wang Fufeng became the champion.

古文：节亦增邑四千六百户，并前七千六百户。
现代文：曹节也增邑四千六百户，并以前封的共七千六百户。
English: Cao Si also increased the number of counties by 4,600, and the total number of counties by 7,600.

古文：父兄子弟皆为公卿列校、牧守令长，布满天下。
现代文：他们父兄子弟都是公卿列校、牧守令长，布满天下。
English: Their fathers, brothers, and children are all nobles, ranked as schoolmasters, and chief herdsmen, and are spread all over the world.

古文：节弟破石为越骑校尉，越骑营五百妻有美色，破石从求之，五百不敢违，妻执意不肯行，遂自杀。
现代文：曹节的弟弟曹破石为越骑校尉，越骑营五百妻有美色，曹破石向五百求妻，五百不敢违，妻子执意不肯行，因自杀。
English: Cao Cao's younger brother, Cao Baishi, was the captain of the Yue cavalry. In the Yue cavalry battalion, there were five hundred beautiful wives. Cao Baishi asked for five hundred wives, and the five hundred did not dare to refuse. His wife was adamant that she would not go, so she committed suicide.

古文：其淫暴无道，多此类也。
现代文：他的淫乱无道，大多如此。
English: He's promiscuous, most of the time.

古文：光和二年，司隶校尉阳球奏诛王甫及子长乐少府萌、沛相吉，皆死狱中。
现代文：光和二年，司隶校尉阳球奏诛杀王甫及他的儿子长乐少府王萌、沛相王吉，都死在监狱里。
English: In the second year of the Guangwa era, Wang Fu, the son of Wang Meng, the head of Changle, and Wang Ji, the son of Pei Xiang, both died in prison.

古文：时连有灾异，郎中梁人审忠以为朱瑀等罪恶所感，乃上书曰：臣闻理国得贤则安，失贤则危，故舜有臣五人而天下理，汤举伊尹不仁者远。
现代文：这时常有灾异，郎中梁人审忠认为是朱王禹等人的罪恶所致，上书说： 我听说治理国家得贤人就安，失去贤人就危，所以舜有臣五人而天下太平，汤武举用伊尹，坏人就不得进。
English: At this time, there were frequent disasters. Liang's son-in-law Liang Zizhong believed that it was caused by the evil of Zhu Wangyu and others. He wrote: I heard that when a country is governed, it is safe to have a wise man, and it is dangerous to lose a wise man. Therefore, if there are only five ministers, the world is peaceful. If Tangwuhou is used by Yi Yin, the bad man is not allowed to enter.

古文：陛下即位之初，未能万机，皇太后念在抚育，权时摄政，故中常侍苏康、管霸应时诛殄。
现代文：皇上即位的时候，不能理万机，皇太后念您尚须抚育，暂时代理政治，前中常侍苏康、管霸及时诛灭。
English: When the emperor ascended the throne, it was not possible to manage everything, the empress dowager still needed to be raised, and for the time being, politics was in charge, and the former middle attendants Su Kang and Guan He were eliminated in time.

古文：太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武考其党与，志清朝政。
现代文：太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武审查他们的党羽，立志肃清朝廷的政治。
English: Grand Master Chen Xi and General Dou Wu examined their party members, determined to clean up the politics of the imperial court.

古文：华容侯朱瑀知事觉露，祸及其身，遂兴造逆谋，作乱王室，撞蹋省闼，执夺玺绶，迫胁陛下，聚会群臣，离间骨肉母子之恩，遂诛蕃、武及尹勋等。
现代文：华容侯朱王禹知道事情爆发，就会大祸临头，于是发起逆谋，大乱王室，践踏宫廷，抢夺印绶，强迫威胁皇上，聚会群臣，离间母子骨肉的恩情，诛杀陈蕃、窦武和尹勋等人。
English: Huarong Prince Zhu Wangyu knew that if things broke out, a great disaster would be imminent, so he initiated a counter-plot, caused chaos in the royal family, trampled on the court, robbed the seal, forced to threaten the emperor, gathered a group of courtiers, separated the mother and son's flesh and blood, and killed Chen Yu, Dou Wu and Yin Xun.

古文：因共割裂城社，自相封赏。
现代文：因此共同分裂国家，自行封赏。
English: Therefore, they jointly split the country and rewarded themselves.

古文：父子兄弟被蒙尊荣，素所亲厚布在州郡，或登九列，或据三司。
现代文：父子兄弟都享尊荣，平常相好的人散布州郡，有的位登九列，有的占据三司。
English: Both father and son brothers enjoy honor and glory. People who usually like each other are scattered throughout the county, some are in the ninth row, and some occupy the third row.

古文：不惟禄重位尊之责，而苟营私门，多蓄财货，缮修第舍，连里竟巷。
现代文：不想禄重位尊的职责，只图营私舞弊，多积财货，修造房屋，连里满巷。
English: They do not want to perform the duties of a dignified person, but only want to engage in personal fraud, accumulate more wealth and goods, build houses, and even fill the streets.

古文：盗取御水以作鱼钓，车马服玩拟于天家。
现代文：窃取宫中御水，作为钓鱼之用，车马衣服玩物，比于天子。
English: Stealing water from the palace, using it for fishing, and comparing chariots, horses, clothes, and playthings to the Son of Heaven.

古文：群公卿士杜口吞声，莫敢有言。
现代文：群公卿士，闭口吞声，不敢说一句话。
English: The court nobles closed their mouths and swallowed, not daring to say a word.

古文：州牧郡守承顺风旨，辟召选举，释贤取愚。
现代文：州牧郡守秉承他们旨意，征召选举，贤能的人才不要，而擢用那些愚昧无知的人。
English: Adhering to their will, the governors of the prefectures and counties called for the election. They did not want the talented people, but promoted those who were ignorant.

古文：故虫蝗为之生，夷寇为之起。天意愤盈，积十余年。
现代文：因此蝗虫发生，夷寇为乱。天意愤怨已满，积十余年。
English: As a result, the locusts appeared and the barbarian raids turned into chaos. The wrath of heaven has been satisfied, accumulating for more than ten years.

古文：故频岁日食于上，地震于下，所以谴戒人主，欲令觉悟，诛鉏无状。
现代文：所以连年日食于上，地震在下，这是警告人主，想人主觉悟过来，诛杀坏人。
English: So for years the eclipse is above, the earthquake is below, this is a warning to the Lord, I want the Lord to come to his senses and kill the bad guys.

古文：昔高宗以雉雊之变，故获中兴之功。
现代文：从前高宗因雉升鼎耳的变异，修德而商朝得以中兴。
English: Formerly, Gaozong was able to prosper during the Shang Dynasty because of his ability to cultivate virtue.

古文：近者神祇启悟陛下，发赫斯之怒，故王甫父子应时馘截，路人士女莫不称善，若除父母之仇。
现代文：最近神祗开导皇上，大发雷霆。王甫父子及时诛灭，路上行人，不分男女，没有不拍手称快，好像是报了父母之仇。
English: Wang Fu and his son were killed in time, and pedestrians on the road, both men and women, applauded, as if they had avenged their parents.

古文：诚怪陛下复忍孽臣之类，不悉殄灭。
现代文：却怪皇上再容忍孽臣一伙，不全部消灭。
English: However, he blames the emperor for tolerating a group of evil retainers and not eliminating them all.

古文：昔秦信赵高，以危其国；吴使刑人，身遘其祸。
现代文：从前秦信赵高，因使国家覆亡，吴任用刑人，反被刑人所害。
English: In the past, Qin Xin Zhao Gao was killed for overthrowing the state, and Wu appointed the executioner, but was killed by the executioner.

古文：虞公抱宝牵马，鲁昭见逐乾侯，以不用宫之奇、子家驹以至灭辱。
现代文：虞公抱宝牵马，鲁昭被逐于乾侯，都因不听宫子奇、子家驹的话，以至灭亡羞辱。
English: Yugong held the treasure and led the horse, Lu Zhao was banished to Qianhou, all because they did not listen to the words of Gong Ziqi and Zi Jiaqi, and even died of humiliation.

古文：今以不忍之恩，赦夷族之罪，奸谋一成，悔亦何及！
现代文：现在以不忍的恩德，赦免夷族的滔天大罪，奸谋一成，失悔也来不及了！
English: Now, with unbearable benevolence, pardon the heinous crime of the barbarians, the evil plot is complete, and it is too late to repent!

古文：臣为郎十五年，皆耳目闻见，瑀之所为，诚皇后所不复赦。
现代文：我为郎十五年，都是耳闻目见，朱王禹的所作所为，真是皇天所不能再赦免的。
English: I have been a farmer for 15 years. I have seen and heard everything. What Zhu Wangyu has done is truly unforgivable.

古文：愿陛下留漏刻之听，裁省臣表，埽灭丑类，以答天怒。
现代文：愿皇上留一点点时间，看看我的上表，扫灭丑类，以答天怒。
English: May the emperor spare a little time to look at my watch, to sweep away the ugliness, and to answer the wrath of heaven.

古文：与瑀考验，有不如言，愿受汤镬之诛，妻子并徙，以绝妄言之路。
现代文：考问朱王禹，如果有不实之词，愿受诛杀，妻子并徙，以杜绝乱说的路。 
English: The examiner asked Zhu Wangyu that if there were any untrue words, he would be willing to be beaten to death, and his wife would also be deported, in order to prevent him from saying anything untrue.

古文：章寝不报。
现代文：奏章被压下来。
English: The score is suppressed.

古文：节遂领尚书令。
现代文：曹节就兼尚书令。
English: Cao Si also issued an imperial edict.

古文：四年，卒，赠车骑将军。
现代文：四年，逝世，赠车骑将军。
English: Four years later, he passed away and was given a free ride to the general.

古文：后瑀亦病卒，皆养子传国。
现代文：后来朱王禹也病死，都是养子传国。
English: Later, Zhu Wangyu also died of illness, and both were adopted sons.

古文：审忠字公诚，宦官诛后，辟公府。
现代文：审忠字公诚，宦官诛灭之后，征召公府。
English: After judging the loyalty and sincerity of the eunuchs, the eunuchs were called up to the public office.

古文：吕强字汉盛，河南成皋人也。
现代文：◆吕强传，吕强字汉盛，河南成皋人。
English: ◆Lv Qiang Chuan, Lv Qiang Zi Han Sheng, Henan Cheng Yao Ren.

古文：少以宦者为小黄门，再迁中常侍。
现代文：少时以宦者为小黄门，再升中常侍。
English: At a young age, he was given the title of Little Yellow Gate, and then he was promoted to the rank of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：为人清忠奉公。
现代文：为人清正忠诚，奉公守法。
English: He is honest, loyal and law-abiding.

古文：愿陛下详思臣言，不以记过见玼为责。
现代文：灵帝时，依例封宦官，吕强被封为都乡侯。吕强言辞恳切，坚决不接受，灵帝只好依从了他。
English: When Lingdi was enthroned as eunuch, Lv Qiang was enthroned as the prince of the capital. Lv Qiang's words were earnest and resolute, and Lingdi had no choice but to obey him.

古文：书奏不省。中平元年，黄巾贼起，帝问强所宜施行。
现代文：当时，灵帝多蓄私财，收天下的珍宝，郡国贡献，要先输内署，名叫 导行费 。中平元年，黄巾贼闹事，灵帝问吕强怎么办。
English: At that time, Emperor Lingdi accumulated a lot of private wealth, collected the world's precious treasures, county and state contributions, and had to first lose the domestic agency, called the escort fee. In the first year of the Middle Ages, the Yellow Turban Thieves caused trouble, and Emperor Lingdi asked Lü Qiang what to do.

古文：强欲先诛左右贪浊者，大赦党人，料简刺史、二千石能否。
现代文：吕强的意见是先诛杀皇上左右的贪污腐化分子，大赦党人，考察刺史、二千石的优劣。
English: Lu Qiang's opinion is to first kill the emperors and other corrupt elements, amnesty party members, and examine the merits and demerits of stabbing history and two thousand stones.

古文：帝纳之，乃先赦党人。
现代文：灵帝采纳了。于是先大赦党人。
English: Emperor Ling adopted it. Therefore, he first granted amnesty to the party members.

古文：于是诸常侍人人求退，又各自征还宗亲子弟在州郡者。
现代文：这样，诸常侍就人人要求退出朝廷，又各自召回在州郡的宗族亲戚子弟。
English: In this way, all the attendants asked everyone to withdraw from the imperial court, and each of them recalled their relatives and children in the county.

古文：中常侍赵忠、夏恽等遂共构强，云 与党人共议朝廷，数读《霍光传》。
现代文：中常侍赵忠、夏恽等就共同诬陷吕强，说： 吕强与党人共同议论朝廷，经常读《霍光传》，想废帝，另立皇上。
English: Zhao Zhong, Xia Yao and other members of the Central Standing Committee jointly framed Lyu Qiang, saying: Lyu Qiang discussed the imperial court with party members, often read "The Biography of Huo Guang," and wanted to depose the emperor and set up another emperor.

古文：强兄弟所在并皆贪秽 。
现代文：吕强兄弟所在的地方，都贪污枉法。 
English: Wherever the Lü Qiang brothers are, corruption is rampant.

古文：帝不悦，使中黄门持兵召强。
现代文：帝不高兴了，使中黄门带着武器召吕强。
English: The emperor was displeased, and ordered Zhonghuangmen to call Lv Qiang with weapons.

古文：强闻帝召，怒曰： 吾死，乱起矣。
现代文：吕强听说皇上叫他，生气说： 我死，国家就要乱了啊！
English: When Lu Qiang heard that the emperor had summoned him, he became angry and said, "If I die, the country will be in chaos!"

古文：丈夫欲尽忠国家，岂能对狱吏乎！ 
现代文：大夫尽忠国家，难道能够听从狱吏处置吗？ 
English: If a doctor is loyal to the country, can he obey the orders of the prison warden?

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：就自杀身死。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：忠、恽复谮曰： 强见召未知所问，而就处草自屏，有奸明审。 
现代文：赵忠、夏恽还诬陷他说： 吕强被皇上召问，不知道问什么，却在外面野草中自杀，他有奸谋是很明显的。 
English: Zhao Zhong and Xia Yao also slandered him, saying, "Lyu Qiang was summoned by the emperor to be questioned, and he did not know what to ask, but he committed suicide outside in the weeds. It is obvious that he had a plot.

古文：遂收捕宗亲，没入财产焉。时，宦者济阴丁肃、下邳徐衍、南阳郭耽、汝阳李巡、北海赵祐等五人称为清忠，皆在里巷，不争威权。巡以为诸博士试甲乙科，争弟高下，更相告言，至有行赂定兰台漆书经字，以合其私文者，乃白帝，与诸儒共刻《五经》文于石，于是诏蔡邕等正其文字。
现代文：当时，宦官济阴丁肃、下邳徐衍、南阳郭耽、汝阳李巡、北海赵等五人，名为清忠，都在里巷中，不争权夺利，李巡认为诸博士考试甲乙科，争第高下，互相告语，甚至有行贿改定兰台漆书经字，以合他的文章的，于是告诉皇上，与诸儒生共同刻《五经》文于石上，诏令蔡邕等校正文字。
English: At that time, the five eunuchs named Qingzhong, namely, Jixin Dingsu, Xiaojun Xuyan, Nanyang Guotan, Ruyang Li Jun, and Beihai Zhao, were all in the middle of the street, and did not compete for power and profit. Li Jun thought that the doctoral examinations were A and B subjects, and competed for the highest grade, and they made speeches to each other. There was even a bribe paid to change the text of the Lantai Lacquer Book to match his article. Therefore, he told the emperor that he would jointly engrave the text of the "Five Classics" on the stone with the Confucian students, and

古文：自后《五经》一定，争者用息。
现代文：自后《五经》一定，争论就停止了。
English: After the "Five Classics" were confirmed, the debate stopped.

古文：赵祐博学多览，著作校书，诸儒称之。
现代文：赵博学，看书很多，著作校书，诸儒生都称赞他。
English: Zhao Bo Xue, read a lot of books, wrote school books, all Confucian students praised him.

古文：又小黄门甘陵吴伉，善为风角，博达有奉公称。
现代文：又小黄门甘陵吴伉，会候四方四隅的风，以占卜吉凶，胸怀广阔，有奉公守法的名声。
English: In addition, the small Huangmen, Ganling, and Wuzhen, wait for the winds in all directions and corners, with divination for good and evil, with a broad mind, and have a reputation for obeying the law.

古文：知不得用，常托病还寺舍，从容养志云。
现代文：自己知道不被任用，经常托病回到自己的宿舍，从容养志。
English: Knowing that he would not be appointed, he often returned to his dormitory on sick leave to refresh himself.

古文：张让者，颎川人；赵忠者，安平人也。
现代文：◆张让传，张让颍川郡人；赵忠安平人。
English: ◆Zhang Zhanchuan, Zhang Zhan from Beichuan County; Zhao Zhongan from Ping.

古文：少皆给事者中，桓帝时为小黄门。
现代文：少年时都在宫廷中做事，桓帝时任小黄门。
English: All of them worked at the court when they were young, and Emperor Kante was the little yellow door.

古文：忠以与诛梁冀功封都乡侯。
现代文：赵忠因为参加诛杀梁冀功封都乡侯。
English: Zhao Zhong was awarded the title of county magistrate for participating in the assassination of Liang Jie.

古文：延熹八年，黜为关内侯，食本县租千斛。
现代文：延熹八年，黜为关内侯，食本县租千斛。
English: Eight years later, he became the governor of Guanai and rented thousands of yakitori bowls in Shibumoto County.

古文：灵帝时，让、忠并迁中常侍，封列侯，与曹节、王甫等相为表里。
现代文：汉灵帝时张让、赵忠一起升为中常侍，封为列侯。与曹节、王甫等人内外一气。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanling, Zhang Zhan and Zhao Zhong were promoted to the rank of middle-ranking attendants and were made vassals. They were popular with Cao Jie, Wang Fu and others both at home and abroad.

古文：节死后，忠领大长秋。
现代文：曹节死后，赵忠兼任大长秋。
English: After Cao Jie's death, Zhao Zhong also served as the Grand Chancellor.

古文：让有监奴典任家事，交通货赂，威形喧赫。
现代文：张让有监奴主管家务，勾结权贵，收受贿赂，威名很大。
English: Zhang Rong has a slave in charge of housework, colludes with powerful people, accepts bribes, and has a great reputation.

古文：扶风人孟佗，资产饶赡，与奴朋结，倾谒馈问，无所遗爱。奴咸德之，问佗曰： 君何所欲？
现代文：扶风人孟佗，家产富足，同张让的监奴结为朋友，竭自己所有送给监奴，没有剩下一点自己所爱的东西。
English: Meng Xuan, the wind-up man, had a rich family, and made friends with Zhang's slaves. He gave everything he had to his slaves, and had nothing left that he loved.

古文：力能办也。 曰： 吾望汝曹为我一拜耳。 
现代文：监奴感激他，问孟佗： 您有什么要求呢？
English: The prisoner thanked him and asked Meng Yu: What do you want?

古文：时宾客求谒让者，车恒数百千两，佗时指让，后至，不得进，监奴乃率诸仓头迎拜于路，遂共轝车入门。
现代文：我都能为您办啊。 孟佗说 ：我只希望你们为我一拜而已。 当时请求见张让的宾客，经常在门口停着数百上千辆车子。孟佗那时也去见张让，因为后到，不能进去，监奴就率领各奴仆在路上迎拜孟佗，并且共同抬着他的车子进门。
English: I can do it all for you. Meng Xuan said, "I just want you to bow to me for a moment." At that time, guests who requested to see Zhang Zhan often parked hundreds of thousands of cars at the door. Meng Xuan also went to see Zhang Zhan at that time, because when he arrived later, he couldn't get in, so the prisoner led the servants to bow to Meng Xuan on the road, and together they carried his car into the door.

古文：宾客咸惊，谓佗善于让，皆争以珍玩赂之。
现代文：宾客们大为惊奇，认为孟佗和张让很相好，都争着用珍宝奇玩贿赂他。
English: The guests were very surprised and thought that Meng Xuan and Zhang Zhan were very friendly. They were all competing to bribe him with rare treasures.

古文：佗分以遗让，让大喜，遂以佗为凉州刺史。
现代文：孟佗分一些给张让，张让大喜，让孟佗当了凉州刺史。
English: Meng Wei gave some points to Zhang Zhan, Zhang Zhan was overjoyed, and Meng Zhan became the history of Liangzhou.

古文：是时，让、忠及夏恽、郭胜、孙璋、毕岚、栗嵩、段珪、高望、张恭、韩悝、宋典十二人，皆为中常侍，封侯贵宠，父兄子弟布列州郡，所在贪贱，为人蠹害。
现代文：这时，张让、赵忠及夏恽、郭胜、孙璋、毕岚、栗嵩、段王圭、高望、张恭、韩悝、宋典十二人，都任中常侍，封侯贵宠，父子兄弟分布州郡当官，贪污残暴，是人民的祸害。
English: At this time, Zhang Zhan, Zhao Zhong, Xia Qian, Guo Sheng, Sun Qian, Bi Qian, Li Song, Duan Wang Gui, Gao Wang, Zhang Qian, Han Qian, and Song Di, twelve people, were all appointed as middle-ranking attendants, princes' favorites, and father-son brothers were distributed as state and county officials. Corruption and brutality are the scourge of the people.

古文：黄巾既作，盗贼糜沸，郎中中山张钧上书曰： 窃惟张角所以能兴兵作乱，万人所以乐附之者，其源皆由十常侍多放父兄、子弟、婚亲、宾客典据州郡，辜榷财利，侵掠百姓，百姓之冤无所告诉，故谋议不轨，聚为盗贼。
现代文：黄巾造乱，盗贼像开了锅的粥一样。郎中中山张钧上书说 ：我想张角所以能够兴兵作乱，成千上万的人愿意跟着他，其根源都在十常侍，把他们的父兄、子弟、亲戚、宾客放到各州郡，独占财利，侵夺百姓，百姓的冤屈无处申诉，所以图谋不轨，聚积成为盗贼。
English: The yellow scarf created chaos, and the thieves were like porridge cooked in a pot. Zhang Xuan, the son-in-law of Zhongshan, wrote in a letter: "I think the reason why Zhang Qiao was able to start a riot, and thousands of people were willing to follow him, was due to the ten regular attendants, who placed their fathers, brothers, children, relatives, and guests in every county and prefecture, monopolized wealth and profit, and robbed the people. The people had nowhere to complain about their grievances, so they plotted and gathered to become thieves.

古文：宜斩十常侍，县头南郊，以谢百姓，又遣使者布告天下，可不须师旅，而大寇自消。 
现代文：应该杀了十常侍，把他们的脑袋悬挂南郊，以此向老百姓请罪。再派使者布告天下，这样可以不须用兵，而大寇自会消散。 
English: They should have killed the ten regular attendants and hung their heads in the southern suburbs as an apology to the common people. Then they should have sent an envoy to announce it to the world. In this way, there would be no need to use soldiers, and the bandits would have dispersed.

古文：天子以钧章示让等，皆免冠徒跣顿首，乞自致洛阳诏狱，并出家财以助军费。
现代文：皇帝把张钧的奏章给张让等人看，他们都脱掉帽子、靴子叩头请罪，乞求让自己去洛阳监狱，并且拿出家财以助军费。
English: The emperor showed Zhang Xuan's record to Zhang Zhan and others, and they all took off their hats and boots to bow down and plead guilty, begging to go to Luoyang Prison, and to give out their family wealth to help with military expenses.

古文：有诏皆冠履视事如故。
现代文：皇帝诏令他们都戴上帽子，穿起靴子，和以前一样工作。
English: The emperor ordered them all to put on their hats and boots and go to work as before.

古文：帝怒钧曰： 此真狂子也。
现代文：皇帝对张钧发怒说 ：你真是一个疯子啊！
English: The emperor said angrily to Zhang Ye, "You really are a madman!"

古文：十常侍固当有一人善者不？ 
现代文：十常侍中硬没有一个好的吗？ 
English: Isn't there a good one among the ten regular attendants?

古文：钧复重上，犹如前章，辄寝不报。
现代文：张钧又上书，还是和上次的奏章一样。但总是被扣压不上报。
English: Zhang Xuan submitted his report again, still the same as the previous report. However, he was always held back from submitting it.

古文：诏使廷尉、侍御史考为张角道者，御史承让等旨，遂诬奏钧学黄巾道，收掠死狱中。
现代文：皇帝下诏廷尉、侍御史调查搞张角太平道的人，御史秉承张让等人的意旨，诬告张钧学黄巾道，把他逮捕，拷打他，死在狱中。
English: The emperor's courtier Zhao and his attendant Gu Shi investigated the people who engaged in the Zhangjiajie Taiping Dao. Gu Shi, adhering to the intention of Zhang Zhan and others, falsely accused Zhang Lu of learning the Yellow Turban Dao, arrested him, tortured him, and died in prison.

古文：而让等实多与张角交通。
现代文：而张让等人却与张角勾结往来。
English: However, Zhang Zhan and others colluded with Zhang Jiao.

古文：后中常侍封谞、徐奉事独发觉坐诛，帝因怒诘让等曰： 汝曹常言党人欲为不轨，皆令禁锢，或有伏诛。今党人更为国用，汝曹反与张角通，为可斩未？ 
现代文：后来中常侍封、徐奉与黄巾勾结的事败露被杀，皇帝因此发怒责问张让等人说 ：你们常说党人图谋不轨，下令禁锢，有的还被杀掉，现在党人成为国家有用的人才，你们反与张角私通，这可杀不可杀？ 
English: Later, when it was revealed that the collusion between Zhongzhang Zifeng, Xu Bong, and Huang Yan had failed and Cang was killed, the emperor angrily rebuked Zhang Zhan and the others, saying, "You often say that the Party members plotted evil, ordered them to be imprisoned, and some were even killed. Now, the Party members have become useful talents for the country. You, on the other hand, are having an illicit affair with Zhang Jiao. Is this something that can be killed or not?

古文：皆叩头云： 故中常侍王甫、侯览所为。 
现代文：张让等都叩头说： 这是前中常侍王甫、侯览干的。 
English: Zhang Zhan and the others all bowed their heads and said, "This was done by the former middle-ranking official, Hou Xiangtu.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：皇帝就没有追究了。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：明年，南宫灾。
现代文：第二年，南宫遭火灾。
English: The following year, the South Palace was destroyed by fire.

古文：让、忠等说帝令敛天下田亩税十钱，以修宫室。
现代文：张让、赵忠等人劝皇帝下令收天下田地税每亩十钱，用来修建宫室。
English: Zhang Zhan, Zhao Zhong and others persuaded the emperor to order the collection of the national land tax of ten yuan per mu, which was used to build the palace.

古文：发太原、河东、狄道诸郡材木及文石，每州郡部送至京师，黄门常侍辄令谴呵不中者，因强折贱买，十分雇一，因复货之于宦官，复不为即受，材木遂至腐积，宫室连年不成。
现代文：征调太原、河东、狄道各郡的木材和有花纹的石头，每当州郡把这些东西送到京师，黄门常侍总是下令谴责呵斥那些运送木石不合格的人，并且强行折价，贱价收买，十分的只给一分的价钱，又把它卖给宦官，宦官又不马上接受，木材因而堆积腐朽，宫室连年修不成。
English: Every time the prefectures of Taiyuan, Hedong, and Didao sent these things to Beijing, the Yellow Gate attendant always ordered to condemn and reprimand those who transported unqualified wood and stone, and forced discounts, bought at low prices, and sold it to eunuchs, who did not immediately accept it, so the wood accumulated and rotted, and the palace could not be repaired year after year.

古文：刺史、太守复增私调，百姓呼嗟。
现代文：刺史、太守又私自增加征调的数量，百姓呼号叹息，苦不堪言。
English: Sashihi and Taishou also increased the number of requisitions on their own, and the people cried and sighed in anguish.

古文：凡诏所征求，皆令西园驺密约敕，号曰 中使 ，恐动州郡，多受赇赂。
现代文：凡是皇帝征求的东西，都派西园中的骑士秘密带着皇帝的命令，号称 中使 ，恐吓州郡，多受贿赂。
English: Whatever the emperor asked for, the knights of the Western Garden secretly sent with the emperor's order, known as the middle envoy, to intimidate the state and county, and to accept more bribes.

古文：刺史、二千石及茂才孝廉迁除，皆责助军修宫钱，大郡至二三千万，余各有差。
现代文：刺史、二千石及茂才、孝廉的提拔任用，都责令出助军需和修宫室钱，大郡到二三千万，其余各有差别。
English: Zhishi, with 2,000 koku, and Maozai, with the promotion and appointment of Xiaolian, were all ordered to send military supplies and repair the palace room money, with a large county up to 230 million, and the rest were different.

古文：当之官者，皆先至西园谐价，然后得去。
现代文：应当上任的人，都必须先去西园评定价值，然后才去。
English: Those who should take office must first go to the West Park to assess the value, and then go.

古文：有钱不毕者，或至自杀。
现代文：有的钱交不够，甚至自杀。
English: Some don't pay enough money and even commit suicide.

古文：其守清者，乞不之官，皆迫遣之。
现代文：那些保持清白的人请求不去上任，都被强行派去。
English: Those who maintained their innocence and asked not to take office were forcibly removed.

古文：时，钜鹿太守河内司马直新除，以有清名，减责三百万。
现代文：当时新任命的巨鹿郡太守河内郡人司马直，因有清名，减少一些，责令交三百万。
English: At that time, Sima Zhi, the newly-appointed head of Juhu County and the governor of Hanoi County, was ordered to pay three million.

古文：直被诏，帐然曰： 为民父母，而反割剥百姓，以称时求，吾不忍也。 
现代文：司马直接到诏令，惆怅地说： 为人民父母，反而搜刮百姓，以满足当今所需，我心不忍啊！ 
English: Sima went directly to the edict and said, "As the people's parents, I can't bear to search the people to meet today's needs.

古文：辞疾，不听，行至孟津，上书极陈当世之失，古今祸败之戒，即吞药自杀。
现代文：托病辞官，上面不准。走到孟津，上书尽力陈述当世的过失，古今祸败的教训，然后吞药自杀。
English: He went to Mengjin, wrote a letter, tried his best to explain the mistakes of the past, the lessons of the calamities of the past and the present, and then committed suicide by swallowing medicine.

古文：书奏，帝为暂绝修宫钱。
现代文：书奏上后，皇帝为此暂时停征了修宫钱。
English: After the book was published, the emperor temporarily suspended the collection of palace repair money for this reason.

古文：又造万金堂于西园，引司农金钱缯帛，仞积其中。
现代文：又建万金堂于西园，取司农的金钱缯帛，满积其中。
English: He also built the Wanjintang in the West Park, taking money from the peasants and piling it up.

古文：又还河间买田宅，起第观。
现代文：又回到河间买田地住宅，建造宅第楼观。
English: He returned to Kawama to buy a field residence and build the first floor.

古文：帝本侯家，宿贫，每叹桓帝不能作家居，故聚为私臧，复寄小黄门常侍钱各数千万。
现代文：灵帝本是侯爵出身，素来贫穷，常常叹息桓帝不能置家业，所以聚敛金钱财物作为私产，又收存了小黄门常侍的钱各数千万。
English: Originally a marquis by birth, Emperor Ling was always poor. He often lamented that Emperor Huan could not establish a family business, so he collected money and property as private property, and also collected tens of millions of money from Xiao Huangmen's attendants.

古文：常云： 张常侍是我公，赵常侍是我母。 
现代文：灵帝常说 ：张常侍是我公，赵常侍是我母。 
English: Ling Di often said: Zhang Changzhi is my father, Zhao Changzhi is my mother.

古文：宦者得志，无所惮畏，并起第宅，拟则宫室。
现代文：宦官得志，无所畏惧，大家仿照宫室营造私人住宅。
English: The eunuchs were ambitious and fearless, and they built private residences modeled after the imperial palace.

古文：帝常登永安候台，宦官恐其望见居外，乃使中大人尚但谏曰： 天子不当登高，登高则百姓虚散。 
现代文：灵帝常登永安侯台，宦官怕他看见自己的住宅，就使中大人尚但劝皇帝说： 天子不应当登高，登高，老百姓就要虚散。 
English: Lingdi often went to Yongan Houtai. The eunuchs were afraid that he would see their houses, so they asked the middle-aged man Shangdan to persuade the emperor, saying, "The Son of Heaven should not go up high. If he goes up high, the common people will be scattered."

古文：自是不敢复升台榭。
现代文：皇帝从此不再登亭台楼阁。
English: From then on, the emperor no longer ascended the throne.

古文：明年，遂使钩盾令宋典缮修南宫玉堂。
现代文：第二年，就派钩盾令宋典修缮南宫玉堂。
English: In the second year, he ordered Song Sheng to repair the South Palace's Great Hall.

古文：又使掖庭令毕岚铸铜人四列于仓龙、玄武阙，又铸四钟，皆受二千斛，县于玉堂及云台殿前。
现代文：又派掖廷令毕岚铸造四个铜人排列在苍龙、玄武宫前。又铸了四座钟，可容二千斛粮食，悬挂于玉堂及云台殿前。
English: He also ordered the court to cast four bronze figures to be placed in front of the Soryu and Genbu Palaces, and four bells with a capacity of 2,000 monme of grain to be hung in front of the Jade Hall and the Yuntai Hall.

古文：又铸天禄虾蟆，吐水于平门外桥东，转水入宫。
现代文：又铸天禄虾蟆，吐水于平门外桥东，转水流入宫内。
English: They also cast the shrimp cocoon of Tenroku Shrimp, spitting water to the east of the bridge outside the gate, and diverting the water into the palace.

古文：又作翻车渴乌，旋于桥西，用洒南北郊路，以省百姓洒道之费。
现代文：又造翻车渴乌，安放桥西，用来喷洒南北郊道路，以节省百姓洒道路的费用。
English: In addition, a dumper truck was built and placed on the west side of the bridge to spray the roads in the northern and southern suburbs, in order to save the people the cost of spraying the roads.

古文：又铸四出文钱，钱皆四道。
现代文：又铸四出文钱，钱上都有四道和边轮相连的花纹。
English: In addition, four coins were minted, each with four patterns connected to the rim.

古文：识者窃言侈虐已甚，形象兆见，此钱成，必四道而去。
现代文：懂得的人私下议论说，奢侈暴虐已经到了极点。形象征兆出现，这种钱铸成，一定要四方流散。
English: Those in the know privately argue that the luxury tyranny has reached its peak. The image signs appear, this money is minted, it must be dispersed in all directions.

古文：及京师大乱，钱果流布四海。
现代文：等到京师大乱，这种钱果然流散四海。
English: By the time of the Great Scholar's Revolt in Beijing, this money had spread far and wide.

古文：复以忠为车骑将军，百余日罢。
现代文：又任用赵忠为车骑将军，百多天免职。
English: He also appointed Zhao Zhong as the general of chariot and cavalry. He was relieved of duty for more than a hundred days.

古文：六年，帝崩。中军校尉袁绍说大将军何进，令诛中官以悦天下。
现代文：中平六年，汉灵帝崩，中军校尉袁绍劝大将军何进下令杀宦官使天下人高兴。
English: In the sixth year of the Middle Ages, when Emperor Hanling passed away, Yuan Shao, a lieutenant in the Chinese army, advised General He Jin to order the killing of eunuchs to make the people of the world happy.

古文：谋泄，让、忠等因进入省，遂共杀进。
现代文：谋划泄露，张让、赵忠等人乘何进入宫之际，共同杀了何进。
English: When the plan was leaked, Zhang Zhan, Zhao Zhong and others took advantage of the opportunity to enter the palace and jointly killed He Jin.

古文：而绍勒兵斩忠，捕宦官无少长悉斩之。
现代文：袁绍率兵杀了赵忠，搜捕宦官，无论老小，统统杀掉。
English: Yuan Shao led his soldiers to kill Zhao Zhong and hunt down and kill all eunuchs, young and old.

古文：让等数十人劫质天子走河上。追急，让等悲哭辞曰： 臣等殄灭，天下乱矣。
现代文：张让等几十人劫持天子作为人质逃到黄河边上，追赶得急迫，张让等人悲痛地哭着向天子告辞说： 我等灭绝，天下大乱啊！
English: Zhang Zhan and dozens of others took Tianzi as a hostage and fled to the edge of the Yellow River. They chased after him with great urgency. Zhang Zhan and others said goodbye to Tianzi with tears of sorrow: "We are waiting for extinction, the world is in chaos!"

古文：惟陛下自爱！ 
现代文：希望陛下自己爱惜自己！ 
English: I hope His Majesty will take care of himself!

古文：皆投河而死。
现代文：说完，都投河自杀。
English: After saying this, they all threw themselves into the river and committed suicide.

古文：论曰：自古丧大业绝宗禋者，其所渐有由矣。
现代文：史官评论说： 自古丧国灭宗的，不是一朝一夕之故，是慢慢地造成的。
English: The historian commented: Since ancient times, the destruction of a country and the extermination of a religion did not happen overnight. It happened gradually.

古文：三代以嬖色取祸，嬴氏以奢虐致灾，西京自外戚失祚，东都缘阉尹倾国。
现代文：夏商周三代因好色取祸，秦始皇因奢侈暴虐招害，西汉由于外戚而亡，东汉以宦官失国。
English: The third generation of the Xia merchants brought disaster because of their lechery, the First Emperor of Qin brought disaster because of his extravagant brutality, the Western Han Dynasty died because of their relatives, and the Eastern Han Dynasty lost their country because of their eunuchs.

古文：成败之来，先史商之久矣。
现代文：成败之来，以前史籍议论得很多啊。
English: In the past, there was a lot of discussion about historical records.

古文：至于衅起宦夫，其略犹或可言。
现代文：至于罪起宦官，大略还有可以讨论之处。
English: As for the guilty eunuch, there is still room for discussion.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：刑余之丑，理谢全生，声荣无辉于门阀，肌肤莫传于来体，推情未鉴其敝，即事易以取信，加渐染朝事，颇识典物，故少主凭谨旧之庸，女君资出内之命，顾访无猜惮之心，恩狎有可悦之色。
现代文：宦官这种人，他们与普通人不同，名声不好，不是出身于贵族大家。肌肤血气不能传于后代，表面上看不出他的坏处，做事容易取得信任，加以在朝廷里见多识广，熟悉典章制度，所以年幼的君主，依靠他谨慎练达的长处，女君利用他出入听命方便。察访他没有猜疑忌惮的心思，接近他有可喜的颜色。
English: Eunuchs are different from ordinary people, they have a bad reputation, they are not from the aristocracy. Their skin and blood cannot be passed on to future generations, their bad points cannot be seen on the surface, it is easy to gain trust, and they are well-informed in the imperial court and familiar with the award system. Therefore, the young monarch relies on his strengths of prudence and practice, and the princess uses him to enter and exit at her convenience. He has no suspicious mind when visiting, and he has a pleasant color when approaching.

古文：亦有忠厚平端，怀术纠邪；或敏才给对，饰巧乱实；或借誉贞良，先时荐誉。
现代文：也有忠厚正直，怀术纠正邪恶的；有敏于应对，弄巧乱实的；还有借誉于忠良，先期引誉的。
English: There are also those who are loyal, honest, and have the ability to correct evil; those who are good at coping with things, and those who are clever and devious; and those who owe their reputation to being loyal and good, and take credit ahead of time.

古文：非直苟恣凶德，止于暴横而已。
现代文：不都是放肆为凶，只是一味横暴而已。
English: Not all of them are reckless, they are just violent.

古文：然莫邪并行，情貌相越，故能回惑昏幼，迷瞀视听，盖亦有其理焉。
现代文：然真假并行，貌似忠诚，情实奸恶，所以能迷惑昏庸幼弱之主，搅乱视听，大抵也有一定的道理在其中。
English: However, truth and falsehood go hand in hand, seeming to be loyal, but actually being treacherous. Therefore, it can confuse the drowsy and weak, and disturb the audio-visual. Most of the time, there is a certain truth in it.

古文：诈利既滋，朋徒日广，直臣抗议，必漏先言之间，至戚发愤，方启专夺之隙，斯忠贤所以智屈，社稷故其为墟。
现代文：诈利既多，党羽日广，忠直的臣子直言抗议，一定会先期泄漏出来，因忧戚发愤，想有所制裁，就正好给了他们专夺的机会。
English: Since there are a lot of fraudulent profits, the party is expanding day by day, and loyal courtiers are protesting bluntly, they will definitely leak out in advance. Because of their grief and anger, if they want to be sanctioned, it just gives them the opportunity to monopolize.

古文：《易》曰： 履霜坚冰至。 
现代文：《易经》说： 履霜坚冰至。 
English: "I Ching" says: "The foot cream is as hard as ice."

古文：云所从来久矣。
现代文：就是说由来很久了，难道是一朝一夕的吗？
English: That is to say, it has been around for a long time. Was it created overnight?

