古文：交趾
现代文：胡燕交趾
English: Toe to toe

古文：交趾郡人多养孔雀，或遗人以充口腹，或杀之以为脯腊。
现代文：交趾郡人大多饲养孔雀，或是送给别人吃肉，或是杀了做成肉脯。
English: Most people in Jiaozuo County raise peacocks, or give them to others to eat, or kill them to make meat stew.

古文：人又养其雏为媒，旁施网罟，捕野孔雀。
现代文：还有的人饲养小孔雀做诱饵，在旁边安好网，捕捉野孔雀。
English: Others keep small peacocks as bait, and set up nets nearby to catch wild peacocks.

古文：伺其飞下，则牵网横掩之，采其金翠毛，装为扇拂。
现代文：等野孔雀飞下地时就牵动网绳将孔雀罩住，然后拔取孔雀身上金翠色的羽毛，制造成拂尘的扇子。
English: When the Ichino peacock flies down to the ground, it pulls the net rope to cover the peacock, and then plucks the golden feathers on the peacock to make a fan to sweep the dust.

古文：或全株，生截其尾，以为方物。云，生取则金翠之色不减耳。
现代文：有时要完整的羽毛，就活着截断孔雀的尾巴，当作土特产品，还说： 活着取毛，毛上的金翠色一点不变。 
English: Sometimes, in order to obtain complete feathers, the tail of a peacock is cut off while it is still alive, as a local specialty, and it is said: If the feathers are plucked while alive, the golden hue of the feathers will not change.

古文：罗州罗州山中多孔雀，群飞者数十为偶。
现代文：罗州的山中有很多孔雀，几十只为一群在一起飞翔。
English: There are many peacocks in the mountains of Luzhou. Dozens of them fly together as a flock.

古文：雌者尾短，无金翠。雄者生三年，有小尾，五年成大尾。
现代文：雌孔雀尾巴短，也没有金翠色，雄孔雀出生三年，开始长出小尾巴，五年长成大尾巴。
English: Female peacocks have short tails and are not golden. Male peacocks are born in the third year and begin to grow small tails. In the fifth year, they grow large tails.

古文：始春而生，三四月后复凋，与花萼相荣衰。
现代文：立春时尾羽开始生长，三四个月后又凋落了，和花朵同时繁荣和凋谢。
English: At the beginning of spring, the tail feathers begin to grow, and after three or four months, they fall off again, blooming and fading at the same time as the flowers.

古文：然自喜其尾而甚妬，凡欲山栖，必先择有置尾之地，然后止焉。南人生捕者，候甚雨，往擒之，尾沾而重，不能高翔，人虽至。
现代文：孔雀喜爱自己的尾羽并且非常忌妒，凡是想在山林里休息，一定要先选择好放置尾巴的地方，然后才栖息在那里，南方人要捕捉活孔雀，要等到下大雨的时候才去，这时孔雀的尾巴上沾上雨水变得很沉重，不能高飞。
English: Peacocks love their own tail feathers and are very envious. Anyone who wants to rest in the mountain forest must first choose a good place to place the tail, and then perch there. Southerners want to catch live peacocks, and wait until it rains heavily. At this time, the peacock's tail becomes heavy with rainwater and cannot fly high.

古文：且爱其尾，恐人所伤，不复骞翔也。
现代文：虽然有人走近，但是因为它太爱自己的尾巴，恐怕被人损坏，就不再飞翔了。
English: Although someone approached, but because it loves its tail so much, I'm afraid someone will damage it, it will no longer fly.

古文：虽驯养颇久，见美妇人好衣裳与童子丝服者，必逐而啄之。
现代文：孔雀即使是驯养了很久，但是如果看见了漂亮女人穿着好看衣服和穿鲜艳丝绸衣服的小孩，也一定要追上去啄她们。
English: Even if peacocks have been domesticated for a long time, if they see a beautiful woman in a nice dress and a child in a bright silk dress, they must chase and peck them.

古文：芳时媚景，闻管弦笙歌，必舒张翅尾，盼睇而舞，若有意焉。
现代文：如果遇到美好的天气，美丽的景色，听到管弦乐器演奏的曲调，一定要舒展开翅膀和尾巴，目光流转地跳舞，好象是很有情意的样子。
English: If you encounter good weather, beautiful scenery, and hear the tunes played by orchestral instruments, be sure to comfortably spread your wings and tail, and dance with your eyes rolling, as if you are very affectionate.

古文：山谷夷民烹而食之，味如鹅，解百毒。
现代文：住在山谷里的少数民族把孔雀煮熟了吃，味道象鹅肉一样，能解百毒。
English: Ethnic minorities living in the valley eat the peacocks cooked, the taste is like goose meat, and it can solve all kinds of poisons.

古文：人食其肉，饮药不能愈病。
现代文：人要是吃了孔雀肉，吃药就没有治病的效验了。
English: If people eat peacock meat, there will be no curative effect of taking medicine.

古文：其血与其首，解大毒。
现代文：孔雀的血和头，能解巨毒。
English: The blood and head of the peacock can dissolve the poison.

古文：南人得其卵，使鸡伏之即成。
现代文：南方人得到孔雀蛋，让鸡孵化就可以了。
English: Nanfang people get peacock eggs, and it's enough to let chickens hatch.

古文：其脚稍屈，其鸣若曰 都护 。
现代文：孔雀的脚稍稍弯曲，它的叫声象是在说： 都护 。
English: The peacock's feet are slightly bent, and its cry seems to say: "Protect the capital."

古文：土人取其尾者，持刀于丛篁可隐之处自蔽，伺过，急断其尾，若不即断，回首一顾，金翠无复光彩。
现代文：当地的土人想得到孔雀尾羽，就拿着刀在丛竹中隐蔽，等孔雀经过时，赶快砍断它的尾巴，如果不能立即砍断，孔雀回头看上一眼，尾羽就会失去金翠的颜色和光彩。
English: If the local natives want to get the peacock's tail feathers, they hide in the bamboo thicket with a knife. When the peacock passes by, quickly cut off its tail. If it cannot be cut off immediately, the peacock will look back and the tail feathers will lose their golden color and luster.

古文：王轩
现代文：王轩
English: Wang Xuan

古文：卢肇住在京南海，见从事王轩有孔雀。
现代文：卢肇住在京城南海，看见从事王轩有只孔雀。
English: Lu Zhao, who lives in Beijing's Nanhai District, saw a peacock performing the Wang Xuan dance.

古文：一日奴来告曰： 蛇盘孔雀，且毒死矣。 
现代文：有一天，仆人来告诉说： 蛇盘住孔雀，快要毒死孔雀了。 
English: One day, a servant came to tell him: "A snake has entangled a peacock and is about to poison it.

古文：轩令救之，其走卒笑而不救，轩怒，卒云： 蛇与孔雀偶。 
现代文：王轩让兵丁快去救孔雀，他的手下笑着却不去救，王轩生气了，手下人说： 蛇与孔雀在交配。 
English: Wang Xuan told the soldier to go quickly to save the peacock. His men laughed but did not save the peacock. Wang Xuan became angry. His men said, "The snake is mating with the peacock."

古文：汉燕
现代文：汉燕
English: Hanyan

古文：蓐泥为窠，声多稍小者汉燕。
现代文：用草和泥做巢，叫声频繁体形较小的燕子是汉燕。
English: Smaller swallows that build nests of grass and mud and make frequent calls are called Chinese swallows.

古文：陶胜力注《本草》云，紫胸轻小者是越燕，胸斑黑声大者是胡燕。其作巢喜长，越燕不入药用。
现代文：陶胜力注《本草》说：胸前是紫色，重量轻体形小的是越燕。胸前有黑斑点，叫声宏亮的是胡燕，胡燕做巢喜欢做长形的巢。越燕不能做药用。
English: Tao Shengli said in "The Materia Medica": the chest is purple, the light weight and small body is the common swiftlet. The chest has black spots, and the loud call is the common swiftlet. The common swiftlet likes to make a long-shaped nest. The common swiftlet cannot be used for medicinal purposes.

古文：越与汉，亦小差耳。
现代文：越燕和汉燕，也只不过是稍有差别罢了。
English: There is only a slight difference between Yueyan and Hanyan.

古文：胡燕凡狐白貂鼠之类，燕见之则毛脱，或燕蛰于水底。
现代文：凡是狐狸和白貂鼠一类的动物，燕子看见它们羽毛就脱落了，藏伏多水的泥洞中。
English: When the swallows saw animals such as foxes and stoats, they shed their feathers and hid in watery mud holes.

古文：旧说燕不入室，取桐为男女各一，投井中，燕必来。
现代文：传说燕子如果不进屋里，取桐木来雕刻成男女各一人扔到井里，燕子一定进屋。
English: Legend has it that if a swallow does not enter a house, a man and a woman are carved from paulownia wood and thrown into a well. The swallow will definitely enter the house.

古文：胸斑黑声大，名胡燕，其窠有容匹素者。
现代文：胸前有黑色斑点叫声宏亮的，名叫胡燕，它的巢有的能放下一匹生绢。
English: There is a black spot on its chest, and it calls loudly. It is called Hu Yan. Some of its nests can hold a ginger maggot.

古文：千岁燕
现代文：千岁燕
English: Chitose Yan

古文：齐鲁之间，谓燕为乙，作巢避戊己。
现代文：齐鲁那个地方的人把燕叫做乙。燕子做巢躲避戊日己日。
English: People in that part of Qilu call swallows B. Swallows build nests to avoid the day of judgment.

古文：《玄中记》云，千岁之燕户北向。
现代文：《玄中记》中说：千年燕子的巢口向北开。
English: In "The Tale of Genji," it is said that the nest of the thousand-year swallow opens to the north.

古文：《述异要》云，五百岁燕生胡髯。
现代文：《述异要》中说：五百年的燕子长胡须。
English: "Five hundred years of swallows grow whiskers," it says in "A Summary of the Anomalies."

古文：晋瑞
现代文：晋瑞
English: Jinrui

古文：魏禅晋岁，北阙下有白光如鸟雀之状，时有飞翔去来。
现代文：魏把帝位禅让给晋的那一年，京城北面的城楼下有白光象是鸟雀的形状，经常地飞来飞去。
English: In the year that Wei abdicated the imperial throne to Jin, there was a white light in the shape of a bird flying around under the castle to the north of the capital.

古文：有司即闻奏，帝使罗者张之，得一白燕，以为神物，以金为笼，致于宫内，旬日不知所在。
现代文：官署将这件事报告给皇上，皇上派人用网去捉，结果捉到一只白燕，认为是神物，用金丝做了个笼子，放在皇宫内，十天之后白燕不知到哪里去了。
English: The government office reported the matter to the emperor, who sent someone to catch it with a net. As a result, a white swallow was caught, which was considered to be a sacred object. A cage was made of gold wire and placed in the imperial palace. Ten days later, the white swallow did not know where to go.

古文：论者云： 金德之瑞。 昔师旷时，有白燕来巢，检瑞应图，果如所论。
现代文：有人评论说： 这是兴盛繁荣的好兆头，从前师旷的时候，就有白燕来筑巢，考察这个祥瑞现象，正应验了图谶上的话。 
English: Some people commented: This is a good sign of prosperity. Once upon a time, during the Spring Festival, there was a white swallow that came to build a nest and investigate this auspicious phenomenon. The words on the map are being fulfilled.

古文：师旷，晋人也，古今之议相符焉。
现代文：果然就象这个人说的一样。师旷是晋人也罢，古代和今天的议论是相符合的。
English: It's just like this person said. Whether Shige was a Jin person or not, the discussion between ancient times and today is consistent.

古文：元道康
现代文：元道康
English: Former Dokang

古文：后魏元道康字景怡，居林虑山，云栖幽谷，静掩衡茅，不下人间，逾二十载。
现代文：后魏有人叫元道康，字景怡，隐居在林虑山。云雾笼罩着幽深的山谷，静静地掩闭着横木为门的茅草屋，他从不下山到尘世中去，一直过了二十多年。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Yuan Daokang, also known as Jing Yi, who lived in seclusion in Linxi Mountain. Clouds and fog shrouded the deep valley, quietly concealing the thatched cottage with a crossbeam door. He never went down the mountain to the earthly world, and he lived for more than twenty years.

古文：服饵芝木，以娱其志。
现代文：他服用灵芝仙草，来陶冶自己的情操和志向。
English: He takes Ganoderma lucidum to cultivate his sentiments and aspirations.

古文：高欢为丞相，前后三辟不就。道康以时方乱，不欲应之。
现代文：高欢做了丞相，前后三次来请他出山做官他都没有去，元道康认为那时正要发生动乱，不想答应他。
English: When Gao Huan became chancellor, he did not go to the three times when he was invited to go out to the mountains to be an official. Yuan Daokang thought that there was going to be turmoil at that time and did not want to agree to him.

古文：至高洋，又征，亦不起。
现代文：等到高洋做了丞相，又来请他出山，他仍然没有去。
English: When Takahiro became the prime minister, I came to ask him to leave the mountain, but he still did not go.

古文：道康书斋常有双燕为巢，岁岁未尝不至。
现代文：元道康的书房里有一对燕子，每年都飞来筑巢的。
English: There is a pair of swallows in Yuan Daokang's study. They come to build a nest every year.

古文：道康以连征不去，又惧见祸，不觉嗟咨。
现代文：元道康因为朝廷连年征召自己都没有去，害怕引来灾祸，不觉地暗自叹气。
English: Yuan Daokang did not go because the imperial court had conscripted him for years, and he was afraid of bringing disaster, unconsciously sighing to himself.

古文：是夕，秋月朗然，清风飒至。道康向月微思，忽闻燕呼康字云： 景怡，卿本澹然为乐，今何愁思之深耶？ 
现代文：这天晚上，秋月朗朗地照着，清风一阵阵吹来，元道康面向明月思索，忽然听到燕子招呼元道康的字说： 景怡，你本来心情淡泊，自得其乐，现在为什么有这么多的忧愁和思虑呢？ 
English: On this evening, the autumn moon was shining brightly, the clear wind was blowing in gusts, and Yuan Daokang was facing the bright moon and thinking. Suddenly, he heard a swallow hail Yuan Daokang and say: Jing Yi, you were originally in a light mood, enjoying yourself, now why are there so many sorrows and worries?

古文：道康惊异，乃知是燕。
现代文：元道康很惊奇，这才知道是燕子在说话。
English: Yuan Daokang was very surprised, and only then did he know that it was the swallow speaking.

古文：又曰： 景怡景怡，乐以终身。 
现代文：燕子又说： 景怡景怡，要一辈子快乐。 
English: Swallow also said: Jing Yi Jing Yi, to be happy for a lifetime.

古文：康曰： 尔为禽而语，何巢我屋？ 
现代文：元道康说： 你是禽鸟却会说话，为什么在我的屋里筑巢？ 
English: Yuan Daokang said, "You are a bird, but you can talk. Why do you build a nest in my house?"

古文：燕曰： 我为上帝所罪，暂为禽耳。
现代文：燕子说： 我被上天责罚，暂时做禽鸟了。
English: The swallow said: I have been punished by the heavens and have temporarily become a bird.

古文：以卿盛德，故来相依。 
现代文：因为你道德高尚，所以才来依附于你。 
English: I've come to depend on you because of your high moral standards.

古文：道康曰： 我忘利，不售人间，所以闭关服道，宁昌其德，为卿所谓？ 
现代文：元道康说： 我忘却名利，不愿步入尘世，所以才关上门学习道家学说，发扬光大道家学说，就象你所说的那样。 
English: Yuan Daokang said: I forgot about fame and fortune and did not want to step into the world, so I closed the door to study the Taoist doctrine and carry forward the Taoist doctrine, just as you said.

古文：燕曰： 海内栖隐，尽名誉耳。
现代文：燕子说： 天下隐居的人，全是沽名钓誉的人。
English: Swallow said: The people who live in seclusion are all those who are after fame and glory.

古文：独卿知道，卓然嚣外，所以神祇敬属，万灵归德。 
现代文：只有你真正懂得道法，卓然独立尘世之外。所以神灵尊敬你、关注你，千万种生灵都佩服于你的德行。 
English: You are the only one who truly understands the Dharma, and you are so independent of the earthly world. Therefore, the gods respect and pay attention to you, and tens of thousands of beings admire your virtue.

古文：燕曰： 我来日昼时，往前溪相报。 
现代文：燕子接着又说： 我明日天亮时，到前面的溪水边有话对你说。 
English: The Swallow went on to say, "I will go to the edge of the stream in front of you at dawn tomorrow and have something to say to you.

古文：道康乃策杖南溪，以伺其至。
现代文：元道康便拄着木杖到南面的溪水边去等候燕子，等到天亮，看见两只燕子从北面的山岭飞来落到山涧下面。
English: Yuan Daokang then walked with a cane to the south side of the stream to wait for the swallows, and when it was dawn, he saw two swallows flying from the mountains in the north and falling under the hawthorn.

古文：及昼，见二燕自北岭飞来而投涧下，一化为青衣童子，一化为青衣女子。前来谓道康曰： 今我便归，以卿相命，故来此化。
现代文：一只变成一个穿黑衣的男童，一只变成一个穿黑衣的少女，走上前来对元道康说： 今天我们就要回天上去了，为了给你预测命运，所以才到这里来点化你，否则就没有什么留作纪念的了。
English: One turned into a black-clad boy, one into a black-clad girl, came forward and said to Yuan Daokang: Today we are going back to heaven, in order to predict your fate, so I came here to make you happy, otherwise there would be nothing left as a souvenir.

古文：然无以留别，卿有隐志，幽阴见嘉，卿之寿更四十岁，以此相报。 
现代文：你有隐居的志向，神灵都给予好评，你的寿命还有四十岁，就以此来作为对你的报答吧。 
English: You have the desire to live in seclusion, the gods have all given a favorable comment, and your life expectancy is still forty years old, so take this as a reward for you.

古文：言讫，复为双燕飞去，不知所往。
现代文：说完，又变成一对燕子飞走了，不知道哪里去了。
English: After saying this, they turned into a pair of swallows and flew away, I don't know where they went.

古文：时道康已年四十，后果终八十一。
现代文：这时元道康已经四十岁了，后来果然八十一岁才死去。
English: At this time, Yuan Daokang was already forty years old, and later died at the age of eighty-one.

古文：范质
现代文：范质
English: Norms

古文：汉户部侍郎范质言，尝有燕巢于舍下，育数雏，已哺食矣。
现代文：汉代户部侍郎范质说，曾经有一对燕子在他家的屋下筑巢，养育了几只雏燕，已经进入哺育喂食阶段。
English: Han Dynasty household attendant Fan Qi said that once a pair of swallows built a nest under the roof of his house, raised several young swallows, and have entered the feeding stage.

古文：其雌者为猫所搏食之，雄者啁啾，久之方去。即时又与一燕为匹而至，哺雏如故。
现代文：那只雌燕被猫捉住吃了，雄燕鸣叫着很久才飞走，不多时又和另一只雌燕配成一对回来了，还象从前一样地哺育雏燕。
English: The female bird was caught and eaten by the cat, the male bird chirped for a long time before flying away, and soon returned with another female bird to form a pair, and also nursed the chicks as before.

古文：不数日，诸雏相次堕地，宛转而僵。
现代文：不几天，所有的雏燕一个接一个地掉到地上，辗转着死去。
English: Within a few days, all the chicks fell to the ground one by one, writhing and dying.

古文：儿童剖腹视之，则有蒺藜子在嗉中，盖为继偶者所害。
现代文：儿童剖开雏燕的肚子观察发现有蒺藜子在雏燕的胃里，都是被燕子后来的配偶给害死的。
English: The child cut open the young swallow's stomach and observed that there were lice in the young swallow's stomach, all of which were killed by the swallow's later mate.

古文：飞数
现代文：鹧鸪飞数
English: flying number

古文：鹧鸪飞数逐月，如正月，一飞而止于窠中，不复起矣。
现代文：鹧鸪飞翔的次数随着月份而变化。如果是正月，飞一次后就呆在巢中，不再起飞了。
English: The number of times the dragonfly flies changes with the month. If it is the first month, it will stay in the nest after flying once and will no longer take off.

古文：十二月十二起，最难采，南人设网取之。
现代文：十二月十二日开始，最难捕捉，南方人就张网捕捉鹧鸪。
English: Since December 12th, the most difficult to catch, people in the south have been setting up nets to catch dragonflies.

古文：飞南向
现代文：飞南向
English: Heading south

古文：鹧鸪似雌雉，飞但南，不向北。
现代文：鹧鸪的样子象雌野鸡，只向南飞，不向北飞。
English: Dragonflies look like female pheasants, only fly south, not north.

古文：杨孚《交州异物志》云： 鸟像雌雉，名鹧鸪，其志怀南，不思北徂。 
现代文：杨孚的《交州异物志》中说： 有一种鸟象雌野鸡，名叫鹧鸪。它心里只是想着南方，不愿意朝北方走。 
English: Yang Fu's "Jiaozhou Exotics" said: There is a kind of bird like a female pheasant, called a pheasant. It only thinks about the south, and does not want to go north.

古文：吴楚鹧鸪
现代文：吴楚鹧鸪
English: Wu Chuxuan

古文：能解冶葛并菌毒，臆前有白圆点，背上间紫赤毛。其大如野鸡，多对啼。
现代文：吴楚一带都有鹧鸪的踪迹，然而岭南最多。鹧鸪的肉白而且脆嫩，远远超过家鸡和野鸡的味道，并且能化解和治疗葛草和菌类中毒。鹧鸪胸前有白色圆点，背上间隔生长着紫色和红色的羽毛。它的大小象野鸡，大多数喜对面鸣叫。
English: There are traces of crickets all around Wuchu, but most of them are in Lingnan. The meat of crickets is white and crispy, far exceeding the taste of chickens and pheasants, and can dissolve and treat kudzu and fungus poisoning. There are white dots on the chest of crickets, and purple and red feathers grow at intervals on the back. It is the size of a pheasant, and most of them like to sing.

古文：《南越志》云： 鹧鸪虽东西回翔，然开翅之始，必先南翥。
现代文：《南越志》上说： 鹧鸪鸟虽然东西来回地飞翔，可是刚展翅起飞的时候，一定先向南飞。
English: "Southern Vietnamese History" said: Although the ostrich flies back and forth, when it takes off, it must fly south first.

古文：其鸣自呼 社薄州。  
现代文：鹧鸪鸣叫的声音似乎是在呼唤 社薄州  。
English: The sound of crickets chirping seems to be calling for Shiboushu.

古文：又《本草》云： 自呼 鉤輈格磔。  
现代文：另外《本草》上说： 鹧鸪鸟常常自己呼叫 鉤輈格磔  。
English: In addition, "This Grass" said: Ostriches often call themselves "格."

古文：李群玉《山行闻鹧鸪》诗云： 方穿诘曲崎岖路，又听鉤輈格磔声。 
现代文：李群玉的《山行闻鹧鸪》诗中说： 刚刚穿过艰难曲折的山路，又听见鹧鸪鸟 鉤輈格磔 的叫声。 
English: Li Qunyu's poem "Walking in the Mountains" says: I have just passed through the difficult and tortuous mountain road, and I hear the cry of the ostrich, the quail.

古文：鹊知太岁
现代文：鹊知太岁
English: Zou Zhitai

古文：鹊知太岁之所在，《博物志》云： 鹊窠背太岁。 
现代文：喜鹊知道太岁星所在的方向，《博物志》上说： 鹊巢背着太岁星。 
English: The magpie knows the direction of the great star. "Natural History" said: "The magpie's nest carries the great star."

古文：端午日午时，焚其巢，灸病者，疾立愈。
现代文：这不是因为喜鹊有智慧，而是靠喜鹊天生的本能。《淮南子》上说： 喜鹊知道哪一年风大，就离开高大的乔木，去到傍出的树枝上筑巢。 
English: This is not because the magpie has wisdom, but because of the innate instinct of the magpie. "Huainanzi" said: The magpie knows which year the wind is strong, and leaves the tall tree to build a nest on the branches.

古文：张颢
现代文：张颢
English: Zhang Ye

古文：常山张颢为梁相，天新雨后，有鸟如山鹊，稍下堕地，民拾取，即化为一圆石。
现代文：常山的张颢是梁国的丞相。有一天雨过天晴，有一只象山鹊的鸟坠落到地下，被一个老百姓拾起来以后变成一块圆圆的石头。
English: Changshan's Zhang Qian is the prime minister of Liang Guo. One day, after the rain, a bird like a hawthorn fell to the ground and was picked up by a commoner and turned into a round stone.

古文：颢椎破之，得一金印，文曰 忠孝侯印。 
现代文：张颢砸破石头，得到一金印，上面的文字是： 忠孝侯印 。
English: Zhang Ye broke through the stone and got a gold seal. The words on it read: "Loyalty and filial piety seal."

古文：颢以上闻。藏之秘府。
现代文：张颢把这件事报告给皇上，金印被收藏在宫内册府里。
English: Zhang Ye reported the matter to the emperor, and the gold seal was collected in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：颢后官至太尉，后议郎汝南樊行夷校书东观，上表言： 尧舜之时，尝有此官，今天降印，宜应复。 
现代文：张颢后来官至太尉。议郎汝南人樊行夷在东观书府校对书稿，给皇上上书说： 尧舜的时候，曾经设过忠孝侯个官职，现在上天降下这颗金印，应该重设这个官职。 
English: Zhang Xuan was later promoted to the rank of captain. His father-in-law, Ru Nanren, and his brother-in-law, Xing Xingyi, proofread the manuscript at the Dongguan Library and sent a letter to the emperor, saying: "At the time of Emperor Xuan, there was once a position of loyalty and filial piety, but now that Heaven has lowered this gold seal, this position should be reinstated.

古文：条支国
现代文：条支国
English: Strokestown

古文：章帝永宁元年，条支国有来进异瑞，有鸟名鳷鹊，形高七尺，解人言。
现代文：东汉章帝永宁元年，条支国派人来进献不平常的吉祥物，有一只鸟名鳷鹊，身高七尺，能听懂人说的话。
English: In the first year of Yongning, Emperor Zhang of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the State of Jochi sent someone to present an unusual mascot. It was a seven-feet-tall bird called a cormorant, which could understand human speech.

古文：其国太平，鳷鹊群翔。
现代文：哪个国家太平，就会有鳷鹊成群地飞翔。
English: Whichever country is peaceful, there will be dragonflies flying in flocks.

古文：昔汉武时，四夷宾服，有致此鹊，驯善。有吉乐事，则鼓翼翔鸣。
现代文：从前汉武帝时，四边的少数民族归顺，有的国家就奉献过这种鳷鹊，驯养得很好，要是有了吉祥快乐的事，它就振动双翅一边飞翔一边鸣叫。
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of Emperor Han Wudi, ethnic minorities from all over the country submitted to the emperor. Some countries have dedicated this dragonfly, and it has been well domesticated. If there is something auspicious and happy, it will vibrate its wings while flying and chirping.

古文：按庄周云： 雕陵之鹊，盖其类也。 
现代文：按，庄子说的， 雕陵之鹊 ，就是指的这种鸟。
English: According to what Zhuangzi said, "the dragonfly of the mausoleum" refers to this kind of bird.

古文：黎景逸
现代文：黎景逸
English: Lai King Yat

古文：唐贞观末，南康黎景逸居于空青山，常有鹊巢其侧，每饭食餧之。
现代文：唐太宗贞观末年，南康的黎景逸住在空青山上，有喜鹊在他住的地方附近筑巢，他每天用饭喂喜鹊。
English: In the last years of Tang Taizong Zhenguan, Nankang's Li Jingyu lived on the Qiuqing Mountain. Magpies built nests near where he lived, and he fed the magpies with food every day.

古文：后邻近失布者，诬景逸盗之，系南康狱。
现代文：后来，他的邻居中有个丢了布的人，诬告黎景逸偷布，黎景逸被关押在南康的监狱中。
English: Later, one of his neighbours, who had lost a piece of cloth, falsely accused Lai Jingyi of stealing the cloth. Lai Jingyi was detained in a prison in Nankang.

古文：月余，劾不承，欲讯之，其鹊止于狱楼，向景逸欢喜，以传语之状。
现代文：一个多月的时间，黎景逸都没有承认偷布，官府正准备刑讯。那只喜鹊停在狱楼上，向着黎景逸显示出很欢喜的样子，似乎是在向他传递话语。
English: For more than a month, Lai Jingyi did not admit to stealing the cloth, and the government was preparing to torture him. The magpie stopped on the prison floor and showed Lai Jingyi a very happy look, as if it was passing him words.

古文：其日传有赦，官司诘其来，云： 路逢玄衣素衿人所说。 
现代文：当天就有人传言说要有大赦，官府问消息是从哪里来的，回答说： 路上遇到一个穿黑色衣服白色领子的人所说的。 
English: On the same day, there were rumours that there would be an amnesty. When the authorities asked where the news had come from, they replied: "A man in black with a white collar told me on the road."

古文：三日而赦果至，景逸还山，乃知玄衣素衿者，鹊之所传。
现代文：三日后大赦的公文果然传到，黎景逸被放还归山，这才知道黑衣白领的人，就是喜鹊去传的话。
English: Three days later, the official document of the amnesty actually arrived, and Lai Jingyi was released to return to the mountain. Only then did the black-and-white-collar workers know that it was the magpies who were going to spread the word.

古文：张昌期
现代文：张昌期
English: Zhang Changji

古文：汝州刺史张昌期，易之弟也，恃宠骄贵，酷暴群僚。
现代文：汝州刺史张昌期，是张易之的弟弟。他依仗哥哥的权势而骄横自大，对待同事也残酷暴虐。
English: Ruzhou assassin Zhang Changji is the younger brother of Zhang Yizhi. He relies on his brother's power and arrogance, and treats his colleagues cruelly and brutally.

古文：梁县有人白云，有白鹊见。
现代文：梁县有人对他说，有白喜鹊出现。
English: Someone in Liang County told him that white magpies had appeared.

古文：昌期令司户杨楚玉捕之，部人有鹞子七十笼矣，以蜡涂爪。
现代文：张昌期就命令司户杨楚玉捕捉。
English: Zhang Chang ordered the steward to catch Yang Chudam.

古文：拜谢而去。
现代文：杨楚玉的部下有七十笼雀鹰，他们用蜡涂到雀鹰的爪子上；到了树林里以后，看见有一只白喜鹊在前边飞，还有一群喜鹊跟着在这只喜鹊后边飞，看见鹞子以后都飞散了，只有白鹊还在。鹞子去捉白喜鹊，白鹊一点也没受到损伤。用笼子装着白喜鹊送给张昌期，张昌期笑着说： 这只白喜鹊赎了你一条命。 杨楚玉磕头说： 这是上天让我活着，不然的话，就是去投河跳海，也不敢来见您。 
English: Yang Chu Yu's subordinates had seventy cages of sparrowhawks, and they coated the talons of the sparrowhawks with wax. When they got to the woods, they saw a white magpie flying in front, and a group of magpies flying behind this magpie. When they saw the pigeons, they all flew away, only the egrets were still there. The pigeons went to catch the white magpie, and the egrets were not damaged at all. They sent the white magpie to Zhang Changji in a cage. Zhang Changji smiled and said, "This white magpie has redeemed your life." Yang Chu Yu's steed said,

古文：崔圆妻
现代文：崔圆妻
English: Choi Won-soon

古文：鹊窠中必有栋。
现代文：喜鹊的巢里一定有一根 栋梁 。
English: There must be a beam in the magpie's nest.

古文：崔圆相公妻在家时，与姊妹于后园见一鹊构窠，共衔一木，大如笔管，长尺余，安窠中，众悉不见。
现代文：崔圆丞相的妻子在家的时候，和姐妹们在后园看见一对喜鹊在筑巢。两只喜鹊共同衔着一根木棍，粗细象笔管一样，长短有一尺多，安放到巢中，而别的人都没有看见。
English: When Cui Yuancheng's wife was at home, she and her sisters saw a pair of magpies building a nest in the backyard. The two magpies tied together a wooden stick, thick and thin like a pen tube, with a length of more than a foot, and placed it in the nest, while no one else saw it.

古文：俗言见鹊上梁必贵。
现代文：俗话说，看见喜鹊上梁的人一定尊贵。
English: As the saying goes, anyone who sees a magpie soaring over the beam must be noble.

古文：乾陵
现代文：乾陵
English: Qianling Mausoleum

古文：大历八年，乾陵上仙观之尊殿，有双鹊衔柴及泥，补葺隙坏十五处。
现代文：唐朝大历八年，乾陵上仙观的殿楼上，有一对喜鹊鸟衔着木柴棍和泥，修补殿楼上的裂缝和损坏的地方十五处。
English: In the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, a pair of magpies carrying sticks of firewood and mud repaired 15 cracks and damaged areas on the upper floor of the Hall of Immortals at the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：宰臣表贺之。
现代文：辅政大臣给皇上上书祝贺这件事。
English: The Vice-Minister of State sent a letter to the Emperor to congratulate him on this.

古文：鸽信
现代文：鸽信
English: Pigeon letter

古文：理丞郑复礼言，波斯舶上多养鸽，鸽能飞行数千里，辄放一只至家，以为平安信。
现代文：大理丞郑复礼说，波斯人的船上大多都养着鸽子，鸽子能飞行数千里，过一段时间就放一只鸽子回家，当做是一封平安的家信。
English: Zheng Fuli said that most of the Persians kept pigeons on their ships. Pigeons can fly thousands of miles, and after a while they would send a pigeon home as a safe letter.

古文：鸡
现代文：鸡
English: Chicken soup

古文：陈仓宝鸡
现代文：陈仓宝鸡
English: Chen Cang Baoji

古文：秦穆公时，陈仓人掘地得物，若羊非羊，若猪非猪，牵以献穆公。
现代文：秦穆公的时候，陈仓人挖地得到一个动物，象羊又不是羊，象猪又不是猪，便牵着它准备去献给秦穆公。
English: At the time of Qin Mu Gong, Chen Cangren dug up an animal, like a sheep but not a sheep, like a pig but not a pig, and took it to prepare to offer it to Qin Mu Gong.

古文：道逢二童子曰： 此为媪述，常在地中，食死人脑。若欲杀之，以柏插其首。 
现代文：路上遇到两个童子对他说： 这个动物叫媪述。经常生活在地下，吃死人的脑子，如果想要杀它，可以用柏树枝插进它的头里。 
English: On the way, he met two boys who said to him, "This animal is called a cormorant. It often lives underground and eats the brains of the dead. If you want to kill it, you can stick a cypress branch into its head."

古文：媪曰： 此二童子名为鸡宝，得雄者王，得雌者伯。 
现代文：媪述说： 这两个童子名叫鸡宝，如果捉到雄的，就能做国王，捉到雌的，就能够做伯爵。 
English: He said, "These two boys are called chicken treasure. If you catch a male, you can become a king, and if you catch a female, you can become a count."

古文：陈仓人舍之，逐二童子，二童化为雉，飞入于林。
现代文：陈仓人就舍掉媪述，去追赶两个童子。两个童子变成野鸡，飞进树林。
English: Chen Cangren gave up the story and chased the two boys. The two boys turned into pheasants and flew into the woods.

古文：陈仓人告穆公，发徒大猎，果得其雌，又化为石，置之汧渭之间。
现代文：陈仓人把事情告诉了秦穆公，秦穆公就派人进行大规模地捕猎，果然捉到了那只雌的，雌的又变成石头，被放到汧山和渭水之间。
English: Chen Cangren told the matter to Qin Mu Gong. Qin Mu Gong sent people to hunt on a large scale, and they caught the female. The female turned into stone and was placed between Lushan and Surabaya.

古文：至文公立祠，名陈宝。
现代文：等到秦文公时为它建祠堂，把那块石头叫做 陈宝 。
English: Wait until Qin Wenguang builds an ancestral hall for it, and call that stone Chen Bao.

古文：雄者飞南集，今南阳雉飞县，即其地也。
现代文：那只雄鸡飞到南集，现在南阳的雉飞县，就是那只雄鸡停留的地方。
English: That rooster flew to Nanji, and now Nanyang's Luofei County is where the rooster is staying.

古文：楚鸡
现代文：楚鸡
English: Chu chicken

古文：楚人有担山鸡者，路人问曰： 何鸟也？ 
现代文：楚国有一个人挑着山鸡，在路上遇到有人问他： 这是什么鸟？ 
English: A man in the state of Chu was picking up a mountain chicken. On the road, he met someone who asked him: What kind of bird is this?

古文：担者欺之曰： 凤皇也。 
现代文：他欺骗那人说： 是凤凰。 
English: He tricked the man into saying it was a phoenix.

古文：路人曰： 我闻有凤皇久矣，今真见之。汝卖之乎？ 
现代文：那人说： 我听说有凤凰已经很久了，现在才算真正看见了，你卖吗？ 回答说： 卖。 
English: The man said, "I've heard about the phoenix for a long time, but now I can actually see it. Do you want to sell it?" He replied, "Sell it."

古文：曰： 然。 乃酬千金，弗与。请加倍，乃与之。
现代文：于是路人出价千金，挑担人不同意，要求加倍出钱，这才把山鸡卖给了路人。
English: As a result, the passer-by offered a lot of money, but the person in charge disagreed and asked for double the money. This is when the pheasant was sold to the passer-by.

古文：方将献楚王，经宿而鸟死。路人不遑惜其金，惟恨不得以献耳。
现代文：路人正准备把它献给楚王时，过了一宿鸟就死了，路人不去可惜花掉的那些钱，只恨不能把鸟献给楚王。
English: When the passer-by was preparing to give it to King Chu, the bird died after one night. The passer-by did not want to spend the money, but only wanted to give the bird to King Chu.

古文：国人传之，咸以为真凤而贵，宜欲献之。
现代文：人们传说着这件事，全都认为那是只真正的凤凰，因而路人才要把它献给楚王。
English: People told stories about it, and everyone thought it was a real phoenix, so passers-by wanted to dedicate it to King Chu.

古文：遂闻于楚王，王感其欲献己也，召而厚赐之，过买凤之直十倍矣。卫女
现代文：事情传到楚王的耳朵里，楚王为路人想把凤凰献给自己行为所感动，便把路人叫来厚厚地赏赐了路人，超过买鸟时所花的钱数的十倍。卫女
English: The matter reached the ears of King Chu, who was moved by the passerby's act of wanting to dedicate the phoenix to himself. He called the passerby over and generously rewarded him with ten times the amount of money he had spent to buy the bird.

古文：《雉朝飞》操者，卫女傅母所作也。
现代文：《雉朝飞》琴曲，是卫女的女师傅创作的。
English: The piano piece "Flying in the Morning" was created by a female teacher of Wei Niu.

古文：卫侯女嫁于齐太子，中道闻太子死，问傅母曰： 何如？ 
现代文：卫侯的女儿嫁给齐国的太子，走到半路上听说太子死了，就问师傅说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Wei Hou's daughter married the crown prince of Qi. Halfway through the journey, she heard that the crown prince had died. She asked the master, "What should I do?"

古文：傅母曰： 且往赴丧。 
现代文：师傅说： 暂且去参加丧礼。 
English: The master said: Let's go to the funeral.

古文：丧毕，不肯归，终之以死。
现代文：丧礼结束后，卫女不肯再回娘家，一直到死。
English: After the funeral, the maid refused to return to her mother's house until she died.

古文：傅母悔之，取女所自操琴，于冢上鼓之。
现代文：师傅后悔这件事，拿过来卫女生前使用的琴，在卫女的坟前弹了起来。
English: The master regretted this and took the harp that had been used in front of the shrine maiden and played it in front of her grave.

古文：忽有二雉俱出墓中，傅母抚雌雉曰： 女果为雉耶？ 
现代文：忽然有两只野雉一起从坟墓里飞出来。师傅抚摸着雌雉说： 你果然变成雉鸟了吗？ 
English: Suddenly, two vultures flew out of the grave together. The master stroked the female vulture and said: Have you really turned into an ostrich?

古文：言未卒，俱飞而起，忽然不见。
现代文：话未说完，两只雉鸟一起飞起来，一会儿就不见了。
English: Before the words were out, the two storks flew up together and disappeared in an instant.

古文：傅母悲痛，授琴作操，故曰《雉朝飞》。
现代文：师傅很悲痛，弹着琴创作了一支乐曲，所以叫《雉朝飞》曲。
English: The master was very sad, and created a piece of music while playing the piano, which is why it is called the "Flying Dragonfly" piece.

古文：长鸣鸡
现代文：长鸣鸡
English: Changming Chicken

古文：汉成帝时，交趾越隽献长鸣鸡伺晨鸡，即下漏验之，晷刻无差。
现代文：汉成帝的时候，交趾的越隽贡献了一只能长鸣报晓的司晨鸡。成帝立即命令人用滴漏计时器来验证，司晨鸡鸣叫的时刻和计时器的刻度一点不差。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng, the cross-toed yakitori contributed a morning chicken that could only chirp to announce the dawn. Emperor Zheng immediately ordered someone to use a drip timer to verify that the time of the morning chicken's chirping was exactly the same as the timer.

古文：长鸣一食顷不绝，长距善斗。
现代文：司晨鸡鸣叫起来能连续一顿饭的时间不停歇。这种鸡的脚爪很长，善于搏斗。
English: The song of the morning rooster can last for an entire meal. This chicken has long claws and is good at fighting.

古文：沉鸣鸡
现代文：沉鸣鸡
English: Songbirds

古文：建安三年，胥图献沉鸣石鸡，色如丹，大如燕。
现代文：建安三年，胥图国贡献沉鸣石鸡，红色，大小象燕子一样。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, Shantou Province contributed a red stone chicken, the size of which is like a swallow.

古文：常在地中，应时而鸣，声能远彻。
现代文：石鸡经常生活在地下，按时鸣叫，叫声能清楚地传到很远的地方。
English: Rock ptarmigan often live underground, chirping at regular intervals, and their calls can be clearly heard over long distances.

古文：其国闻其鸣，乃杀牲以祀之。
现代文：胥图国的人听到了石鸡的叫声，就杀牲畜祭祀它。
English: When the people of Sutu heard the cry of the stone chicken, they slaughtered livestock to sacrifice it.

古文：当声处掘地，得此鸡。
现代文：在它发出叫声的地方挖地，就得到这只鸡。
English: The chicken was found by digging at the spot where it had made the sound.

古文：若天下平，翔飞颉颃，以为嘉瑞，亦谓宝鸡。
现代文：如果天下太平，石鸡就上下翻飞，人们把这种现象当成祥瑞，所以又把这种鸡叫作宝鸡。
English: If the world is at peace, the stone chicken will fly up and down. People regard this phenomenon as auspicious, so they call this chicken a treasure chicken.

古文：其国无鸡，人听地中，以候晷刻。
现代文：胥图国没有普通的鸡，人们听地下石鸡的鸣叫，来计算时间。
English: There are no ordinary chickens in the country. People listen to the chirping of the underground stone chicken to calculate the time.

古文：道师云： 昔仙人相君采石，入穴数里，得丹石鸡，舂碎为药。
现代文：有个道士说： 从前仙人相君去采石料，入洞穴几里深，得到了红色石鸡。
English: A Taoist said: Once upon a time, a hermit went to quarry stone, entered a cave several miles deep, and obtained a red stone chicken.

古文：服者令人有声气，后天而死。 
现代文：捣碎了做药，服了能使人加强声音和气息，在先天的寿数之后才死去。 
English: pounded to make a medicine, took a medicine that can make people strengthen their voice and breath, and died after the innate life expectancy.

古文：昔汉武宝鼎元年，四方贡珍怪，有琥珀燕，置之静室，自然鸣翔，此之类也。
现代文：从前汉武帝宝鼎元年，四方国家都来贡献珍奇的宝物，其中有个琥珀燕，把它放在一间静室里，会自然地鸣叫飞翔，就是沉鸣石鸡这一类的珍奇宝物。
English: Once upon a time, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Baoding of the Han Dynasty, countries from all four directions came to contribute rare treasures. Among them was an amber swallow, which, when placed in a quiet room, would naturally sing and fly. It was a rare treasure such as a singing stone chicken.

古文：《洛书》云： 胥图之宝，土德之征。
现代文：《洛书》上说： 胥图国的宝物，乃是土德的象征。
English: "The Book of Luo" said: "The treasure of Lantu is a symbol of the motherland.

古文：大魏嘉瑞焉。 
现代文：这正是大魏国的祥瑞之兆。 
English: This is a sign of prosperity for the Great Wei Kingdom.

古文：孙休
现代文：孙休
English: Sun Xiu

古文：孙休好射雉，至其时，则晨往夕返。
现代文：孙休喜好射猎雉鸡，到了适合打猎的季节他就早晨出去晚上才返回。
English: Sun Xiu likes to shoot pheasants. When the season is suitable for hunting, he will go out in the morning and only return in the evening.

古文：群臣莫不上谏曰： 此小物，何足甚耽？ 
现代文：大臣们没有不提意见劝阻的，他们说： 这是小动物，为什么那么爱好呢？ 
English: The ministers did not hesitate to offer advice and dissuade him, saying: "It's a small animal, why is it so fond of it?

古文：答曰： 虽为小物，耿介过人，朕之所以好也。 
现代文：孙休回答说： 它虽然是小动物，耿直刚正却超过了人，所以我才喜欢它。 
English: Sun Xiu replied, "Although it is a small animal, it is more upright than a human, which is why I like it.

古文：吴清
现代文：吴清
English: Wu Qing

古文：徐州民吴清，以太元五年被差为征。
现代文：徐州的百姓吴清，在吴国太元五年被派遣出征。
English: Wu Qing, a citizen of Xuzhou, was sent to the front in the fifth year of the Taiyuan reign of the State of Wu.

古文：民杀鸡求福，煮鸡头在盘中，忽然而鸣，其声甚长。
现代文：吴清杀鸡祈求赐福，煮熟的鸡头在盘子里，忽然鸣叫起来，叫声悠长。
English: Wu Qing killed a chicken to pray for blessing. The cooked chicken head was on the plate, and suddenly it began to sing. It was a long song.

古文：后破贼帅邵宝，宝临阵战死。
现代文：后来打败了贼兵主帅邵宝，邵宝战死在沙场上。
English: Later, he defeated the Thieves' coach Shao Bao, and Shao Bao died on the battlefield.

古文：其时僵尸狼藉，莫之能识。
现代文：沙场上僵硬的尸体乱七八糟，没有人能识别。
English: The rigid bodies on the sand are in such a mess that no one can identify them.

古文：清见一人著白袍，疑是主帅，遂取以闻。推校之，乃是宝首。
现代文：吴清看见一具尸体穿着白袍，怀疑是主帅，就搬过尸体来研究推断，那鸡头也正是邵宝首级之征。
English: Wu Qing saw a corpse wearing a white robe and suspected that it was the coach. He moved the corpse to study and deduce. That chicken head was also the first sign of Shao Bao.

古文：清以功拜清河太守，越自什伍，遽升荣位。
现代文：吴清因此功被任命为清河太守。从士兵越级提升，一下子就登上了高贵荣耀的位子。
English: As a result, Wu Qing was appointed as the governor of Qinghe. He was promoted from a soldier to a noble and honorable position.

古文：鸡之妖，更为吉祥。
现代文：鸡表现出的妖异现象，更是吉祥的征兆。
English: The strange phenomenon exhibited by chickens is an even more auspicious sign.

古文：广州刺史
现代文：广州刺史
English: A brief history of Guangzhou

古文：广州刺史丧还，其大儿安吉，元嘉三年病死，第二儿，四年复病死。
现代文：广州刺史死后被运回故乡。他的大儿子安吉在南朝元嘉三年得病死了，第二个儿子元嘉四年又得病死了。
English: After the death of Guangzhou Zhishi, he was transported back to his hometown. His eldest son, Anji Ramo, died of illness in the third year of the Southern Dynasty of Yuan Jia, and his second son, Yuan Jia, died of illness in the fourth year.

古文：或教以一雄鸡置棺中，此鸡每至天欲晓，辄在棺里鸣三声，甚悲彻，不异栖中鸣，一月日后，不复闻声。
现代文：有人让把一只公鸡放在棺材里避灾，这只鸡每天天要亮时，都在棺材里叫三声，叫得很悲惨，同在鸡窝里叫的没有什么不一样的。一个月以后，也听不到这只鸡的叫声了。
English: Someone had a rooster placed in a coffin to avoid disaster. This rooster crowed three times in the coffin every day when it was about to dawn. The crowing was very sad and was no different from the crowing in the chicken coop. A month later, the crowing of this rooster could no longer be heard.

古文：祝鸡公
现代文：祝鸡公
English: Congratulations to the chicken

古文：祝鸡公者，洛阳人也。
现代文：祝鸡公是洛阳人，住在尸乡的北山下。
English: Zhu Rongong is from Luoyang and lives in the northern foothills of the Necropolis.

古文：居尸乡北山下，养鸡百余年，鸡皆有名字，千余头。
现代文：他养了一百多年的鸡，养的鸡全都有个名字，一共有一千多只。
English: He has been raising chickens for more than a hundred years. All of his chickens have a name, and there are more than a thousand in total.

古文：暮栖树下，昼放散之。
现代文：晚上鸡就睡在树下，白天就散放着。
English: Chickens sleep under trees at night and roam freely during the day.

古文：欲取呼名，即种别而至。
现代文：他呼唤哪一只鸡的名字，哪一只鸡就自动来到他的身边。
English: He calls the name of any chicken, and any chicken will come to him automatically.

古文：卖鸡及子，得千余万，辄置钱去。
现代文：他卖大鸡和鸡蛋，得到一千多万贯钱。
English: He sold large chickens and eggs and made more than ten million yuan.

古文：之吴，作养池鱼。
现代文：就放好钱来到吴国，又开始干起用池塘养鱼。
English: He put his money aside and came to Wuzhong and started to raise fish in ponds again.

古文：后登吴山，鸡雀数百，常出其旁。
现代文：后来他攀登吴山，经常有几百只鸡和雀出现在他的身边。
English: Later, when he climbed Mount Wu, hundreds of chickens and finches often appeared at his side.

古文：朱综
现代文：朱综
English: Zhu Zong

古文：临淮朱综遭母难，恒外处住。
现代文：临淮朱综的母亲去世了，长期在外面居住守丧。
English: Lin Huai's mother passed away, and she lived outside for a long time in mourning.

古文：内有病，因见前妇。
现代文：听说妻子病了，于是回去看望妻子。
English: He heard that his wife was ill, so he went back to see her.

古文：妇曰： 丧礼之重，不烦数还。 
现代文：妻子说： 丧礼是大事，不要经常回来了。 
English: My wife said, "Funerals are important, so don't come back often."

古文：综曰： 自荼毒已来，何时至内？ 
现代文：朱综说： 自从母亲去世，我什么时候到内室去过？ 
English: Zhu Zimin said: Since my mother died, when have I been to the inner room?

古文：妇云： 君来多矣。 
现代文：妻说： 你来的次数很多啊。 
English: My wife said: You come here a lot.

古文：综知是魅，敕妇婢，候来，便即闭户执之。
现代文：朱综知道是妖魅作怪。就命令妻子的婢女等到他来时，就立即关上门窗捉拿。
English: Zhu Zomei knew that it was the work of a demon. He ordered his wife's maid to wait until he came, and then immediately close the doors and windows to catch him.

古文：及来，登往赴视，此物不得去，遽变老白雄鸡。
现代文：等到那装扮成他的怪物来了，朱综立刻前去探视捉拿，这个怪动无法离开，马上变成一只白色的老公鸡。
English: When the monster dressed up as him arrived, Zhu Zhai immediately went to visit and capture it. This freak couldn't leave and immediately turned into a white male chicken.

古文：推问是家鸡，杀之遂绝。
现代文：一追问原来是家养的鸡，杀了鸡以后再没有怪事发生。
English: After questioning the chicken, which turned out to be a domestic chicken, nothing strange happened after the chicken was killed.

古文：代郡亭
现代文：代郡亭
English: Daigun-tei

古文：代郡界中一亭，作怪不可止。
现代文：代郡的边界处有一座供行人住宿吃饭的亭站，经常有妖精作怪。
English: There is a pavilion station for pedestrians to stay and eat at the border of the county, and there are often fairies.

古文：有诸生壮勇者，暮行，欲止亭宿，亭吏止之。诸生曰： 我自能消此。 
现代文：有一个姓诸的书生，很勇敢傍晚走路，想在亭站中住宿，官吏制止他，他说： 我自己能消除灾祸。 
English: A scholar surnamed Zhu, who was brave enough to walk in the evening and wanted to stay in a pavilion, was stopped by officials. He said: I can eliminate the disaster myself.

古文：乃住宿食。
现代文：于是便住下来吃饭休息。
English: So they stayed to eat and rest.

古文：夜诸生前坐，出一手，吹五孔笛，诸生笑谓鬼曰： 汝止有一手，那得遍笛，我为汝吹来。 
现代文：夜里书生坐在前厅，这时，出现了一只手，吹着一支五个孔的笛子。书生笑着对鬼说： 你只有一只手，怎么能按住所有的笛孔，我替你吹吧。 
English: In the night, Shousei was sitting in the anteroom, when a hand appeared, blowing a flute with five holes. Shousei smiled and said to the ghost, "You only have one hand, how can you hold all the flute holes, I'll blow it for you."

古文：鬼云： 卿为我少指耶？ 
现代文：鬼说： 你以为我手指少吗？ 
English: The ghost said, "Do you think I have too few fingers?"

古文：乃复引手，即有数十指出，诸生知其可击，因拔剑砍之，得老雄鸡。
现代文：于是又伸出手来，竟有几十个手指。书生知道可以攻击鬼了，于是就拔出剑来砍去，结果砍死的是一只老雄鸡。
English: So he stretched out his hand again, and it turned out to have dozens of fingers. The scholar knew that he could attack the ghost, so he pulled out his sword to cut it, and the result was an old rooster.

