古文：前世遗事，时有于古人文章中见之。
现代文：古代的逸事，有时候在古人的文章中也可以看到。
English: Anecdotes from ancient times can sometimes be found in the writings of the ancients.

古文：元稹诗有 琵琶宫调八十一，三调弦中弹不出。 
现代文：元稹有句诗说 琵琶宫调八十一，三调弦中弹不出。 
English: There is a poem by Yuan Xuan that says, "In the 81st measure of the Biwa Palace Tuning, the strings cannot be played in the 3rd measure."

古文：琵琶共有八十四调，盖十二律各七均，乃成八十四调。
现代文：琵琶共有八十四调，大概是十二律每一律各有七韵，一共是八十四调。
English: There are a total of eighty-four pitches for the lute, roughly twelve, each of which has seven rhymes, for a total of eighty-four pitches.

古文：稹诗言 八十一调 ，人多不喻所谓。
现代文：元稹的诗说 八十一调 ，人们大多都不明白他这么说是什么意思。
English: Most people don't understand what he means when he says the poem is in Eighty-one tones.

古文：余于金陵丞相家得唐贺怀智《琵琶谱》一册，其序云： 琵琶八十四调。
现代文：我在金陵丞相家获得唐朝贺怀智一册《琵琶谱》，它的序言说： 琵琶八十四调。
English: I obtained a copy of the Tang Dynasty He Huai Zhi's "Biwa Spectrum" at the home of Minister Jinling Zheng. Its preface said: "The 84 tunes of the pipa."

古文：内黄钟、太蔟、林钟宫声，弦中弹不出，须管色定弦。
现代文：内黄钟、太蔟、林钟宫声，弦中弹不出，须管色定弦。
English: Inner yellow bell, too loud, Lin Zhongguo sound, can not bounce in the string, must be color-coded string.

古文：其余八十一调，皆以此三调为準，更不用管色定弦。 
现代文：其余八十一调，皆以此三调为准，更不用管色定弦。 
English: The remaining eighty-one tones are all based on these three tones, not to mention the chromatic tuning.

古文：始喻稹诗言。如今之调琴，须先用管色 合 字定宫弦下生徵，徵弦上生商，上下相生，终于少商。
现代文：看到这个才明白元稹诗句中所说的如同今天的调琴，要先用管色 合 字确定宫弦，然后以宫弦下生徵，徵弦上生商，上下相生，直到少商。
English: Only after seeing this did I understand that what was said in the poem by Yuan Zheng is similar to tuning a piano today. First, you need to use the tube color combination to determine the palatal chord, and then use the lower palatal chord to create the tone, the upper palatal chord to create the tone, and the upper and lower palatal chords to create the tone, until there are fewer tones.

古文：凡下生者隔二弦，上生者隔一弦取之。
现代文：但凡下生的隔二弦，上生的隔一弦取之。
English: But where the lower-born divide by two, the upper-born divide by one.

古文：凡弦声皆当如此。
现代文：凡是弦声都应当如此。
English: This should be the case for all string sounds.

古文：古人仍须以金石为準，《商颂》 依我磬声 是也。
现代文：古人都须要以金石乐器为定音标准，《商颂》 依我磬声 说的就是这一情形。
English: The ancients had to use the gold and stone musical instruments as the tuning standard, and this is what the "Merchant's Song" is saying.

古文：今人苟简，不復以弦管定声，故其高下无準，出于临时。
现代文：今天的人贪图省事，不再用弦管乐器定声，所以声音的高低没有定准，都是临时调配。
English: Today's people are eager to save time and effort, and no longer use stringed instruments to set the tone, so the pitch of the sound is not set, and it is all temporary.

古文：怀智《琵琶谱》调格，与今乐全不同。
现代文：贺怀智《琵琶谱》中的调格，与今乐完全不同。
English: The tuning in He Huai Zhi's "Biwa Shu" is completely different from that of contemporary music.

古文：唐人乐学精深，尚有雅律遗法。
现代文：唐人乐学精深，还保留有古乐的雅律遗法。
English: He is a profound scholar of Chinese folk music, and has preserved the legacy of classical music.

古文：今之燕乐，古声多亡，而新声大率皆无法度。
现代文：今天的燕乐中，古声大多亡佚，而新声大抵都没有法度。
English: In today's bird song, the old voices are mostly dead, and the new voices are mostly illegal.

古文：乐工自不能言其义，如何得其声和？
现代文：乐工自身都不能讲明白乐中的道理，如何能让他们的音乐和谐呢？
English: Musicians themselves cannot explain the meaning of music, how can they make their music harmonious?

古文：今教坊燕乐，比律高二均弱。 合 字比太蔟微下，却以 凡 字当宫声，比宫之清微高。
现代文：今天教坊的燕乐比唐律高二律稍弱。 合 字比太蔟略低，却以 凡 字当宫声，比黄钟清宫稍高。
English: Today, the Yan music in the classroom is slightly weaker than the Tang music, with a higher diatonic scale, and the He zi is slightly lower than the Tai zi, but it uses the Fan zi as the palace sound, which is slightly higher than the Huang Zhong Qing Gong.

古文：外方乐尤无法，求体又高教坊一均以来。
现代文：中原以外的音乐尤其没有法度，大体上又比教坊的高一律多。
English: Music outside the Central Plains, in particular, is unregulated, and in general, there are more high schools than kindergartens.

古文：唯北狄乐声，比教坊乐下二均。
现代文：唯独北狄的乐声，比教坊乐低二律。
English: However, Bei Di's music is inferior to the music of the school.

古文：大凡北人衣冠文物，多用唐俗，此乐疑亦唐之遗声也。
现代文：大致北方人的服饰器物多采用唐代的风俗，这种音乐怀疑也是唐代音乐的残留。
English: For the most part, the clothing and utensils of northerners mostly adopt the customs of the Tang Dynasty, and this kind of music is suspected to be a remnant of Tang Dynasty music.

古文：今之燕乐二十八调，布在十一律，唯黄钟、中吕、林钟三律，各具宫、商、角、羽四音；其余或有一调至二三调，独蕤宾一律都无。
现代文：今天的燕乐二十八调分布在十一律上，唯独黄钟、中吕、林钟三律各自具有宫、商、角、羽四音；其余的律有的有一调，有的有二三调，唯独蕤宾这一律一调都没有。
English: Today's Yan Le's twenty-eight tunings are distributed over eleven tunings, except for the three tunings of Huang Zhong, Zhong Lv and Lin Zhong, each of which has four tones of palace, merchant, horn and feather; the remaining tunings have one tuning, some have two or three tunings, but there is no tuning for Xingbin.

古文：内中管仙吕调，乃是蕤宾声，亦不正当本律。
现代文：其中的管仙吕调是蕤宾声，但也不算是本律。
English: Among them, Guanxian Lv's tune is the main melody, but it is not the fundamental melody.

古文：其间声音出入，亦不全应古法。
现代文：这二十八调中的声音也有出入，不完全符合从前的法度。
English: The sounds in these twenty-eight tunings also vary, and do not fully conform to the previous regulations.

古文：略可配合而已。
现代文：仅是大体上可以配合而已。
English: It's just that we can cooperate in general.

古文：如今之中吕宫，却是古夹钟宫；南吕宫，乃古林钟宫；今林钟商，乃古无射宫；今大吕调，乃古林钟羽。
现代文：比如今天的中吕宫，却是古代的夹钟宫；南吕宫是古代的林钟宫；今天的林钟商是古代的夷则商；今天的南吕调，是古代的林钟羽。
English: For example, today's Zhonglv Palace is the ancient Zhangzhong Palace; South Lv Palace is the ancient Linzhong Palace; today's Linzhong merchants are the ancient Yizhe merchants; today's South Lv Diao is the ancient Linzhong Yu.

古文：虽国工亦莫能知其所因。
现代文：即使是全国最优秀的乐工也不清楚其中的缘由。
English: Even the best musicians in the country don't know why.

古文：十二律并清宫，当有十六声。
现代文：十二律加上清宫，应当有十六声。
English: Twelve precepts plus the Qing imperial anthem should be sixteen syllables.

古文：今之燕乐止有十五声。
现代文：今天的燕乐只有十五声。
English: Today's bird song has only fifteen notes.

古文：盖今乐高于古乐二律以下，故无正黄钟声，只以 合 字当大吕，犹差高，当在大吕、太蔟之间， 下四 字近蔟， 高四 字近夹钟， 下一 字近姑洗， 高一 字近中吕， 上 字近蕤宾； 勾 字近林钟， 尺 字近夷则， 工 字近南吕， 高工 字近无射， 六 字近应钟， 下凡 字为黄钟清。 高凡 字为太吕清， 下五 字为太蔟清， 高五 字为夹钟清。
现代文：大概今乐比古乐高二律稍弱，所以没有正黄钟声，只认 合 字当大吕，仍然偏高，本应当在大吕、太蔟之间， 下四 字近太蔟， 高四 字近夹钟， 下一 字近姑洗， 高一 字近中吕， 上 字近蕤宾， 勾 字近林钟， 尺 字近夷则， 下工 字近南吕， 高工 字近无射， 下凡 字近应钟， 下凡 字为黄钟清。 高凡 字为大吕清， 下五 字为太蔟清， 高五 字为夹钟清。
English: Probably, the current music is slightly weaker than the ancient music, so there is no positive yellow bell, only the recognition of the word when the Great Lu, still high, should have been between the Great Lu and the Great Lu, the lower four words close to the Great Lu, the high four words close to the clamped bell, the next word close to the Guba, the high one word close to the Middle Lu, the upper word close to the Zhibin, the hook word close to the Forest Bell, the shaku word close to the Yizi, the lower work word close to the South Lu, the high work word close to the no shot, the lower word close to the bell, the lower word

古文：法虽如此，然诸调杀声，不能尽归本律，故有偏杀、侧杀、寄杀、元杀之类。
现代文：法度虽然如此，然而各调中的杀声，不能完全规划本律，所以有偏杀、侧杀、寄杀、元杀之类。
English: Although the law is like this, however, the killing in each tuning cannot completely plan the original law, so there are partial killing, side killing, side killing, original killing and the like.

古文：虽与古法不同，推之亦皆有理。
现代文：虽然与古代的法度不同，推敲它也自有道理。
English: Although it is different from the ancient law, it makes sense to study it.

古文：知声者皆能言之，此不备载也。
现代文：通晓音乐的人都能把它讲明白，这里就不一一记载了。
English: Anyone who is familiar with music can explain it clearly, but not everything is recorded here.

