古文：十月，惠公卒。
现代文：十月，晋惠公死。
English: In October, Jin Huigong died.

古文：十二月，秦伯纳公子。
现代文：十二月，秦穆公把公子重耳送回晋国。
English: In December, Qin Mu sent his son Chong Er back to Jin.

古文：及河，子犯授公子载璧，曰： 臣从君还轸，巡于天下，怨其多矣！
现代文：到了黄河边上，子犯把祭祀用的璧交给重耳，说： 我跟随您乘车周转，在天下巡行，臣的罪过已经太多了。
English: When they arrived at the edge of the Yellow River, the son-in-law handed the sacrificial wreath to the eagle, saying, "I have followed you on your car tour, traveling all over the world. The minister's sins are too many.

古文：臣犹知之，而况君乎？
现代文：我自己尚且知道，何况您呢？
English: I know it myself, how much more do you?

古文：不忍其死，请由此亡。 
现代文：我不忍心因此而死，请公子就此允许臣离开吧。 
English: I can't bear to die because of this, so please allow me to leave.

古文：公子曰： 所不与舅氏同心者，有如河水。 
现代文：重耳说： 假如我不跟舅舅同心同德，我愿以黄河水赌咒为誓！ 
English: The heavy ear said: If I don't have the same heart as my uncle, I will swear by the water of the Yellow River!

古文：沈璧以质。董因迎公于河，公问焉，曰： 吾其济乎？ 
现代文：说着就把那块璧扔进了黄河里，来表明自己的诚信。董因在黄河边上迎接重耳，重耳问道： 我这次回来能成功吗？ 
English: While saying this, he threw the gem into the Yellow River to show his sincerity. On the edge of the Yellow River, Dong Ying greeted Jie Er. Jie Er asked: Will I be able to succeed this time?

古文：对曰： 岁在大梁，将集天行。
现代文：董因回答说： 现在太岁星出现在大梁区域，这象征您将要成就大事。
English: Dongying replied, "Nowadays, the Chinese New Year Star appears in the beam area, which symbolizes that you will achieve great things.

古文：元年始受，实沈之星也。
现代文：您即位的第一年，是在实沈星的位置。
English: In the first year of your reign, you were in the position of the real Shen Xing.

古文：实沈之墟，晋人是居。
现代文：实沈的故城，正是晋人居住的地方。
English: The old city of Jishen is exactly where the Jin people lived.

古文：所以兴也。
现代文：晋国因此才兴盛起来的。
English: This is how Jin flourished.

古文：今君当之，无不济矣。
现代文：如今正好应合在您身上，没有不成功的。
English: It's the right fit for you right now, and there's no such thing as failure.

古文：君之行也，岁在大火。
现代文：您出逃的时候，岁星在大火星的位置。
English: When you run away, the year star is in the position of the great Mars.

古文：大火，阏伯之星也，是谓大辰辰以成善，后稷是相，唐叔以封。
现代文：大火星，就是阏伯星，也称为大辰星。辰星代表农事吉祥，周的祖先后稷据此以成就农事，晋的始祖唐叔也是岁星在辰的那年受封的。
English: The Great Mars is Dabo Star, also known as the Great Dragon Star. Dragon Star represents agricultural auspiciousness, and Zhou's ancestor Houyi achieved agricultural affairs according to this. Jin's ancestor Tang Uncle was also named the Year Star in the year of Dragon Star.

古文：瞽史记曰：嗣续其祖，如谷之滋。
现代文：瞽史的记载说：子孙后代继承先祖，如同谷物蕃育滋长。
English: It is recorded in Chinese history that descendants inherit their ancestors, just as grains are nurtured and grown.

古文：必有晋国。
现代文：因此必定能得到晋国。
English: Therefore, it is certain to be promoted to the next level.

古文：臣筮之，得《泰》之八。
现代文：我占筮，得到《泰》卦阴爻的数字是八。
English: I guessed eight, and the number I got was eight.

古文：曰：是谓天地配亨，小往大来，今及之矣，何不济之有？
现代文：说：这是指天地亨通，小的去大的来。现在到时候了，怎么会不成功呢？
English: He said, "This refers to the heavens and the earth prospering, and the small going to the great. Now is the time, how can it not succeed?

古文：且以辰出而以参入，皆晋祥也，而天之大纪也。
现代文：而且您是岁星在辰时出走的，又于岁星在参时回国，这些都是晋国吉祥的征兆，是上天大的历数。
English: Moreover, the fact that you left the country at the time of the New Year's Eve, and returned to the country at the time of the New Year's Eve, are all auspicious signs for the promotion of the country, which is a great number.

古文：济且秉成，必霸诸侯。
现代文：成功稳握在手，必定能称霸诸侯。
English: With success firmly in hand, it is sure to be able to dominate the princes.

古文：子孙赖之，君无惧矣。 
现代文：子孙后代都仰赖它，您不必害怕。
English: Future generations depend on it, and you don't have to be afraid.

古文：公子济河，召令狐、臼衰、桑泉，皆降。
现代文：重耳渡过了黄河，召集令狐、臼衰、桑泉三个地方的长官，他们都投降了。
English: He crossed the Yellow River and summoned the governors of the three regions of Linghu, Usui and Mulberry Springs. They all surrendered.

古文：晋人惧，怀公奔高梁。
现代文：晋国人感到害怕，晋怀公逃亡到了高梁。
English: The people of Jin were afraid, and Prince Jin Huai fled to Gaoliang.

古文：吕甥、冀芮帅师，甲午，军于庐柳。
现代文：吕甥、冀芮率领着军队，甲午那天，驻扎在庐柳。
English: On the day of the first day of the second lunar month, the army led by Lv Nefu and Ji Rong was stationed in Qiliu.

古文：秦伯使公子絷如师，师退，次于郇。
现代文：秦穆公派公子絷到晋军去交涉，结果晋军退走，驻扎在郇城。
English: Qin Mu Gong sent his son Zou to the Jin army to negotiate, as a result, the Jin army retreated and was stationed in Lucheng.

古文：辛丑，狐偃及秦、晋大夫盟于郇。
现代文：辛丑日，狐偃与秦、晋两国的大夫在郇城会盟订约。
English: On the fateful day, the fox and the doctors from Qin and Jin signed a treaty at the Shicheng Association.

古文：壬寅，公入于晋师。
现代文：壬寅那天，重耳到达晋军中。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, Jie Er arrived in the Jin army.

古文：甲辰，秦伯还。
现代文：甲辰日，秦穆公返回秦国。
English: On the day of the Epiphany, Qin Mu Gong returned to Qin.

古文：丙午，入于曲沃。
现代文：丙午日，重耳进入曲沃。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the heavy ears reached Quwo.

古文：丁未，入绛，即位于武宫，戊申，刺怀公于高梁。
现代文：丁未日，进入首都绛城，在晋武公庙即位。戊申日，在高梁刺杀了晋怀公。
English: On the day of Dingwei, he entered the capital of Lucheng and ascended to the throne in the temple of Jinwukong. On the day of Wushen, he assassinated Jinhuai in Gaoliang.

