古文：孔子生鲁昌平乡陬邑。
现代文：孔子出生在鲁国昌平乡的陬邑。
English: Confucius was born in Lu Province, Changping Township.

古文：其先宋人也，曰孔防叔。
现代文：他的祖先是宋国人，叫孔防叔。
English: His ancestor was a man from the Song Dynasty, called Uncle Kong Bo.

古文：防叔生伯夏，伯夏生叔梁纥。
现代文：防叔生伯夏，伯夏生了叔梁纥。
English: The defense uncle gave birth to Bixia, and Bixia gave birth to uncle Liang Yao.

古文：纥与颜氏女野合而生孔子，祷於尼丘得孔子。
现代文：叔梁纥和一位姓颜的女子野合生下了孔子，那是他们到尼丘山向神明祷告后而得孔子的。
English: Shu Liangyao and a woman named Yan gave birth to Confucius, who was born after they went to Mount Nichiu to pray to the gods.

古文：鲁襄公二十二年而孔子生。
现代文：鲁襄公二十二年孔子出生。
English: In the 22nd year of King Lu Xiang, Confucius was born.

古文：生而首上圩顶，故因名曰丘云。字仲尼，姓孔氏。
现代文：他刚出生时头顶是凹下去的，所以就给他取名叫丘。字仲尼，姓孔氏。
English: When he was first born, the top of his head was sunken, so he was given the name Yau. His Chinese name is Zhongni and his surname is Kong.

古文：丘生而叔梁纥死，葬於防山。
现代文：孔子出生不久叔梁纥就死了，埋葬在防山。
English: Soon after Confucius was born, Shu Liangyao died and was buried in Fangshan.

古文：防山在鲁东，由是孔子疑其父墓处，母讳之也。
现代文：防山在鲁国东部，因此孔子无法确知父亲的坟墓在何处，他的母亲没有把父亲埋葬的地方告诉他。
English: Fenshan is in the eastern part of Lu, so Confucius couldn't be sure where his father's grave was. His mother didn't tell him where his father was buried.

古文：孔子为兒嬉戏，常陈俎豆，设礼容。
现代文：孔子小时候做游戏，常常摆起各种祭器，学做祭祀的礼仪动作。
English: When Confucius was a child, he played games and often set up various sacrificial objects to learn how to perform ritual actions.

古文：孔子母死，乃殡五父之衢，盖其慎也。
现代文：孔子的母亲死后，就把灵柩暂且停放在五父之衢，并未埋葬，这是出于慎重的考虑。
English: After the death of Confucius' mother, the coffin was temporarily placed in the tomb of the five fathers and was not buried. This was out of prudent consideration.

古文：陬人輓父之母诲孔子父墓，然後往合葬於防焉。
现代文：陬邑人輓父的母亲把孔子父亲的葬地告诉了他，然后孔子才把母亲迁去防山同父亲葬在一起。
English: The father's mother told him the burial place of Confucius' father, and then Confucius moved his mother to Fangshan and buried her with his father.

古文：孔子要绖，季氏飨士，孔子与往。
现代文：孔子腰间还系着孝麻带守丧时，季孙氏举行宴会款待名士，孔子前去参加。
English: When Confucius was still wearing the filial piety ribbon around his waist to observe the funeral, the Ji Sun clan held a banquet to entertain celebrities, and Confucius went to attend.

古文：阳虎绌曰： 季氏飨士，非敢飨子也。 
现代文：季孙氏的家臣阳虎阻挠说： 季氏招待名士，没有请你啊。 
English: Mr. Ji Sun's vassal, Yang Hu, interrupted and said: Mr. Ji invited celebrities, but he didn't invite you.

古文：孔子由是退。
现代文：孔子因此而退了回来。
English: Confucius retreated because of this.

古文：孔子年十七，鲁大夫孟釐子病且死，诫其嗣懿子曰： 孔丘，圣人之後，灭於宋。
现代文：孔子十七岁那年，鲁国大夫釐子病危，临终前告诫儿子懿子说： 孔丘，是圣人的后代，他的祖先在宋国灭亡。
English: In the seventeenth year of Confucius's life, the doctor of the State of Lu, Xun Zi, was critically ill. Before his death, he admonished his son, Xun Zi, saying: "Confucius is the descendant of a sage, and his ancestors perished in the State of Song.

古文：其祖弗父何始有宋而嗣让厉公。
现代文：他的先祖弗父何本来应当继位做宋国国君，却让位于他的弟弟厉公。
English: Why did his ancestor Fufu, who should have succeeded to the throne as the sovereign of Song, give way to his brother Liguo?

古文：及正考父佐戴、武、宣公，三命兹益恭，故鼎铭云： 一命而偻，再命而伛，三命而俯，循墙而走，亦莫敢余侮。
现代文：到他的另一个先祖正考父时，辅佐宋戴公、宋武公、宋宣公三朝，三次受命一次比一次恭敬，所以正考父鼎的铭文说： 第一次任命鞠躬而受，第二次任命时弯腰而受，第三次任命时俯首而受。
English: When another ancestor of his was being examined by his father, he assisted Song Dai Gong, Song Wu Gong, and Song Xuan Gong for three dynasties, and was ordered to pay respect three times. Therefore, the inscription of the examination of his father said: The first appointment was bowed and accepted, the second appointment was bent and accepted, and the third appointment was bowed and accepted.

古文：饘於是，粥於是，以餬余口。 
现代文：走路时避开道路中央，靠墙而行，也没有人敢来欺辱我；我就在这个鼎中做些面糊粥以糊口度日。 
English: When I walk, I avoid the middle of the road and walk against the wall, and no one dares to bully me; I just make some porridge in this soup to make a living.

古文：其恭如是。
现代文：他的恭谨节俭已经到了这个地步。
English: His scrupulous frugality has reached this point.

古文：吾闻圣人之後，虽不当世，必有达者。
现代文：我听说圣人的后代，虽不一定做国君执政，但必定会有才德显达的人出现。
English: I have heard that the descendants of saints, although they do not necessarily rule as kings, but there will certainly be people of great talent.

古文：今孔丘年少好礼，其达者欤？
现代文：如今孔子年少而好礼，他不就是才德显达的人吗？
English: Now that Confucius is young and polite, isn't he a man of great talent?

古文：吾即没，若必师之。 
现代文：如果我死了，你一定要以他为师。 
English: If I die, you must learn from him.

古文：及釐子卒，懿子与鲁人南宫敬叔往学礼焉。
现代文：等到孟釐子去世，孟懿子和鲁国人南宫敬叔便前往孔子那里学习礼仪。
English: After Meng Xi's death, Meng Xi and his uncle Nangong Jing, a native of Lu, went to Confucius to learn the etiquette.

古文：是岁，季武子卒，平子代立。
现代文：这一年，季武子死了，由平子继承了卿位。
English: In the same year, Ji Takeko died, and Hiroko inherited the title of nobility.

古文：孔子贫且贱。
现代文：孔子家境贫穷且地位卑下。
English: Confucius's family was poor and underprivileged.

古文：及长，尝为季氏史，料量平；尝为司职吏而畜蕃息。
现代文：等他成年后，曾给季氏做过管理仓库的小吏，出纳钱粮算得公平准确；也曾担任过管理牧场的小吏，牲畜繁育得很好。
English: After he became an adult, he worked as a clerk to manage the warehouse for Mr. Ji, and the cashier calculated the money and grain fairly and accurately; he also worked as a clerk to manage the pasture, and the livestock bred well.

古文：由是为司空。
现代文：因此他又升任主管营建工程的司空。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of supervisor of the construction project.

古文：已而去鲁，斥乎齐，逐乎宋、卫，困於陈蔡之间，於是反鲁。
现代文：过了没多久，他离开了鲁国，在齐国受到排斥，在宋国、卫国遭遇到驱逐，又在陈国和蔡国之间被围困，最后又返回了鲁国。
English: Soon after, he left the State of Lu, was rejected in the State of Qi, was expelled from the State of Song and the State of Wei, was besieged between the States of Chen and Cai, and finally returned to the State of Lu.

古文：孔子长九尺有六寸，人皆谓之 长人 而异之。
现代文：孔子身高九尺六寸，人们都称他为 长人 ，觉得他与一般人不一样。
English: Confucius was nine feet six inches tall, and people called him the Elder and thought he was different from ordinary people.

古文：鲁复善待，由是反鲁。
现代文：鲁国依然对他很好，所以他回到了鲁国。
English: Russia still treated him well, so he returned to Russia.

古文：鲁南宫敬叔言鲁君曰： 请与孔子適周。 
现代文：鲁国人南宫敬叔对鲁昭公说： 请让我与孔子一起出使周国。 
English: Uncle Nangong Jing, a native of Lu, said to Lu Zhaogong, "Please let me go to Zhou with Confucius.

古文：鲁君与之一乘车，两马，一竖子俱，適周问礼，盖见老子云。
现代文：鲁昭公就给了他一辆车子、两匹马，一名童仆，随他出发，到周国去学习礼仪，又拜望了老子。
English: Lu Zhaogong gave him a carriage, two horses, and a boy servant, and he set out with him to study etiquette in Zhou Province and visit Lao Zi.

古文：辞去，而老子送之曰： 吾闻富贵者送人以财，仁人者送人以言。
现代文：辞别的时候，老子出来送他们时说： 我听说富贵的人是用财物送人，品德高尚的人是用言辞送人。
English: At the time of parting, when Lao Zi came out to see them off, he said, "I have heard that rich people send people away with wealth, and people of high moral character send people away with words.

古文：吾不能富贵，窃仁人之号，送子以言，曰： 聪明深察而近於死者，好议人者也。博辩广大危其身者，发人之恶者也。
现代文：我不是富贵的人，只能窃用品德高尚人的名号，用言辞为您送行。这几句话是： 聪明深察的人常常受到死亡的威胁，那是因为他喜欢议论别人的缘故；博学善辩识见广大的人常遭困厄危及自身，那是因为他好揭发别人罪恶的缘故。
English: I am not a rich man, and I can only steal the name of a virtuous man and see you off with a few words: A wise and insightful man is often threatened with death, because he likes to talk about others; a knowledgeable and argumentative man is often in trouble and endangers himself, because he is good at exposing the sins of others.

古文：为人子者毋以有己，为人臣者毋以有己。  孔子自周反于鲁，弟子稍益进焉。
现代文：做子女的不能有私心，做臣下的要不能只想自己而是要心存君主。 孔子从周回到鲁国之后，跟从他学习的弟子渐渐多了起来。
English: As a child, one must not be selfish, as a subject, one must not think only of oneself, but must keep the monarch in mind.After Confucius returned to Lu from Zhou, the number of disciples who studied with him gradually increased.

古文：是时也，晋平公淫，六卿擅权，东伐诸侯；楚灵王兵彊，陵轹中国；齐大而近於鲁。
现代文：在这个时候，晋平公淫乱无道，韩氏、赵氏、魏氏、中行氏、范氏、知氏六家大臣把持国政，不断出兵攻打东边的侯国，楚灵王军队强大，也时常侵犯中原各国；齐是大国又靠近鲁国。
English: At this time, the Jin and Ping Dynasties were rampant, and the six ministers of the Han, Zhao, Wei, Zhongxing, Fan, and Zhi dynasties were in charge of state affairs, constantly sending troops to attack the eastern principalities. King Chuling's army was strong and often invaded the Central Plains countries. They were all great powers and close to the Lu Kingdom.

古文：鲁小弱，附於楚则晋怒；附於晋则楚来伐；不备於齐，齐师侵鲁。
现代文：鲁国既小又弱，归附楚国就惹怒晋国；归附晋国就招致楚国来讨伐；对于齐国如果奉事不周到，齐国的军队就侵犯鲁国。
English: As Lu was small and weak, annexation of Chu would anger Jin; annexation of Jin would invite Chu to invade; if Qi did not do a good job, Qi's army would invade Lu.

古文：鲁昭公之二十年，而孔子盖年三十矣。
现代文：鲁昭公二十年，孔子三十岁。
English: Lu Zhaogong is 20 years old, Confucius is 30 years old.

古文：齐景公与晏婴来適鲁，景公问孔子曰： 昔秦穆公国小处辟，其霸何也？ 
现代文：齐景公与晏婴来到鲁国，景公问孔子说： 从前秦公国家小而且位置偏僻，他能够称霸，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: When Qi Jing Gong and his infant son came to Lu, Jing Gong asked Confucius: "Formerly, Qin Gong's country was small and remote, and he was able to dominate it. What was the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 秦，国虽小，其志大；处虽辟，行中正。
现代文：孔子回答说： 秦国虽小，志向却很大；所处地方虽然偏僻，但施政却很恰当。
English: Confucius replied, "Although Qin is a small country, it has great aspirations. Although it is located in a remote area, its governance is very appropriate.

古文：身举五羖，爵之大夫，起累绁之中，与语三日，授之以政。
现代文：秦穆公亲自拔用五张黑公羊皮赎来的百里奚，授给他大夫的官爵，把他从拘禁中一解救出来，秦君与他谈论了三天，随后就让他执掌国政。
English: Qin Mu Gong personally used five pieces of black ram skin to redeem the hundred-li yuans and awarded him the title of doctor, releasing him from detention. Qin Jun talked with him for three days, and then let him take charge of state affairs.

古文：以此取之，虽王可也，其霸小矣。 
现代文：用这种精神来治理国家，就是统治整个天下也是可以的，他当个霸主不算什么大事。 
English: Using this spirit to govern the country, it is possible to rule the whole world. It is not a big deal for him to be a hegemon.

古文：景公说。
现代文：景公听了很高兴。
English: Jinggong was very happy to hear this.

古文：孔子年三十五，而季平子与郈昭伯以斗鸡故得罪鲁昭公，昭公率师击平子，平子与孟氏、叔孙氏三家共攻昭公，昭公师败，奔於齐，齐处昭公乾侯。
现代文：孔子三十五岁的时候，季平子因为与郈昭伯斗鸡的缘故得罪了鲁昭公，昭公率军队攻打平子，平子和孟孙氏、叔孙氏三家联合攻打昭公，昭公的军队战败，逃奔到齐国，齐国把昭公安置在乾侯这个地方。
English: When Confucius was thirty-five years old, Ji Ping Zi offended Lu Zhaogong because of a cockfight with Zhai Zhaobo. Zhaogong led an army to attack Ping Zi. Ping Zi and the Meng Sun clan and the three great-grandsons jointly attacked Zhaogong. Zhaogong's army was defeated and fled to Qi. Qi placed Zhaogong in Qianhou.

古文：其後顷之，鲁乱。
现代文：其后过了不久，鲁国发生了变乱。
English: Not long after that, there was a revolution in Russia.

古文：孔子適齐，为高昭子家臣，欲以通乎景公。
现代文：孔子来到齐国，做了高昭子的家臣，想借高昭子的关系接近景公。
English: Confucius came to Qi, became a vassal of Gao Akiko, and wanted to use Gao Akiko's relationship to get close to King Jing.

古文：与齐太师语乐，闻韶音，学之，三月不知肉味，齐人称之。
现代文：孔子与齐国的乐官谈论音乐，听到了舜时的《韶》乐，就学习了起来，陶醉其中竟然有三个月的时间尝不出肉的味道，齐国人都称赞他。
English: Confucius talked about music with the music official of Qi, and when he heard the "Chong" music of Gong, he began to study. He was so intoxicated that he could not taste the taste of meat for three months. The people of Qi all praised him.

古文：景公问政孔子，孔子曰： 君君，臣臣，父父，子子。 
现代文：齐景公向孔子请教如何为政，孔子说： 国君要有国君的样子，臣子要有臣子的样子，父亲要有父亲的样子，儿子要有儿子的样子。 
English: Lord Qi Jing asked Confucius for advice on how to run the government. Confucius said: The sovereign should look like a sovereign, the vassal should look like a vassal, the father should look like a father, and the son should look like a son.

古文：景公曰： 善哉！
现代文：景公听了后说： 讲得很好！
English: After listening, Jinggong said, "You spoke very well!

古文：信如君不君，臣不臣，父不父，子不子，虽有粟，吾岂得而食诸！ 
现代文：假如国君没有国君的样子，臣子没有臣子的样子，父亲没有父亲的样子，儿子没有儿子的样子，即使有很多的粮食，我怎么能吃得到呢！ 
English: If the sovereign does not have the appearance of a sovereign, the vassal does not have the appearance of a vassal, the father does not have the appearance of a father, the son does not have the appearance of a son, even if there is a lot of grain, how can I eat it!

古文：他日又复问政於孔子，孔子曰： 政在节财。 
现代文：改日景公又向孔子请教为政的道理，孔子说： 管理国家最重要的是节省财物。 
English: Confucius said: The most important thing in governing a country is to save money.

古文：景公说，将欲以尼谿田封孔子。
现代文：景公听了很高兴，打算把尼谿的田地封赏给孔子。
English: Jing Gong was very pleased to hear this, and planned to award Confucius the fields of Ni'dang.

古文：晏婴进曰： 夫儒者滑稽而不可轨法；倨傲自顺，不可以为下；崇丧遂哀，破产厚葬，不可以为俗；游说乞贷，不可以为国。
现代文：晏婴劝阻说： 那些儒者能言善辩，是不能用法来约束他们的；他们高傲任性自以为是，不能任为下臣使用；他们崇尚丧事的礼仪，竭尽哀情，为了葬礼隆重而不惜倾家荡产，不能让这种做法形成风气；他们四处游说乞求官禄，不能用他们来治理国家。
English: "Those Confucians can speak well, but you can't use the law to restrain them; they are arrogant, self-willed and self-righteous, and can't be used as subordinates; they advocate the etiquette of funerals, make every effort to mourn, and sacrifice their family's wealth for a grand funeral, and can't let this practice form a culture; they can't use them to govern the country.

古文：自大贤之息，周室既衰，礼乐缺有间。
现代文：自从那些圣贤相继下世以后，周王室也随之衰微下去，礼崩乐坏已经有一段时间了。
English: Since those sages passed away one after another, the Zhou royal family has also waned, and it has been a while since it has been ceremonious.

古文：今孔子盛容饰，繁登降之礼，趋详之节，累世不能殚其学，当年不能究其礼。
现代文：现在孔子讲究仪容服饰，详定繁琐的上朝下朝礼节，刻意追求举手投足的仪态，这些繁文缛节，就是几代人也学习不完，毕生也搞不清楚。
English: Now Confucius pays attention to the appearance and dress, details the cumbersome up-and-down morning etiquette, and deliberately pursues the gesture of raising hands and feet. These red tape, even several generations can't finish learning, and they can't figure it out for life.

古文：君欲用之以移齐俗，非所以先细民也。 
现代文：您如果想用这套规矩来改变齐国的风俗，恐怕这不是引导百姓的好办法。 
English: If you want to use this set of rules to change the customs of Qi, I'm afraid this is not a good way to guide the people.

古文：後景公敬见孔子，不问其礼。
现代文：之后，齐景公虽然很有礼貌地接见孔子，可不再问起有关礼的问题了。
English: After that, although Qi Jing Gong received Confucius very politely, he no longer asked questions about etiquette.

古文：异日，景公止孔子曰： 奉子以季氏，吾不能。 
现代文：有一天，景公慰留孔子说： 用给季氏那样高的待遇给您，我做不到。 
English: One day, Jing Gong consoled Confucius by saying, "I can't give you the same high treatment as Ji.

古文：以季孟之间待之。
现代文：所以就用上卿季孙氏、下卿孟孙氏之间的待遇给孔子。
English: Therefore, he gave Confucius the same treatment as the upper-ranking Emperor Qisun and the lower-ranking Emperor Mengsun.

古文：齐大夫欲害孔子，孔子闻之。
现代文：齐国的大夫中有人想害孔子，孔子听说了这件事。
English: One of the doctors in Qi wanted to harm Confucius, and Confucius heard about it.

古文：景公曰： 吾老矣，弗能用也。 
现代文：景公对孔子说： 我已年老了，不能任用你了。 
English: King Jing said to Confucius, "I am too old to appoint you.

古文：孔子遂行，反乎鲁。
现代文：孔子于是就离开齐国，返回了鲁国。
English: Confucius then left Qi and returned to Lu.

古文：孔子年四十二，鲁昭公卒於乾侯，定公立。
现代文：孔子四十二岁那年，鲁昭公死在齐国的乾侯，鲁定公即位。
English: In the year when Confucius was forty-two years old, Lu Zhaogong died in Qianhou, Qi Province, and Lu Dingong ascended the throne.

古文：定公立五年，夏，季平子卒，桓子嗣立。
现代文：定公即位的第五年夏天，季平子去世，季恒子继立为上卿。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of Prince Sadafusa's accession to the throne, Jiheishi died and was succeeded by Jietsuko.

古文：季桓子穿井得土缶，中若羊，问仲尼云 得狗 。
现代文：季桓子在挖掘井时掘得一个腹大口小的陶器，里面有个像羊的东西，告诉孔子时却谎称 得到一只狗 。
English: When digging a well, Ji Huan Zi dug out a pottery with a small belly, and inside there was something that looked like a sheep, but when he told Confucius, he lied and said he got a dog.

古文：仲尼曰： 以丘所闻，羊也。
现代文：孔子说： 据我所知，这是羊。
English: Confucius said, "As far as I know, it is a sheep."

古文：丘闻之，木石之怪夔、罔阆，水之怪龙、罔象，土之怪坟羊。 
现代文：我听说，山林中的怪物是一种叫 夔 的单足兽和会学人声的山精 罔阆 ，水中的怪物是神龙和叫 罔象 的水怪，泥土中的怪物是一种雌雄未明的 坟羊 。 
English: I heard that the monster in the mountain forest is a kind of one-legged beast called a grasshopper and a mountain spirit that can learn human voices, the monster in the water is a divine dragon and a water monster called a dragonfly, and the monster in the dirt is a kind of tomb sheep of unknown sex.

古文：吴伐越，堕会稽，得骨节专车。
现代文：吴国攻打越国，把越国的都城会稽摧毁了，得到一节能装满一车的大骨头。
English: Wu attacked Yue, destroyed the capital city of Yue, and got a cartload of bones.

古文：吴使使问仲尼： 骨何者最大？ 
现代文：吴国派使者来问孔子： 什么东西的骨头最大？ 
English: The State of Wu sent an envoy to ask Confucius: What has the largest bones?

古文：仲尼曰： 禹致群神於会稽山，防风氏後至，禹杀而戮之，其节专车，此为大矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 大禹召集群神到会稽山，防风氏来晚了，大禹就把他杀死并陈尸示众，他的骨头一节就有一车长，这是骨头里面最大的。 
English: Confucius said: Dayu summoned the gods to Huiqi Mountain. When Bongfeng arrived late, Dayu killed him and displayed his body to the public. Each of his bones is a car length long, which is the largest bone.

古文：吴客曰： 谁为神？ 
现代文：吴国的使者又问： 那神又是谁呢？ 
English: The emissary of the State of Wu also asked: Who is that god?

古文：仲尼曰： 山川之神足以纲纪天下，其守为神，社稷为公侯，皆属於王者。 
现代文：孔子说： 山川的神灵能兴云致雨足可造福天下，负责监守山川按时祭祀的就是神。守土地和谷物的就是公侯，他们都隶属于王 。
English: Confucius said: The deities of mountains and rivers can create clouds and bring rain, which can benefit the whole world. The deities are responsible for watching over the mountains and rivers and holding sacrifices on time. The princes are responsible for guarding the land and grain, and they are all subordinate to the king.

古文：客曰： 防风何守？ 
现代文：吴使又问： 防风氏是负责祭祀什么呢？ 
English: Wu Zhi also asked: What is the Feng clan responsible for sacrificing?

古文：仲尼曰： 汪罔氏之君守封、禺之山，为釐姓。
现代文：孔子说： 汪罔氏的郡长监守封山和禺山一带的祭祀，是釐姓。
English: Confucius said, "The county magistrate of the Wang Hui clan, who oversees the sacrificial rites in the areas of Fengshan and Lushan, is surnamed Yu.

古文：在虞、夏、商为汪罔，於周为长翟，今谓之大人。 
现代文：在虞、夏、商三叫汪罔，在周叫长翟，现在叫做大人。 
English: In Yu, Xia and Shang, the three are called Wang Yu, in Zhou they are called Chang Yu, and now they are called adults.

古文：客曰： 人长几何？ 
现代文：吴使问： 人的身高能达到多少？ 
English: Wu Zhi asked: How much height can a human reach?

古文：仲尼曰： 僬侥氏三尺，短之至也。长者不过十之，数之极也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 僬侥氏身高三尺，是最矮的了；高的不过三丈，数得上是最高的了。 
English: Confucius replied, "He who is three feet high is the shortest, but he who is three feet high is the tallest.

古文：於是吴客曰： 善哉圣人！ 
现代文：吴国使者听了之后说： 了不起呀圣人！ 
English: After listening to him, the emissary of the State of Wu said, "Wonderful sage!

古文：桓子嬖臣曰仲梁怀，与阳虎有隙。
现代文：季桓子有个宠臣叫仲梁怀，与阳虎有怨仇。
English: Ji Huan Zi had a favorite retainer named Zhong Liang Huai, who had a grudge against Yang Hu.

古文：阳虎欲逐怀，公山不狃止之。
现代文：阳虎想要驱逐仲梁怀，季氏家臣公山不狃阻止了他。
English: Yanghu wanted to expel Zhong Lianghuai, but Ji's vassal Gongshan Buzhong stopped him.

古文：其秋，怀益骄，阳虎执怀。
现代文：这年秋天，仲梁怀更加骄横了，阳虎把仲梁怀捉了起来。
English: This autumn, Zhong Liang Huai became more arrogant. Yang Hu caught Zhong Liang Huai.

古文：桓子怒，阳虎因囚桓子，与盟而醳之。
现代文：季桓子对此很生气，阳虎就把季桓子也囚禁了起来，直到季桓认输订立了盟约才把他释放出来。
English: Ji Huan Zi was very angry about this, and Yang Hu also imprisoned Ji Huan Zi, and did not release him until Ji Huan conceded defeat and made a covenant.

古文：阳虎由此益轻季氏。
现代文：阳虎从此以后更加看不起季氏。
English: Yanghu despised Ji even more from then on.

古文：季氏亦僭於公室，陪臣执国政，是以鲁自大夫以下皆僭离於正道。
现代文：季氏办事也竟然凌驾于鲁君之上，鲁国出现了大臣专权的局面。因此鲁国自大夫以下都不守礼分，超越职权违背了正道。
English: Ji's duties even exceeded Lu Jun's, and a situation of ministerial autocracy emerged in Lu. As a result, everyone in Lu, from doctors on down, did not observe proper etiquette, exceeding their authority and violating the right path.

古文：故孔子不仕，退而脩诗书礼乐，弟子弥众，至自远方，莫不受业焉。
现代文：所以孔子不愿意再在鲁国做官了，退闲在家，专心研究整理《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》这些典籍，学生们越来越多，有的甚至来自远方，无不虚心向孔子求教。
English: Therefore, Confucius was no longer willing to work as an official in the State of Lu. He retired at home and concentrated on the study and arrangement of classics such as "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music." There are more and more students, some even from far away, all with a sincere desire to learn from Confucius.

古文：定公八年，公山不狃不得意於季氏，因阳虎为乱，欲废三桓之適，更立其庶孽阳虎素所善者，遂执季桓子。
现代文：鲁定公八年，公山不狃在季桓子手下不得志，就利用阳虎作乱的机会，打算废掉季孙氏、孟孙氏、叔孙氏三家的嫡生嗣子，另立阳虎素来所喜爱的庶子，于是就把季桓子抓了起来。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of King Luding, Gongshan Fuxi, frustrated with Ji Hanzi's subordinates, took advantage of Yang Hu's opportunity to create a disturbance and planned to abolish the legitimate heirs of the three families of the Ji Sun, Meng Sun, and Uncle Sun, and establish another illegitimate son that Yang Hu had always loved, so he arrested Ji Hanzi.

古文：桓子诈之，得脱。
现代文：桓子设计欺骗了他，才得以逃脱出来。
English: He was able to escape only after Kaneko's design deceived him.

古文：定公九年，阳虎不胜，奔于齐。
现代文：鲁定公九年，阳虎作乱失败，逃到了齐国。
English: In the ninth year of King Luding, Yang Hu failed to make trouble and fled to Qi.

古文：是时孔子年五十。
现代文：这时，孔子五十岁。
English: At this time, Confucius was fifty years old.

古文：公山不狃以费畔季氏，使人召孔子。
现代文：公山不狃凭借费城反叛季氏，他派人来召请孔子去帮忙。
English: With the help of the Philadelphia rebel Ji, Gongshan sent someone to summon Confucius to help.

古文：孔子循道弥久，温温无所试，莫能己用，曰： 盖周文武起丰镐而王，今费虽小，傥庶几乎！ 
现代文：孔子探索所依循的治国之道已经很久了，但抑郁不得志，无处可以施展，没有人能任用自己，就说： 当初周文王、周武王兴起于丰、镐而建立了王业，现在费城虽然小，该也差不多吧！ 
English: It has been a long time since Confucius explored the way of governing the country, but he was depressed, had nowhere to apply himself, and no one could appoint him, so he said: In the beginning, King Chouwen and King Chouwu arose in Feng and Handan and established a kingdom, and now, although Philadelphia is small, it is almost the same!

古文：欲往。子路不说，止孔子。
现代文：想要应召前去，子路不高兴，阻止孔子。
English: Wanting to answer the call, Zilu was not happy and tried to stop Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 夫召我者岂徒哉？如用我，其为东周乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 他们请我去，难道会让我白白跑一趟吗？
English: Confucius said: If they invite me, will they let me go for nothing?

古文：然亦卒不行。其後定公以孔子为中都宰，一年，四方皆则之。
现代文：如果重用了我，我将在东方建立一个像周那样的王朝！ 然而最终也没能成行。以后鲁定公任命孔子做了中都长官，一年后，各地都效法他的治理办法。
English: If he had used me again, I would have established a dynasty in the East like that of Zhou! However, in the end, it did not work out. Later, Prince Luding appointed Confucius as the governor of the capital, and a year later, all regions followed his governance method.

古文：由中都宰为司空，由司空为大司寇。
现代文：孔子便由中都长官提升为司空，又由司空提升为大司寇。
English: Confucius was then promoted from the director of the capital to the secretary of the sky, and from the secretary of the sky to the grand secretary of the archers.

古文：定公十年春，及齐平。
现代文：鲁定公十年的春天，鲁国与齐国和解。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of Luding, Lu and Qi were reconciled.

古文：夏，齐大夫黎鉏言於景公曰： 鲁用孔丘，其势危齐。 
现代文：到了夏天，齐国大夫黎鉏对景公说： 鲁国起用了孔丘，这形势会危及齐国 。
English: In the summer, the doctor of Qi, Lijuan, said to Jinggong: "The state of Lu has employed Kongqiu, and this situation will endanger Qi.

古文：乃使使告鲁为好会，会於夹谷。
现代文：于是齐景公就派使者告诉鲁国，说要与鲁定公行友好会晤，约定会晤的地点在夹谷。
English: As a result, King Qi Jing sent an envoy to Lu, saying that he wanted to have a friendly meeting with King Luding, and the agreed meeting place was in Jiaogu.

古文：鲁定公且以乘车好往。
现代文：鲁定公准备好车辆随从，毫无戒备地前去赴会。
English: Ruding prepared a vehicle to accompany him and went to the meeting without any warning.

古文：孔子摄相事，曰： 臣闻有文事者必有武备，有武事者必有文备。
现代文：孔子以大司寇的身份，兼办会晤典礼事宜，他对定公说： 我听说办理外交必须要有武力防备，进行武事活动也必须有外交配合。
English: Confucius, as the grand secretary of the Kuomintang, concurrently handled the meeting ceremony. He said to Ding Gong: I heard that the handling of diplomacy must have armed defense, and martial activities must also have diplomatic cooperation.

古文：古者诸侯出疆，必具官以从。
现代文：从前诸侯离开自己的疆界，一定要带齐必要的官员随从。
English: In the past, when princes left their own borders, they had to bring the necessary officials with them.

古文：请具左右司马。 
现代文：请求您安排左、右司马一起去。 
English: Please arrange for the left and right horses to go together.

古文：定公曰： 诺。 
现代文：定公说： 好的。 
English: Sadako said, "Okay."

古文：具左右司马。
现代文：就带了左、右司马一道去。
English: He took Left and Right Sima with him.

古文：会齐侯夹谷，为坛位，土阶三等，以会遇之礼相见，揖让而登。
现代文：定公在夹谷与齐侯相会。在那里修筑了盟坛，坛上备好席位，设置了三级登坛的台阶，依照诸侯平等相会的礼节，拱手揖让登坛。
English: Sadamasa met with the chieftains in the valley. There, the altar of alliance was built, seats were prepared on the altar, three steps were set up to ascend the altar, and in accordance with the etiquette of the equal meeting of the chieftains, they were allowed to ascend the altar.

古文：献酬之礼毕，齐有司趋而进曰： 请奏四方之乐。 景公曰： 诺。 
现代文：彼此馈赠应酬的仪式行过之后，齐国管事的官员快步上前请示说： 请开始演奏四方各族的舞乐 。齐景公说： 好的。 
English: After the gift-giving and entertainment ceremony, the official in charge of the State of Qi quickly stepped forward and asked: "Please start playing the dance music of all ethnic groups in the four directions." Qi Jinggong said: "Okay."

古文：於是旍旄羽袚矛戟剑拨鼓噪而至。
现代文：于是齐国的乐队以旌旗为先导，有的头戴羽冠，射披皮衣，有的手执矛、戟、剑、楯等武器也跟着上台了，喧闹着一涌而上。
English: As a result, the band from Qi Province led the way with the banner. Some wore feathered crowns and fur coats, while others carried spears, halberds, swords, halberds, and other weapons on stage, making a lot of noise.

古文：孔子趋而进，历阶而登，不尽一等，举袂而言曰： 吾两君为好会，夷狄之乐何为於此！
现代文：孔子见状快步走上前来，一步一阶迅速登台，还差一级台阶时，便扬起衣袖一挥，说道： 我们两国国君为和好而来相会，为什么在这里演奏夷狄的舞乐，请命令管事官员立即处理！ 
English: Seeing the situation, Confucius walked quickly forward, and quickly ascended the stage step by step. When he was still one step short, he raised his sleeves and waved, saying: Our two countries' sovereigns have come to meet for the sake of reconciliation. Why are they playing Yiddish dance music here? Please order the administrative officials to deal with it immediately!

古文：请命有司！ 有司卻之，不去，则左右视晏子与景公。
现代文：主管官员叫乐队退下，他们却不肯动，于是孔子左右看看婴与齐景公的眼色。
English: The officer in charge told the band to back off, but they refused to move, so Confucius looked at the baby and Qi Jinggong's eyes.

古文：景公心怍，麾而去之。
现代文：齐景公心里很惭愧，指挥乐队退下去。
English: Qi Jing Gong felt very ashamed and withdrew from conducting the orchestra.

古文：有顷，齐有司趋而进曰： 请奏宫中之乐。 景公曰： 诺。 
现代文：过了一会儿，齐国的管事官员又跑来说道： 请让我演奏宫中的乐曲 。景公说： 好的。 
English: After a while, the official in charge of the State of Qi came running again and said, "Please let me play the music in the palace." Jing Gong said, "Okay."

古文：优倡侏儒为戏而前。
现代文：于是一些歌舞杂技艺人和身材矮小的侏儒都前来表演了。
English: So some acrobats and diminutive dwarfs came to perform.

古文：孔子趋而进，历阶而登，不尽一等，曰： 匹夫而营惑诸侯者罪当诛！
现代文：孔子看了又快步走上前，一步一阶迅速往台上走，最后一阶还没有迈上就说： 下等人敢来胡闹迷惑诸侯，论罪当杀！
English: When Confucius saw this, he quickly stepped forward, and walked quickly up the stage, step by step. Before he reached the last step, he said, "The low-ranking people dare to play pranks to confuse the lords, and they should be condemned to death!"

古文：请命有司！ 
现代文：请命令主事官员去执行！ 
English: Please order the chief officer to carry it out!

古文：有司加法焉，手足异处。
现代文：于是主事官员依法将他们处以腰斩，叫他们来个手足异处。
English: As a result, the official in charge sentenced them to beheading according to the law, and ordered them to have their hands and feet amputated.

古文：景公惧而动，知义不若，归而大恐，告其群臣曰： 鲁以君子之道辅其君，而子独以夷狄之道教寡人，使得罪於鲁君，为之柰何？ 
现代文：齐景公大为恐惧，深深触动，知道在道义这方面难以和鲁国匹敌，回国之后很是慌恐，告诉他的大臣们说： 鲁国是用君子的道理来辅佐他们的国君，而你们却仅拿夷狄的办法教我，使我得罪了鲁国国君，这该怎办呢？ 
English: Grand Duke Qi Jing was greatly frightened and deeply moved, knowing that it was difficult to match Lu in terms of morality. After returning home, he was very panicked and told his ministers: Lu uses the principle of a gentleman to support their sovereign, but you only teach me the methods of the Yidi, so that I offend the sovereign of Lu. What should I do?

古文：有司进对曰： 君子有过则谢以质，小人有过则谢以文。
现代文：主管官员上前回答说： 君子有了过错，就用实际行动来向人家道歉认错；小人有了过错，就用花言巧语来掩饰。
English: The official in charge came forward and replied: "When a gentleman makes a mistake, he uses practical actions to apologize to others and admit his mistake; when a villain makes a mistake, he uses rhetoric to cover it up.

古文：君若悼之，则谢以质。 
现代文：您如果痛心，就用具体行动来表示道歉吧。 
English: If you are sorry, use concrete actions to express your apology.

古文：於是齐侯乃归所侵鲁之郓、汶阳、龟阴之田以谢过。
现代文：于是齐景公就退还了从前所侵夺的鲁国郓、汶阳、龟阴的土地，以此来向鲁国道歉并悔过。
English: As a result, Lord Qi Jing returned the lands of Lu Guojun, Benyang and Guiyin, which he had previously invaded, in order to apologize to Lu Guojun and repent.

古文：定公十三年夏，孔子言於定公曰： 臣无藏甲，大夫毋百雉之城。 
现代文：鲁定公十三年的夏天，孔子对定公说： 臣子的家中不能收藏武器，大夫的封邑不能筑起高一丈长三百丈的城墙。 
English: In the summer of Ruding's thirteenth year, Confucius said to Ruding: A courtier's home should not have a collection of weapons, and a doctor's fief should not have a city wall that is one meter high and three hundred meters long.

古文：使仲由为季氏宰，将堕三都。於是叔孙氏先堕郈。
现代文：于是就派仲由去当季氏的家臣，打算拆毁季孙、孟孙、叔孙三家封邑的城墙。这时，叔孙氏首先把郈邑的城墙拆了。
English: Therefore, he sent Zhongyu to be a vassal of the Ji clan, intending to tear down the walls of the three fiefs of the Ji, Meng, and uncle. At this time, the uncle first tore down the walls of the city.

古文：季氏将堕费，公山不狃、叔孙辄率费人袭鲁。
现代文：季孙氏也准备拆费邑的城墙，公山不狃和叔孙辄就带领费邑的人袭击鲁国。
English: The Ji Sun clan was also preparing to tear down the city walls of Feiyu, so Gongshan Fuxiong and his uncle Sun Quan led the people of Feiyu to attack Lu.

古文：公与三子入于季氏之宫，登武子之台。
现代文：鲁定公和季孙、孟孙、叔孙三人就躲进了季孙的住宅，登上了季孙武子的高坛。
English: Lu Ding Gong, Qisun, Meng Sun, and the three uncles hid in Qisun's house and ascended to the high altar of Qisun Takeshi.

古文：费人攻之，弗克，入及公侧。
现代文：公山不狃率领的费邑人进攻他们，没有能打进去，但有的人已经突入鲁定公所登高坛的近侧。
English: The Fei Yu people led by Gongshan Fuxuan attacked them and could not get in, but some people had already rushed into the vicinity of the high altar of the Luding Public Hall.

古文：孔子命申句须、乐颀下伐之，费人北。国人追之，败诸姑蔑。
现代文：孔子命令申句须、乐颀下台来攻打他们，费邑人失败逃走，鲁国人乘胜追击，在姑蔑把他们彻底击溃。
English: Confucius ordered Shen Qusu and Le Yao to come down from the stage to attack them. The Fei people fled in defeat, and the Lu people chased them and defeated them completely.

古文：二子奔齐，遂堕费。
现代文：公山不狃、叔孙辄两人逃到了齐国，费邑的城墙终于被拆毁了。
English: His father-in-law, his uncle-in-law, and his grandson-in-law fled to Qi Province, and Fei's city wall was finally demolished.

古文：将堕成，公敛处父谓孟孙曰： 堕成，齐人必至于北门。
现代文：接着准备拆成城，孟孙氏的家臣公敛处父告诉孟孙说： 拆除了成邑的城墙，齐国人必将进逼到我们的北大门。
English: Then, in preparation for the dismantling of the city, Meng Sun's vassal, Guanzhang, told Meng Sun: "After the city wall of Chengyur is dismantled, the people of Qi will surely push into our north gate.

古文：且成，孟氏之保鄣，无成是无孟氏也。
现代文：且成城又是你们孟氏的屏障，没有成城也就等于没有孟氏。我不打算拆毁 。
English: Moreover, Chengcheng is also a barrier for you Mengs. Without Chengcheng, there would be no Mengs. I do not intend to demolish it.

古文：我将弗堕。 十二月，公围成，弗克。
现代文：十二月，鲁定公率兵包围了成城，没有攻下来。
English: In December, the soldiers led by Lu Dinggong surrounded Chengcheng and did not attack it.

古文：定公十四年，孔子年五十六，由大司寇行摄相事，有喜色。
现代文：鲁定公十四年，孔子五十六岁，他以大司寇的身份代理宰相的事物，脸上露出喜悦神色。
English: In the fourteenth year of King Luding, when Confucius was fifty-six years old, he took on the role of acting prime minister, with a look of joy on his face.

古文：门人曰： 闻君子祸至不惧，福至不喜。 
现代文：他的弟子说： 听说君子大祸临头不会恐惧，大福到来也不会喜形于色 。
English: His disciple said, "It is said that a gentleman will not be afraid when calamity approaches, nor will he be overjoyed when good fortune comes.

古文：孔子曰： 有是言也。不曰 乐其以贵下人 乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 是有这句话，但不是还有一句 身在高位礼贤下士而自得其乐 的话吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Yes, there is this sentence, but isn't there also a sentence about enjoying oneself while being a high-ranking eunuch?"

古文：於是诛鲁大夫乱政者少正卯。
现代文：于是孔子就把扰乱国政的大夫少正卯杀了。
English: As a result, Confucius killed Shosho Utsuru, a doctor who disrupted national politics.

古文：与闻国政三月，粥羔豚者弗饰贾；男女行者别於涂；涂不拾遗；四方之客至乎邑者不求有司，皆予之以归。
现代文：孔子参预国政三个月，贩卖猪、羊的商人就不敢漫天要价了；男女行人都分开走路；掉在路上的东西也没人捡走；各地的旅客来到鲁国的城邑，用不着向官员们求情送礼，都能得到他们所需之物并满意地回去。
English: Three months after Confucius took part in the pre-feudal national politics, merchants who sold pigs and sheep no longer dared to ask for exorbitant prices; male and female pedestrians walked separately; things that fell on the road were not picked up; tourists from all over the country came to the cities and towns of Lu. They did not have to beg officials for gifts, they could get what they needed and go back satisfied.

古文：齐人闻而惧，曰： 孔子为政必霸，霸则吾地近焉，我之为先并矣。
现代文：齐国听到了这个消息就害怕了起来，说： 孔子在鲁国执政下去，一定会称霸，一旦鲁国称霸，我们靠它最近，必然会率先来吞并我们。
English: When Qi Guo heard this news, he was frightened and said: "Confucius will surely dominate if he continues to rule Lu. Once Lu dominates, we have been relying on it recently, and it will inevitably take the lead in annexing us."

古文：盍致地焉？ 
现代文：何不先送一些土地给他们呢？ 
English: Why not give them some land first?

古文：黎鉏曰： 请先尝沮之；沮之而不可则致地，庸迟乎！ 
现代文：黎鉏说： 我们先试着阻止他们一下，如果不成，再送给他们土地，难道还会晚吗！ 
English: Lihong said: Let's first try to stop them, and if that doesn't work, let's give them land. Won't it be too late?

古文：於是选齐国中女子好者八十人，皆衣文衣而舞康乐，文马三十驷，遗鲁君。
现代文：于是就从齐国挑选了八十个美貌女子，都穿上华丽的衣服，教她们学会跳《康乐》的舞蹈，身上有花纹的马一百二十匹，一起送给鲁君。
English: So he selected eighty beautiful women from Qi Province, dressed them all in gorgeous clothes, taught them to dance the "Kangle" dance, and gave Lu Jun one hundred and twenty horses with patterns on them.

古文：陈女乐文马於鲁城南高门外，季桓子微服往观再三，将受，乃语鲁君为周道游，往观终日，怠於政事。子路曰： 夫子可以行矣。 
现代文：先把女乐和纹马彩车安置在鲁城南面的高门外。季桓子身着便服前往观看再三，打算接受下来，就告诉鲁君说要外出到各地周游视察，乘机整天到南门观齐国的美女和骏马，连国家的政事也懒得去管理了，子路看到这种情形便对孔子说： 老师，我们可以离开这里了吧。 
English: Ji Huan Zi dressed in civilian clothes and went to see it again and again. When he was about to accept it, he told Lu Jun that he wanted to travel around the country to inspect it. He took the plane all day to go to the South Gate to see the beautiful women and horses of Qi. He was too lazy to manage the country's political affairs. When he saw this, he said to Confucius, "Teacher, let's get out of here."

古文：孔子曰： 鲁今且郊，如致膰乎大夫，则吾犹可以止。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲁国即将举行郊祭，如果能按照法把典礼后的烤肉分给大夫们，那么我还可以留下不走 。
English: Confucius said: Lu is about to hold a suburb festival. If I can distribute the grilled meat after the ceremony to the doctors in accordance with the law, then I can stay.

古文：桓子卒受齐女乐，三日不听政；郊，又不致膰俎於大夫。
现代文：季桓子终于接了齐国送来的女子乐团，一连三天不过问政务；在郊外祭祀束后，又违背常礼，没把把祭肉和郊祭所用的礼器分送给大夫。
English: Ji Huan Zi finally received the women's orchestra sent by Qi Guo, but did not ask about government affairs for three days in a row; after the suburban festival was over, he violated the common rite and did not give the sacrificial meat and the ceremonial utensils used for the suburban festival to the doctor.

古文：孔子遂行，宿乎屯。
现代文：于是孔子便离开了鲁国，当天就在屯地住宿过夜。
English: As a result, Confucius left Lu and spent the night in the settlement.

古文：而师己送，曰： 夫子则非罪。 孔子曰： 吾歌可夫？ 
现代文：鲁国一个名叫师己的乐师来为他送行，说道： 先生您是没有过错的。 孔子说： 我唱一首歌行吗？ 
English: A musician from the state of Lu named Shi Ji came to see him off and said, "Sir, you did nothing wrong."Confucius said, "Can I sing a song?

古文：歌曰： 彼妇之口，可以出走；彼妇之谒，可以死败。
现代文：于是唱道： 那些妇人的口，可以把大臣和亲信撵走；接近那些妇女，可以使人败事亡身。
English: Then they sang: "The mouths of those women can drive away ministers and close confidants; getting close to those women can ruin a man's life."

古文：盖优哉游哉，维以卒岁！ 
现代文：悠闲自在啊，我只有这样安度岁月！ 
English: Leisurely and at ease, that's the only way I can pass the time!

古文：师己反，桓子曰： 孔子亦何言？ 
现代文：师己返回后，桓子问他说： 孔子说了些什么？ 
English: After his master returned, Han Zi asked him, "What did Confucius say?"

古文：师己以实告。
现代文：师己如实相告。
English: My teacher told me the truth.

古文：桓子喟然叹曰： 夫子罪我以群婢故也夫！ 
现代文：桓子长叹一声，说 先生是怪罪我们接受了齐国那一群女乐的缘故啊！ 
English: Kaneko let out a long sigh and said that the teacher was blaming us for accepting that group of female singers from Qi Province!

古文：孔子遂適卫，主於子路妻兄颜浊邹家。
现代文：孔子于是到了卫国，寄住在子路妻子的兄长颜浊邹家中。
English: Confucius then went to the country of Wei and stayed at the home of Zilu's wife's brother Yan Xuan.

古文：卫灵公问孔子： 居鲁得禄几何？ 
现代文：卫灵公问孔子： 你在鲁国得到的俸禄是多少？ 
English: Wei Ling Gong asked Confucius: How much salary did you get in Lu?

古文：对曰： 奉粟六万。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 俸米六万斗。 
English: Confucius replied, "Sixty thousand bucks worth of rice."

古文：卫人亦致粟六万。
现代文：卫国也照样给了他俸米六万斗。
English: As before, the Emperor gave him a stipend of 60,000 do.

古文：居顷之，或谮孔子於卫灵公。灵公使公孙余假一出一入。
现代文：过了不多久，有人在卫灵公面前诋毁孔子，卫灵公就派公孙余假用兵仗监视孔子的出入。
English: Not long after, someone slandered Confucius in front of Wei Ling Gong, and Wei Ling Gong sent his grandson Yu Huan to monitor Confucius's entry and exit.

古文：孔子恐获罪焉，居十月，去卫。
现代文：孔子害怕在这里获罪，居住了十个月，就离开了卫国。
English: Confucius was afraid of being punished here, so he lived there for ten months and then left the country.

古文：将適陈，过匡，颜刻为仆，以其策指之曰： 昔吾入此，由彼缺也。 
现代文：孔子将要到陈国去，经过一个叫匡的地方，弟子颜刻替他赶车，颜刻用马鞭子指着匡地说： 从前我进入过这个城，就是由那缺口进去的 。
English: Confucius was about to go to Chen Province. He passed through a place called Quan. His disciple Yan Xue drove the car for him. Yan Xue pointed to Quan with a horsewhip and said, "I once entered this city through that gap."

古文：匡人闻之，以为鲁之阳虎。阳虎尝暴匡人，匡人於是遂止孔子。
现代文：匡地人听说友人来到，误以为是鲁国的阳虎来了，阳虎曾经残害过匡人，于是匡人就围困了孔子。
English: When the people of Kuang heard that their friend was coming, they mistakenly thought that the Yanghu of Lu was coming. The Yanghu had once killed the Kuang people, so the Kuang people besieged Confucius.

古文：孔子状类阳虎，拘焉五日，颜渊後，子曰： 吾以汝为死矣。 
现代文：孔子的模样很像阳虎，所以被困在那里整整五天。颜渊后来赶到，孔子说： 我还以为你死了。 
English: Confucius looked very much like a male tiger, so he was trapped there for five whole days. Yan Yuan later arrived, and Confucius said: I thought you were dead.

古文：颜渊曰： 子在，回何敢死！ 
现代文：颜渊说： 老师您活着，我如何敢死！ 
English: Yan Yuan said: Teacher, you are alive, how dare I die!

古文：匡人拘孔子益急，弟子惧。
现代文：匡人围攻孔子越来越急，弟子们都很害怕。
English: The Kuang people besieged Confucius more and more urgently, and the disciples were very afraid.

古文：孔子曰： 文王既没，文不在兹乎？
现代文：孔子说： 周文王已经去世，周代的礼乐制度不就在我们这里吗？
English: Confucius said: King Zhouwen has passed away. Isn't the Zhou Dynasty's ritual music system right here with us?

古文：天之将丧斯文也，後死者不得与于斯文也。
现代文：上天如果要毁灭这些礼乐制度的话，就不会让我们这些后死的人承提起维护它的责任。
English: If God wanted to destroy these ritual systems, he would not have left it to those of us who have since died to take on the responsibility of preserving them.

古文：天之未丧斯文也，匡人其如予何！ 
现代文：上天并没有要消灭周代的这些礼乐，匡人又能把我怎么样呢！ 
English: Heaven did not want to destroy these ceremonial music of the Zhou Dynasty, and what can Kuangren do to me?

古文：孔子使从者为甯武子臣於卫，然後得去。
现代文：孔子派了个弟子前往卫国都城担任宁武子的家臣，然后才得以离开匡地。
English: Confucius sent a disciple to the imperial capital to serve as a vassal of Ning Wuzi before he was able to leave Kuangdi.

古文：去即过蒲。月馀，反乎卫，主蘧伯玉家。
现代文：孔子离开匡地之后就到了一个叫蒲的地方，过了一多月，又返回了卫国，寄住在蘧伯玉家。
English: After leaving Kuangdi, Confucius arrived at a place called Pu. After more than a month, he returned to the motherland and stayed at Zibo Yujia.

古文：灵公夫人有南子者，使人谓孔子曰： 四方之君子不辱欲与寡君为兄弟者，必见寡小君。寡小君原见。 
现代文：卫灵公有个叫南子的夫人，派人对孔子说： 各国的君子，凡是看得起我们国君，愿意与我们国君建立像兄弟一样交情的，必定会来见我们国君的夫人，我们国君的夫人希望和您见面。 
English: Wei Linggong had a wife named Nanzi, who sent a message to Confucius saying, "Gentlemen from all over the world who respect our sovereign and are willing to establish a brotherly relationship with our sovereign will surely come to meet our sovereign's wife. Our sovereign's wife hopes to meet you."

古文：孔子辞谢，不得已而见之。
现代文：孔子开始还推辞谢绝一番，最后不得已才去见她。
English: At first, Confucius refused to meet her, but finally he had to.

古文：夫人在絺帷中。
现代文：夫人坐在葛布做的帷帐中等待。
English: The lady sits in the burlap curtains and waits.

古文：孔子入门，北面稽首。
现代文：孔子进门后，面朝北叩头行礼。
English: After Confucius entered the door, he bowed his head facing north.

古文：夫人自帷中再拜，环珮玉声璆然。
现代文：夫人在帷帐中拜了两拜，她披戴的环佩玉器首饰发出了叮当撞击的清声响。
English: The lady bowed twice in the curtain, and the jade jewelry she wore made a clear clanging sound.

古文：孔子曰： 吾乡为弗见，见之礼答焉。 
现代文：事后孔子说： 我原来就不愿见她，现在既然不得已见了，就应该以礼相答谢。 
English: Afterwards, Confucius said, "Originally, I did not want to see her, but now that I have to see her, I should reciprocate with courtesy.

古文：子路不说。
现代文：子路不高兴。
English: Zi Lu is not happy.

古文：孔子矢之曰： 予所不者，天厌之！
现代文：孔子发誓说： 我如果说的不是真的，就让上天厌弃我！
English: Confucius swore, "If what I say is not true, may Heaven reject me!"

古文：天厌之！ 
现代文：就让上天厌弃我！ 
English: Let the heavens abhor me!

古文：居卫月馀，灵公与夫人同车，宦者雍渠参乘，出，使孔子为次乘，招摇巿过之。
现代文：在卫国住了一个多月，灵公与夫人南同坐了一辆车子，宦官雍渠陪待车右，出宫后，让孔子坐在第二辆车子上跟从，大摇大摆地从市上走过。
English: After more than a month's stay in the homeland, Ling Gong and his wife Nan Tong rode in a car, and the eunuch Yong Qu accompanied the car to the right. After leaving the palace, he let Confucius sit in the second car to follow him, and swaggered through the market.

古文：孔子曰： 吾未见好德如好色者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我没有见他喜好德行如同喜好美色一样。 
English: Confucius said, "I have not seen him as fond of virtue as he is of beauty.

古文：於是丑之，去卫，过曹。
现代文：于是对卫灵公的所作所为感到厌恶，就离开卫国，往曹国去了。
English: As a result, he was disgusted by the actions of Wei Linggong and left Wei and went to Cao.

古文：是岁，鲁定公卒。
现代文：这一年，鲁定公去世了。
English: In the same year, Prince Ruding passed away.

古文：孔子去曹適宋，与弟子习礼大树下。
现代文：孔子离开曹国到达宋国，与弟子们在大树下演习礼仪。
English: Confucius left Cao and arrived in Song, where he and his disciples practiced etiquette under a large tree.

古文：宋司马桓魋欲杀孔子，拔其树。
现代文：宋国的司马桓魋想杀死孔子，就把树砍掉了。
English: Sima Huancheng of the Song Dynasty chopped down the tree to kill Confucius.

古文：孔子去。
现代文：孔子只得离开这个地方。
English: Confucius had to leave this place.

古文：弟子曰： 可以速矣。 
现代文：弟子们催促说： 我们可以快点走了。 
English: The disciples urged, "Let's hurry and leave."

古文：孔子曰： 天生德於予，桓魋其如予何！ 
现代文：孔子说： 上天既然把传道德的使命赋予我，桓魋他又能把我怎么样！ 
English: Confucius said, "Since God has given me the mission of teaching morality, what can He do with me?

古文：孔子適郑，与弟子相失，孔子独立郭东门。
现代文：孔子到了郑国，与弟子们走失散了，孔子一个人站在外城的东门。
English: When Confucius arrived in Zheng, he and his disciples became separated. Confucius stood alone at the east gate of the outer city.

古文：郑人或谓子贡曰： 东门有人，其颡似尧，其项类皋陶，其肩类子产，然自要以下不及禹三寸。累累若丧家之狗。 
现代文：郑国人有看见了就对子贡说： 东门有个人，他的额头像尧，脖子像皋陶，肩膀像郑子产，可是从腰部以下比禹短了三寸，一副狼狈不堪、没精打采的样子，真像一条丧家狗。 
English: When the Zheng people saw this, they said to Zigong, "There is a man at the East Gate. His forehead is like a skull, his neck is like a potter's wheel, and his shoulders are like Zheng Zibang. However, he is three inches shorter than Yu from the waist down. He has a disheveled and listless appearance, just like a lost dog.

古文：子贡以实告孔子。
现代文：子贡见面把原话如实地告诉了孔子。
English: When they met, Zigong told Confucius the truth.

古文：孔子欣然笑曰： 形状，末也。而谓似丧家之狗，然哉！
现代文：孔子高兴地说道： 他形容我的相貌，不一定对，但说我像条丧家狗，对极了！对极了。 
English: Confucius said happily, "He described my appearance, not necessarily correctly, but he said I looked like a lost dog. That's right! That's right."

古文：然哉！ 孔子遂至陈，主於司城贞子家。
现代文：孔子于是到达陈国，寄住在司城贞子家里。
English: Confucius then arrived in Chen Province and stayed at the home of Shicheng Sadako.

古文：岁馀，吴王夫差伐陈，取三邑而去。
现代文：一年多之后，吴王夫差来攻打陈国，夺取了三个城邑才退兵。
English: More than a year later, Wu Wangfu sent troops to attack Chen's territory, capturing three towns before withdrawing.

古文：赵鞅伐朝歌。
现代文：赵鞅攻打朝歌。
English: Zhao Wei's attack on morning song.

古文：楚围蔡，蔡迁于吴。
现代文：楚国包围了蔡国，蔡国迁移到吴地。
English: Chu surrounded Cai, and Cai moved to Wu.

古文：吴败越王勾践会稽。
现代文：吴国在会稽打败了越王勾践。
English: Wu Guo defeated Yue Wang Gojun in the audition.

古文：有隼集于陈廷而死，楛矢贯之，石砮，矢长尺有咫。
现代文：有一天，许多只隼落在陈国的宫廷中死了，有隼木做的箭穿在身上，箭头是石头制做的，箭长一尺八寸。
English: One day, many egrets fell down and died in the court of Chen Guo. They were pierced by eucalyptus arrows, the arrows were made of stone, and the arrows were a foot and eight inches long.

古文：陈湣公使使问仲尼。仲尼曰： 隼来远矣，此肃慎之矢也。
现代文：陈湣公派使者向孔子请教，孔子说： 这些隼是从很远的地方飞来的，这是肃慎部族的箭。
English: Chen Yigong sent an envoy to ask Confucius for advice. Confucius said, "These quails have flown from far away. They are the arrows of the Shushan tribe."

古文：昔武王克商，通道九夷百蛮，使各以其方贿来贡，使无忘职业。
现代文：从前周武王伐纣灭商，沟通了与各少数民族的民族的联系，让九夷百蛮各族都贡献各自的地方特产，叫他们不能忘记自己的职责和义务。
English: From the previous week, King Wu sent troops to exterminate the merchants, and communicated with the ethnic groups of the various ethnic minorities, so that the nine hundred barbarian tribes could all contribute their own local specialties, so that they could not forget their duties and obligations.

古文：於是肃慎贡楛矢石砮，长尺有咫。
现代文：于是肃慎部族献来楛木做的箭和石头制作的箭头，长一尺八寸。
English: So the Sushen tribe presented him with an arrow made of birch wood and an arrowhead made of stone, each one foot eight inches long.

古文：先王欲昭其令德，以肃慎矢分大姬，配虞胡公而封诸陈。
现代文：周武王为了显示他的美德，就把肃慎部族的箭分给长女太姬，后来太姬嫁给了虞胡公，虞胡公又封在陈国。
English: In order to show his virtue, King Zhou Wu gave the arrows of the Shushan tribe to his eldest daughter, Taiki. Later, Taiki married Yu Hu Gong, and Yu Hu Gong was sealed in Chen.

古文：分同姓以珍玉，展亲；分异姓以远职，使无忘服。
现代文：当初王室分珍宝玉器给同姓诸侯，是为了表示重视亲族；把远方的贡品分赠给姓诸侯，是为了表示重视亲族；把远方的贡品分赠给姓诸侯，是为了让他们不要忘服从周王朝。
English: At the beginning, the royal family gave precious jewels and jade to the princes with the same surname in order to show the importance of the relatives; gave the distant tribute to the princes with the same surname in order to show the importance of the relatives; and gave the distant tribute to the princes with the same surname in order to let them not forget to obey the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：故分陈以肃慎矢。 
现代文：所以把肃慎部族的箭分给陈国。 
English: Therefore, Chen Guo was given the arrows of the Shushan tribe.

古文：试求之故府，果得之。
现代文：陈湣公听了叫人到过去收藏各方贡物的仓库中去找一找，果然找到了这种箭。
English: Chen Yigong listened and asked someone to look for it in the warehouse that used to collect tributes from all sides, and indeed found this arrow.

古文：孔子居陈三岁，会晋楚争彊，更伐陈，及吴侵陈，陈常被寇。
现代文：孔子在陈国居住了三年，正好遇上晋国、楚国争霸，两国轮番攻打陈国，直到吴国攻打陈国时，陈国常常遭受侵犯。
English: Confucius lived in Chen for three years. It happened to coincide with the struggle for supremacy between Jin and Chu, and the two countries took turns to attack Chen. Until Wu attacked Chen, Chen was often invaded.

古文：孔子曰： 归与归与！
现代文：孔子说： 回去吧，回去吧！
English: Confucius said: Go back, go back!

古文：吾党之小子狂简，进取不忘其初。 
现代文：我家乡的那些弟子都志向高远，他们都很有进取心，也没有忘记自己的初衷。 
English: Those disciples in my hometown are ambitious, they are very enterprising, and they have not forgotten their original intention.

古文：於是孔子去陈。
现代文：于是孔子就离开了陈国。
English: So Confucius left Chen Guo.

古文：过蒲，会公叔氏以蒲畔，蒲人止孔子。
现代文：孔子路过一个叫蒲的地方，正好遇上公叔氏据蒲反叛卫国，蒲人扣留了孔子。
English: Confucius was passing through a place called Pu, when he happened to meet his uncle, who was rebelling against and defending the country according to Pu. The people of Pu detained Confucius.

古文：弟子有公良孺者，以私车五乘从孔子。
现代文：孔子的弟子中有个叫公良孺的，自己带了五辆车子跟随孔子周游各地。
English: One of Confucius' disciples, named Gong Liangyao, took five carts with him to follow Confucius around the country.

古文：其为人长贤，有勇力，谓曰： 吾昔从夫子遇难於匡，今又遇难於此，命也已。
现代文：他这个人身材高大，有才德，且有勇力，对孔子说： 我从前跟随老师周游在匡地遇到危难，如今又在这里遇到危难，这是命里注定的吧。
English: He was a tall man with talent and courage, and he said to Confucius, "I used to travel around with my teacher and encountered danger in Kuangdi, and now I am encountering danger here. Is this fate?

古文：吾与夫子再罹难，宁斗而死。 
现代文：我和老师再一次遭逢灾难，可搏斗而死。 
English: Once again, my teacher and I met with a disaster, but we were able to fight and die.

古文：斗甚疾。蒲人惧，谓孔子曰： 苟毋適卫，吾出子。 
现代文：公良孺跟蒲人打得很激烈，蒲人害怕了，对孔子说： 如果你不到卫国去，我就放你们走。 
English: He fought fiercely with the boy. The boy was afraid and said to Confucius, "If you do not go to the homeland, I will let you go."

古文：与之盟，出孔子东门。
现代文：孔子与他们订立了盟约，这才放孔子他们从东门出去。
English: Confucius made a covenant with them, and only then did he let them go out of the East Gate.

古文：孔子遂適卫。
现代文：孔子于是到了卫国。
English: Confucius then came to defend the country.

古文：子贡曰： 盟可负邪？ 
现代文：子贡说： 盟约可以违背吗？ 
English: Zigong said: Can a covenant be broken?

古文：孔子曰： 要盟也，神不听。 
现代文：孔子说： 在要挟下订立的盟约，神是不会理睬的。 
English: Confucius said: God will not pay attention to a covenant made under duress.

古文：卫灵公闻孔子来，喜，郊迎。
现代文：卫灵公听说孔子到来，很高兴，亲自赶到郊外迎接。
English: Hearing of the arrival of Confucius, Wei Ling Gong was very happy and personally rushed to the suburbs to meet him.

古文：问曰： 蒲可伐乎？ 
现代文：灵公问孔子说： 蒲这个地方可以讨伐吗？ 
English: Ling Gong asked Confucius, "Can we fight in this place?

古文：对曰： 可。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 可以。 
English: Grandson replied: Yes.

古文：灵公曰： 吾大夫以为不可。今蒲，卫之所以待晋楚也，以卫伐之，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：灵公说： 我的大夫却认为不可以讨伐，因为现在的蒲地是防御晋、楚的屏障，用我们卫国的军队去攻打，恐怕是不可以的吧？ 
English: Linggong said, "My doctor, however, thinks that it is not possible to go on a crusade, because the present Pu Di is a barrier for the defense of Jin and Chu. I'm afraid it is not possible to attack with our national defense army, is it?"

古文：孔子曰： 其男子有死之志，妇人有保西河之志。
现代文：孔子说： 蒲地的男子有誓死效忠卫国的决心，妇女有守卫西河这块地方的愿望。
English: Confucius said: The men of Putuo have the determination to swear allegiance to defend the country, and the women have the desire to guard this place of the West River.

古文：吾所伐者不过四五人。 灵公曰： 善。 
现代文：我所说要讨伐的，只是四、五个领头叛乱的人罢了。 卫灵公说： 很好。 
English: I said that I wanted to fight only the four or five leaders of the rebellion.Wei Ling Kung said, "That's fine.

古文：然不伐蒲。
现代文：但是没有出兵攻打蒲地。
English: But no troops were sent to attack Puti.

古文：灵公老，怠於政，不用孔子。
现代文：卫灵公年年纪大了，对国政很懈怠，也不起用孔子。
English: Wei Ling Gongnian is old, very slack on national politics, and does not use Confucius.

古文：孔子喟然叹曰： 苟有用我者，期月而已，三年有成。 
现代文：孔子长叹了一声说： 如果有人起用我，一年时间就差不多了，三年就会在大见成效。 
English: Confucius said with a long sigh, "If someone hires me, it will take about one year, and three years will see great results."

古文：孔子行。
现代文：孔子只好离开卫国。
English: Confucius had to leave China.

古文：佛肸为中牟宰。
现代文：佛肸ｘī担任中牟的长官。
English: Buddhaxi served as the chief of Zhongmou.

古文：赵简子攻范、中行，伐中牟。
现代文：晋国的赵简子攻打范氏、中行氏，讨伐中牟。
English: Zhao Jianzi of Jin attacked the Fan clan and the Zhongxing clan, and fought against the Zhongmou clan.

古文：佛肸畔，使人召孔子。孔子欲往。
现代文：佛肸就占据中牟，反叛赵简子，并派人招请孔子孔子打算去。
English: The Buddhas occupied Zhongmou, rebelled against Zhao Jianzi, and sent someone to invite Confucius. Confucius intended to go.

古文：子路曰： 由闻诸夫子， 其身亲为不善者，君子不入也 。
现代文：子路说： 我听老师说过： 亲自做坏事的人那里，君子是不会去的 。
English: Zilu said: I heard my teacher say: A gentleman will not go to a person who has personally done bad things.

古文：今佛肸亲以中牟畔，子欲往，如之何？ 
现代文：现在佛肸自己占据中牟反叛，您想前去，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Now that the pagoda itself is occupied by the rebels, you want to go, why is that?

古文：孔子曰： 有是言也。
现代文：孔子说： 我是说过这样的话。
English: Confucius said, "I have said so.

古文：不曰坚乎，磨而不磷；不曰白乎，涅而不淄。
现代文：但我不也说过，坚硬的东西是磨不薄的；不也说过洁白的东西，是染不黑的。
English: But I have not said that what is hard cannot be polished, or that what is white cannot be dyed black.

古文：我岂匏瓜也哉，焉能系而不食？ 
现代文：我难道是只中看不能吃的匏瓜吗，怎能挂在那里而不让人食用呢？ 
English: Am I just a muskmelon that can't be eaten? How can I hang there and not be eaten?

古文：孔子击磬。有荷蒉而过门者，曰： 有心哉，击磬乎！
现代文：有一次孔子正敲着磬，有个背着草筐的人路过门口，说道： 有心思啊，就敲打石磬啊！
English: Once, when Confucius was hammering a gong, a man with a straw basket on his back passed by the door and said, "If you have a mind, hammer a stone gong!"

古文：硜々乎，莫己知也夫而已矣！ 
现代文：磬敲得又响又急，是在说没人了解自己而打算放弃吧！ 
English: The gong is beating loudly and urgently, saying that no one knows themselves and is about to give up!

古文：孔子学鼓琴师襄子，十日不进。师襄子曰： 可以益矣。 
现代文：孔子向师襄子学习弹琴，一连学了十天，也没增学新曲子。师襄子说： 可以学些新曲了。 
English: Confucius learned to play the piano from his teacher Xiangzi. He studied for ten days in a row, but did not learn any new pieces. His teacher Xiangzi said, "Now you can learn some new pieces."

古文：孔子曰： 丘已习其曲矣，未得其数也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我已经熟习乐曲了，但还没有熟练地掌握弹琴的技法。 
English: Confucius said: I have become familiar with music, but I have not yet mastered the skill of playing the piano.

古文：有间，曰： 已习其数，可以益矣。 
现代文：过了些时候，师襄子又说： 你已熟习弹琴的技法了，可以学些新曲子了。 
English: After a while, the teacher said, "You have become familiar with the technique of playing the piano, you can learn some new tunes."

古文：孔子曰： 丘未得其志也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我还没有领会乐曲中表达的感情意韵。 
English: Confucius said: I have not yet grasped the emotional rhyme expressed in the music.

古文：有间，曰： 已习其志，可以益矣。 
现代文：过了些时候，师襄子说： 已经领悟了曲子中表达的思想，可以多学些内容了。 
English: After a while, the disciple said, "I have understood the thoughts expressed in the music, and I can learn more content."

古文：孔子曰： 丘未得其为人也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我还没有体会出作曲者是怎样的一个人。 
English: Confucius said, "I have not yet realized what kind of person the composer is.

古文：有间，有所穆然深思焉，有所怡然高望而远志焉。
现代文：过了些时候，孔子肃穆沉静，深思着什么，接着又心旷神怡，显出志向远大的样子。
English: After some time, Confucius was solemn and quiet, pondering over something, and then he was cheerful and showed great ambition.

古文：曰： 丘得其为人，黯然而黑，几然而长，眼如望羊，如王四国，非文王其谁能为此也！ 
现代文：说： 我体会出作曲者是个什么样的人了，他的肤色黝黑，身材高大，目光明亮而深邃，好像一个统治四方侯的王者，除了周文王又有谁能够如此呢！ 
English: He said, "I have come to realize what kind of person the composer is. His skin is dark, tall, and his eyes are bright and deep. He is like a king who rules over the four directions. Who else can do that but King Zhou Wen?"

古文：师襄子辟席再拜，曰： 师盖云文王操也。 
现代文：师襄子恭敬地离开位给孔子拜了两拜，说： 我老师原来说过，这是《文王操》呀 。
English: The disciple respectfully left his seat and bowed twice to Confucius, saying, "My teacher said that this is "Wen Wang Fu."

古文：孔子既不得用於卫，将西见赵简子。
现代文：孔子既然得不到卫国的重用，就打算向西去面见赵简子。
English: Since Confucius would not be able to defend the country, he planned to go west to meet Zhao Jianzi.

古文：至於河而闻窦鸣犊、舜华之死也，临河而叹曰： 美哉水，洋洋乎！丘之不济此，命也夫！ 
现代文：到了黄河边，听到窦鸣犊、舜华被赵简子杀死的消息。就面对着黄河感慨地叹气说： 壮美啊黄河水，浩浩荡荡多么盛大，我没有渡过黄河，也是命运的安排吧！ 
English: When he arrived at the edge of the Yellow River, he heard the news that Dou Mingyao and Zou Hua had been killed by Zhao Jianzi. Facing the Yellow River, he sighed with emotion and said: "Magnificent, Yellow River water, how grand and vast it is, I have not crossed the Yellow River, it is also the arrangement of fate!"

古文：子贡趋而进曰： 敢问何谓也？ 
现代文：子贡赶上前去问： 冒昧地请问老师，这话是什么意思？ 
English: Zigong caught up and asked, "Excuse me teacher, what does this mean?"

古文：孔子曰： 窦鸣犊，舜华，晋国之贤大夫也。
现代文：孔子说： 窦鸣犊、舜华两个人，都是晋国有才德的大夫。
English: Confucius said: Dou Mingtang and Zou Hua are the two most talented doctors in Jin Province.

古文：赵简子未得志之时，须此两人而后从政；及其已得志，杀之乃从政。
现代文：当初赵简子还没有得志的时候，是依靠这两个人才得以从政的；等到他得志了，却杀了他们来执掌政权。
English: At first, when Zhao Jianzi did not have the will to succeed, he relied on these two people to get into politics; when he did, he killed them to take power.

古文：丘闻之也，刳胎杀夭则麒麟不至郊，竭泽涸渔则蛟龙不合阴阳，覆巢毁卵则凤皇不翔。
现代文：我听说过，一个地方剖腹取胎杀害幼兽，麒麟就不来到它的郊野，排干了池塘水抓鱼，那么龙就不调合阴阳来兴致雨了，倾覆鸟巢毁坏鸟卵，凤凰就不愿来这里飞翔。
English: I have heard that in a place where fetuses are killed by disembowelment and young animals are killed, the unicorn will not come to its countryside, the pond water is drained to catch fish, then the dragon will not adjust the yin and yang to cause rain, the bird's nest will be overturned and the eggs will be destroyed, and the phoenix will not want to fly here.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：君子讳伤其类也。
现代文：君子忌讳伤害自己的同类。
English: It is taboo for a gentleman to harm his own kind.

古文：夫鸟兽之於不义也尚知辟之，而况乎丘哉！ 
现代文：那些鸟兽对于不义的行为尚且知道避开，更何况是我孔丘呢！ 
English: Those birds and beasts still know how to avoid unrighteous behavior, let alone my Kongyue!

古文：乃还息乎陬乡，作为陬操以哀之。
现代文：于是便回到老家陬乡居住，创作了《陬操》的琴曲来哀掉窦鸣犊、舜华两们贤人。
English: Therefore, he returned to his hometown and lived there, and composed the piano music of "The Discipline" to mourn the two wise men, Dou Mingtang and Zou Hua.

古文：而反乎卫，入主蘧伯玉家。
现代文：随后又回到卫国，寄住在蘧伯玉家。
English: Subsequently, he returned to the old country and stayed at Zibo Yu's house.

古文：他日，灵公问兵陈。
现代文：有一天，卫灵公向孔子问起军队列阵作战的事。
English: One day, Wei Ling asked Confucius about the formation of armies for battle.

古文：孔子曰： 俎豆之事则尝闻之，军旅之事未之学也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 祭祀的事我倒曾经听说过，排兵布阵的事，我还不曾学过呢。 
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard of the rite of sacrifice, but I have never learned the art of formation.

古文：明日，与孔子语，见蜚雁，仰视之，色不在孔子。
现代文：第二天，卫灵公与孔子谈话的时候，看见空中飞来大雁，就只顾抬头仰望，神色不在孔了身上。
English: The next day, when Wei Ling Gong was talking with Confucius, he saw a wild goose flying in the air. He just looked up, and his face was no longer sad.

古文：孔子遂行，复如陈。
现代文：孔子于是就离开了卫国，再往陈国。
English: Confucius then left the old country and went to the new one.

古文：夏，卫灵公卒，立孙辄，是为卫出公。
现代文：这年夏天，卫灵公死了，他的孙子辄立为国君，这就是卫出公。
English: In the summer of that year, Wei Ling Gong died, and his grandson became the ruler of the country. This is Wei Dew Gong.

古文：六月，赵鞅内太子蒯聩于戚。
现代文：六月间，赵鞅把流亡在外的姨灵公太子蒯聩接纳到戚地。
English: In June, Zhao Yao took the prince's aunt, who was in exile, to his relatives' place.

古文：阳虎使太子絻，八人衰绖，伪自卫迎者，哭而入，遂居焉。冬，蔡迁于州来。
现代文：阳虎让太子蒯聩穿上孝服，又让八个人空麻带孝，装扮成是从卫国来接太子回去奔丧的样子，哭着进了戚城，就在那里住了下来。冬天，蔡国迁都到州来。
English: Yang Hu asked the prince to put on filial piety, and let eight people wear filial piety, dressed as if they were coming from the defense of the country to pick up the prince and go back to the funeral, crying into the relative city, and stayed there. In winter, Cai Guo moved the capital to the state.

古文：是岁鲁哀公三年，而孔子年六十矣。
现代文：这一年是鲁哀公三年，孔子已六十岁了。
English: This year is the third year of Lu Yigong, and Confucius is already sixty years old.

古文：齐助卫围戚，以卫太子蒯聩在故也。
现代文：齐国帮助卫国包围了戚城，是因为卫太子蒯聩在那儿的缘故。
English: It was because of the presence of the crown prince's palace that Qi helped the imperial guard to encircle Qi's capital.

古文：夏，鲁桓釐庙燔，南宫敬叔救火。
现代文：还是这一年夏天，鲁桓公、釐公的庙堂起火烧了起来。南宫敬叔去救火。
English: In the summer of the same year, a fire broke out in the temple of Lord Lu Huan and Lord Xing. Uncle Nangong Jing went to fight the fire.

古文：孔子在陈，闻之，曰： 灾必於桓釐庙乎？ 
现代文：孔子在陈国听到了这个消息，就说： 火灾一定在桓公、釐公的庙堂吧？ 
English: When Confucius heard the news in Chen Guo, he said: The fire must be in the temples of Huan Gong and Xing Gong, right?

古文：已而果然。
现代文：不久证实，果然如他所言。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：秋，季桓子病，辇而见鲁城，喟然叹曰： 昔此国几兴矣，以吾获罪於孔子，故不兴也。 
现代文：这年秋天，季桓子病重乘着辇车望见鲁城，感慨地长叹一声说： 从前这个国家几乎兴旺了，因为我得罪了孔子，所以没有兴旺起来。 
English: In the autumn of that year, Ji Huan Zi, who was seriously ill, rode a stagecoach to see Lucheng. With a long sigh of emotion, he said: In the past, this country was almost prosperous, but because I offended Confucius, it did not prosper.

古文：顾谓其嗣康子曰： 我即死，若必相鲁；相鲁，必召仲尼。 
现代文：回头又对他的嗣子季康子说： 我要是死了，你一定会接掌鲁国的政权佐国君；你佐国君之后，一定要召回孔子。 
English: Looking back, he said to his heir, Ji Kang Zi: "If I die, you will certainly take over the power of Lu, Sakokuni; after you, Sakokuni, you must call back Confucius."

古文：後数日，桓子卒，康子代立。
现代文：过了几天，季桓子死了，季康子继承了他的职位。
English: A few days later, Ji Hanzi died, and Ji Kangzi took over his position.

古文：已葬，欲召仲尼。
现代文：丧事办完之后，想如回了孔子。
English: After the funeral, I felt like I was back in Confucius.

古文：公之鱼曰： 昔吾先君用之不终，终为诸侯笑。
现代文：大夫公之鱼说： 从前我们的国鲁定公曾经任用过他，没能有始有终，最后被诸侯耻笑。
English: Doctor Fish said: Once upon a time, our country's King Luding once appointed him, but he couldn't get it all done. In the end, he was ridiculed by the princes.

古文：今又用之，不能终，是再为诸侯笑。 
现代文：现在你再任用他，如果也不能善终，这会再次招来诸侯的耻笑。 
English: Now you are reappointing him, and if he doesn't end well, it will once again bring ridicule from the lords.

古文：康子曰： 则谁召而可？ 
现代文：季康子说： 那么召谁才好呢？ 
English: Ji Yasuko said: Then who should I call?

古文：曰： 必召厓求。 
现代文：公之鱼说： 一定要召冉求。 
English: Gongzhu said, "You must call Ranqiu."

古文：於是使使召厓求。
现代文：于是就派人召回了冉求。
English: So they sent someone to recall Ranqiu.

古文：厓求将行，孔子曰： 鲁人召求，非小用之，将大用之也。 
现代文：冉求准备起身前往，孔子说： 这次鲁国召冉求回去，不会小用，该会重用他。 
English: As Ran Cu prepared to leave, Confucius said, "This time, when the State of Lu calls Ran Cu back, it will not be of minor use, it will be of great use to him.

古文：是日，孔子曰： 归乎归乎！
现代文：就在这一天，孔子说： 回去吧，回去吧！
English: On this very day, Confucius said: Go back, go back!

古文：吾党之小子狂简，斐然成章，吾不知所以裁之。 
现代文：我家乡的那些弟子志向高远而行事疏阔，为文富有文采，我真不知从何下手来教育他们才好。 
English: Those disciples in my hometown are ambitious and broad-minded, and they are literate. I really don't know what to do to educate them.

古文：子赣知孔子思归，送厓求，因诫曰 即用，以孔子为招 云。
现代文：子贡知道孔子思念家乡想回去，在送冉求时，叮嘱过他 你要是被重用了，要想着把老师请回去 之类的话。
English: Zigong knew that Confucius missed his hometown and wanted to go back. When he was sending Ran Qi away, he told him that if you were overworked, you should think about asking your teacher to come back.

古文：厓求既去，明年，孔子自陈迁于蔡。
现代文：冉求离去之后，第二年，孔子从陈国移居蔡国。
English: After Ran Qi left, Confucius moved from Chen Province to Cai Province the following year.

古文：蔡昭公将如吴，吴召之也。
现代文：蔡昭公准备到吴国去，是吴国国君召他去的。
English: Cai Zhaogong was preparing to go to the State of Wu. It was the King of the State of Wu who summoned him.

古文：前昭公欺其臣迁州来，後将往，大夫惧复迁，公孙翩射杀昭公。
现代文：之前昭公欺骗他的大臣，把国都迁到了州来，这次又要前往吴国，大夫们提心他又要迁都，公孙翩就在路上就用箭射杀了昭公。
English: Previously, Zhaogong had deceived his ministers and moved the capital to Zhouzhou. This time, he wanted to go to Wu. The doctors were worried that he was going to move the capital. Gongsun Piang shot Zhaogong with an arrow on the way.

古文：楚侵蔡。
现代文：接着，楚军就来侵犯蔡国。
English: Next, the Chu army invaded Cai Guo.

古文：秋，齐景公卒。
现代文：同年秋天，齐景公去世。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Qi Jing Gong passed away.

古文：明年，孔子自蔡如叶。
现代文：第二年，孔子从蔡国前往叶邑。
English: In the second year, Confucius traveled from Cai Guo to Ye Eup.

古文：叶公问政，孔子曰： 政在来远附迩。 
现代文：叶公问孔子如何施政，孔子说： 施政的关键在于招揽远方的贤士，使近处的人归附。 
English: When Ye Gong asked Confucius how to govern, Confucius said, "The key to governing lies in recruiting sages from afar and winning the allegiance of those nearby.

古文：他日，叶公问孔子於子路，子路不对。
现代文：有一天，叶公问子路孔子的为人，子路没有回答。
English: One day, Ye Gong asked Zilu what kind of person Confucius was. Zilu did not answer.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 由，尔何不对曰 其为人也，学道不倦，诲人不厌，发愤忘食，乐以忘忧，不知老之将至 云尔。 
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，说： 仲由，你怎么不回答他说 他的为人，学习道理不知道疲倦，教诲别人不感到厌烦，发愤学习时会忘记吃饭，欢乐时会忘记忧愁，不知道衰老将要到来 等等。 
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "Nakayu, why didn't you answer him and say that he is a person who doesn't get tired of learning the truth, doesn't get tired of teaching others, forgets to eat when he is angry, forgets to be sad when he is happy, doesn't know that old age is coming, and so on.

古文：去叶，反于蔡。
现代文：孔子离开楚国的叶地回到蔡国。
English: Confucius left the leafy land of Chu to return to Cai.

古文：长沮、桀溺耦而耕，孔子以为隐者，使子路问津焉。
现代文：在路上遇见长沮、桀溺两人并肩耕田，孔子以为他们是隐士，就叫子路前去打听渡口在什么地方。
English: On the way, he met a man and a woman ploughing a field side by side. Thinking they were hermits, Confucius sent his son ahead to find out where the ferry was.

古文：长沮曰： 彼执舆者为谁？ 
现代文：长沮说： 那个拉着马缰强的人是谁？ 
English: Chang De said, "Who is that man pulling the horse?"

古文：子路曰： 为孔丘。 
现代文：子路回答说： 是孔丘。 
English: Zilu replied, "It is Kongqiu."

古文：曰： 是鲁孔丘与？ 
现代文：长沮又问： 是鲁国的孔丘吧？ 
English: Nagasena asked again: Is it Confucius of Lu?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：子路说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 是知津矣。 桀溺谓子路曰： 子为谁？ 曰： 为仲由。 
现代文：长沮说： 那他应该知道渡口在哪儿了。 桀溺又问子路： 你是谁？ 子路说： 我是仲由。 
English: Chang De said: Then he should know where the ferry port is. Zhaodong also asked Zilu: Who are you? Zilu said: I am Zhongyu.

古文：曰： 子，孔丘之徒与？ 
现代文：桀溺说： 你是孔丘的门徒吗？ 
English: Zhaodong said, "Are you a disciple of Confucius?"

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：子路说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：桀溺曰： 悠悠者天下皆是也，而谁以易之？
现代文：桀溺说： 天下到处都在动荡不安，而谁能改变这种现状呢？
English: Zhaodong said: The world is in turmoil everywhere, and who can change this situation?

古文：且与其从辟人之士，岂若从辟世之士哉！ 
现代文：况且你与跟着那逃避暴乱臣的人四处奔走，还不如跟着我们这些躲避乱世的人呢？ 
English: Besides, if you run around with those who are fleeing from turbulent times, why don't you run around with those of us who are fleeing from a turbulent world?

古文：櫌而不辍。
现代文：说完，就继续不停地耕田。
English: Having said that, he continued to work the fields without stopping.

古文：子路以告孔子，孔子怃然曰： 鸟兽不可与同群。天下有道，丘不与易也。 
现代文：子路把此话告诉了孔子，孔子失望地说： 我们不能居住在山林里与鸟兽同群，要是天下太平，我也用不着到处奔走想改变这个局面了 。
English: Zilu told this to Confucius, who was disappointed and said, "We can't live in the mountains and forests with the birds and beasts. If the world were peaceful, I wouldn't have to run around trying to change the situation."

古文：他日，子路行，遇荷筱丈人，曰： 子见夫子乎？ 
现代文：有一天，子路一个人行走的时候，路遇一位肩扛除草工具的老人。子路问他： 您看见过我的老师吗？ 
English: One day, when Zilu was walking alone, he met an old man carrying a weeding tool on his shoulder. Zilu asked him: Have you seen my teacher?

古文：丈人曰： 四体不勤，五穀不分，孰为夫子！ 
现代文：老人说： 你们这些人四肢不勤劳，五谷分辨不清，谁是你的老师我怎么会知道？ 
English: The old man said, "You people are not diligent with your limbs, and you can't tell the difference between grain and grain. How would I know who your teacher is?

古文：植其杖而芸。
现代文：说完就拄着拐杖拔草去了。
English: After saying this, he went on crutches to pull up the weeds.

古文：子路以告，孔子曰： 隐者也。 
现代文：事后子路把这些经过告诉了孔子，孔子说： 这是位隐士。 
English: Afterwards, Zilu told this story to Confucius, who said, "This man is a hermit.

古文：复往，则亡。
现代文：叫子路再到那里看看，老人已经走了。
English: He told Zi Lu to go there and have a look. The old man had already left.

古文：孔子迁于蔡三岁，吴伐陈。
现代文：孔子迁居到蔡国三年，吴国攻打陈国。
English: Confucius moved to Cai Province for three years, and Wu Province attacked Chen Province.

古文：楚救陈，军于城父。
现代文：楚国救援陈国，军队驻扎在城父。
English: Chu rescued Chen, and the army was stationed in Chengdu.

古文：闻孔子在陈蔡之间，楚使人聘孔子。
现代文：听说孔子住在陈国和蔡国的边境上，楚国便派人去聘请孔子。
English: Hearing that Confucius was living on the border between the states of Chen and Cai, the state of Chu sent someone to recruit him.

古文：孔子将往拜礼，陈蔡大夫谋曰： 孔子贤者，所刺讥皆中诸侯之疾。
现代文：孔子正要前往拜见接受聘礼，陈国、蔡国的大夫商议说： 孔子是位有才德的贤人，他所指责讽刺的都切中诸侯的弊病。
English: Just as Confucius was about to go to pay his respects and accept the betrothal gift, the doctors Chen Guo and Cai Guo discussed and said: Confucius is a wise man with talent, and what he accused of irony is the malady of the princes.

古文：今者久留陈蔡之间，诸大夫所设行皆非仲尼之意。
现代文：如今长久地停留在我们陈国和蔡国之间，大夫们的施政施、所做所为都不合仲尼的意思。
English: Now we are stuck between Chen Guo and Cai Guo for a long time. The doctors' policies, actions and deeds are not in line with Zhongniu's intention.

古文：今楚，大国也，来聘孔子。
现代文：如今的楚国，是个大国，却来聘请孔子。
English: Today's Chu, a big country, has come to hire Confucius.

古文：孔子用於楚，则陈蔡用事大夫危矣。 
现代文：如果孔子在楚国被重用，那么我们陈蔡两国掌权的大夫们就危险了。 
English: If Confucius is reused in Chu, then the doctors in power in our two countries are in danger.

古文：於是乃相与发徒役围孔子於野。
现代文：于是他们双方就派了一些服劳役的人把孔子围困在野外。
English: So they both sent some laborers to besiege Confucius in the open.

古文：不得行，绝粮。
现代文：孔子和他的弟子无法行动，粮食也断绝了。
English: Confucius and his disciples were unable to travel, and food supplies were cut off.

古文：从者病，莫能兴。
现代文：跟从的弟子饿病了，站都站不起来。
English: A follower disciple was so hungry and sick that he couldn't even stand up.

古文：孔子讲诵弦歌不衰。
现代文：孔子却还在不停地给大家讲学，朗诵诗歌、歌唱、弹琴。
English: Confucius, however, continued to lecture, recite poetry, sing, and play the piano.

古文：子路愠见曰： 君子亦有穷乎？ 
现代文：子路很生气地来见孔子： 君子也有困窘的时候吗？ 
English: Zi Lu angrily came to see Confucius: Is there a time when a gentleman is embarrassed?

古文：孔子曰： 君子固穷，小人穷斯滥矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子在困窘面前能坚节操不动摇，人小遇到困窘就会不加节制，什么过火的事情都做得出来。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman can stand firm and unshaken in the face of adversity, but a small man will be unrestrained in the face of adversity, and will do anything to go too far.

古文：子贡色作。
现代文：这时子贡的脸色也变了。
English: At this time, Zigong's face also changed.

古文：孔子曰： 赐，尔以予为多学而识之者与？ 
现代文：孔子说： 赐啊，你认为我是博学强记的人吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Tell me, do you think I am a man of learning?

古文：曰： 然。
现代文：子贡回答说： 是的。
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：非与？ 
现代文：难道不对吗？ 
English: Isn't that right?

古文：孔子曰： 非也。
现代文：孔子说： 不是的。
English: Confucius said, "No."

古文：予一以贯之。 
现代文：我是掌握事物的基本道理并将其统筹贯通的。 
English: I grasp the basic principles of things and put them into practice in an integrated manner.

古文：孔子知弟子有愠心，乃召子路而问曰： 诗云 匪兕匪虎，率彼旷野 。吾道非邪？
现代文：孔子知道弟子们心中不高兴。便叫来子路问道： 《诗经》上说 不是犀牛也不是老虎，然而它却排徊在旷野上 ，难道是我们奉行的道义不对吗？
English: Confucius knew that his disciples were not happy, so he called Lai Zi Lu and asked: "The "Song of Songs" says that it is neither a rhinoceros nor a tiger, yet it lingers in the wilderness. Isn't the morality we follow right?

古文：吾何为於此？ 
现代文：我们为什么会落到这种地步呢？ 
English: How did we get to this point?

古文：子路曰： 意者吾未仁邪？
现代文：子路说： 大概是我们的仁德还不够吧？
English: Zilu said: Perhaps our benevolence is not enough?

古文：人之不我信也。
现代文：所以人家不信任我们；想必是我们的智谋还不够吧？
English: That's why they don't trust us; surely our cleverness isn't enough?

古文：意者吾未知邪？
现代文：所以人家不放我们通行。 
English: That's why they won't let us pass.

古文：人之不我行也。 
现代文：孔子说： 有这样的说法吗？
English: Confucius said: Is there such a saying?

古文：孔子曰： 有是乎！由，譬使仁者而必信，安有伯夷、叔齐？
现代文：仲由啊，假使有仁德的人必定能使人信任，哪里还会有伯夷、叔齐饿死在首阳山呢？
English: Oh, Zhongyu, if a person with benevolence can certainly make people trust him, where else will there be a beggar and an uncle starving to death on Shouyang Mountain?

古文：使知者而必行，安有王子比干？ 
现代文：假使有智谋的人就能早行无阻，哪里会有王子比干被剖心的事呢？ 
English: If a man of wit can get away with anything, where is the prince who will not do what he is told?

古文：子路出，子贡入见。
现代文：子路退出，子贡进来见孔子。
English: Zi Lu withdrew, and Zigong came in to see Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 赐，诗云 匪兕匪虎，率彼旷野 。
现代文：孔子对子贡说： 赐啊，《诗经》上说 不是犀牛也不是老虎，然而它却徘徊在旷野上 。
English: Confucius said to Zigong, "Please, the Book of Songs says that it is neither a rhinoceros nor a tiger, yet it wanders in the wilderness.

古文：吾道非邪？
现代文：难道是我们的学说有有什么不对吗？
English: Is there something wrong with our teaching?

古文：吾何为於此？ 子贡曰： 夫子之道至大也，故天下莫能容夫子。
现代文：我们为什么落到这种地步呢？ 子贡说： 老师的学说博大到极点了，所以天下没有一个国家能容纳老师。
English: Why have we come to this? Zigong said: The teachings of teachers are extremely broad, so there is no country in the world that can accommodate teachers.

古文：夫子盖少贬焉？ 
现代文：老师何不稍微降低一些您的要求呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the teacher lower your standards a bit?

古文：孔子曰： 赐，良农能稼而不能为穑，良工能巧而不能为顺。
现代文：孔子说： 赐啊，好的农夫虽然善于耕种，但他却不一定有好的收获；好的工匠虽然不精巧的手艺，但他的所作却未必能使人们都称心如意。
English: Confucius said: Granted, although a good farmer is good at farming, he does not necessarily have a good harvest; although a good craftsman is not a delicate craft, his work may not be able to make people happy.

古文：君子能脩其道，纲而纪之，统而理之，而不能为容。
现代文：有修养的人能研修自己的学说，就像网一样，先构出基本的大纳统绪，然后再依疏理扎，但不一定被世人所接受。
English: A cultivated person can study his own theory, just like a net, first construct a basic outline, and then follow the outline, but it is not necessarily accepted by the world.

古文：今尔不脩尔道而求为容。
现代文：现在你不去研修自己的学说，反而想降格来敬合取容。
English: Now, instead of studying your own doctrine, you want to lower yourself to be respected.

古文：赐，而志不远矣！ 
现代文：赐啊，你的志向太不远大了。 
English: Give me a break, your aspirations are too small.

古文：子贡出，颜回入见。
现代文：子贡出去之后，颜回进来见孔子。
English: After Zigong left, Yan returned to see Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 回，诗云 匪兕匪虎，率彼旷野 。
现代文：孔子说： 回啊，《诗经》说 不是犀牛也不是老虎，然而它却徘徊在旷野上 。
English: Confucius said, "Again, the Book of Songs says, 'It is neither a rhinoceros nor a tiger, yet it wanders in the wilderness.'

古文：吾道非邪？
现代文：难道是我们的说学有什么不对吗？
English: Is there something wrong with our teaching?

古文：吾何为於此？ 
现代文：我们为什么落到这种地步呢？ 
English: How did we get to this point?

古文：颜回曰： 夫子之道至大，故天下莫能容。
现代文：颜回说： 老师的学说博大到极点了，所以天下没有一个国家能容纳老师。
English: Yan Hui said: "Teachers' teachings are extremely broad, so there is no country in the world that can accommodate teachers.

古文：虽然，夫子推而行之，不容何病，不容然後见君子！
现代文：虽然是这样，老师还是要推行自己的学说，不被天下接受又有什么关系呢？不被接受，这样才能显出君子的本色！
English: Although this is the case, the teacher still has to promote his own doctrine. What does it matter if it is not accepted by the world? If it is not accepted, then the true nature of the gentleman can be revealed!

古文：夫道之不脩也，是吾丑也。
现代文：一个人不研修自己的学说，那才是自己的耻辱。
English: If one does not study one's own doctrine, that is one's own disgrace.

古文：夫道既已大脩而不用，是有国者之丑也。
现代文：至于已下大力研修的学说不被人所用，那是当权者的耻辱了。
English: As for the theory that has been vigorously studied not being used by people, that is the shame of those in power.

古文：不容何病，不容然後见君子！ 
现代文：不被天下接又有什么关系呢？不被接受，这样才能显出君子的本色！ 
English: What does it matter if you are not accepted by the world? If you are not accepted, only then can you show the true colors of a gentleman!

古文：孔子欣然而笑曰： 有是哉颜氏之子！
现代文：孔子听了欣慰地笑着说： 是这样的啊，姓颜的小伙子！
English: Hearing this, Confucius smiled with relief and said, "That's right, young man with the surname Yan!"

古文：使尔多财，吾为尔宰。 
现代文：假使你有很多钱财，我愿意给你做管家。 
English: If you have a lot of money, I'll be your butler.

古文：於是使子贡至楚。
现代文：于是派子贡到楚国去。
English: Therefore, he sent tribute to Chu.

古文：楚昭王兴师迎孔子，然後得免。
现代文：楚昭王调动军队来迎接孔子，这才免除了这场灾祸。
English: King Chu Zhao mobilized the army to meet Confucius, which only spared the calamity.

古文：昭王将以书社地七百里封孔子。
现代文：楚昭王想把有户籍登记的七百里地方封给孔子。
English: King Chu Zhaowang wanted to give Confucius the fief of a seven-hundred-mile area with a household registration.

古文：楚令尹子西曰： 王之使使诸侯有如子贡者乎？ 
现代文：楚国的令尹子西阻止说： 大王派往各诸侯国的使臣，有像子贡这样的人吗？ 
English: The king of Chu ordered Yin Zixi to stop him, saying, "The great king has sent envoys to all the provinces. Is there anyone like Zigong?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：昭王说： 没有。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文： 王之辅相有如颜回者乎？ 曰： 无有。 
现代文：子西又问： 大王的左右辅佐大臣，有像颜回这样的人吗？ 昭王说： 没有。 
English: Zixi also asked, "The great king's left and right assistant ministers, are there any people like Yan Hui?" King Zhao said, "No."

古文： 王之将率有如子路者乎？ 
现代文：子西又问： 大王的将帅，有像子路这样的吗？ 
English: Zixi also asked: Is there a great general like Zilu?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：昭王回答说： 没有。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文： 王之官尹有如宰予者乎？ 
现代文：子西还问： 大王的各部主事官员，有像宰予这样的吗？ 
English: Zixi also asked: Are there any leading officials in the great king's ministries like Zaiyou?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：昭王回答说： 没有。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文： 且楚之祖封於周，号为子男五十里。
现代文：子西接着说： 况且我们楚国的祖先在受周天子受封时，封号是子爵，土地跟男爵相等，方圆五十里。
English: Zixi went on to say, "Moreover, when our ancestors in Chu were crowned by Zhou Tianzi, the title was viscount, and the land was equal to that of a baron, with a radius of fifty miles.

古文：今孔丘述三五之法，明周召之业，王若用之，则楚安得世世堂堂方数千里乎？
现代文：现在孔丘讲述三皇五帝的规制法度，申明周公旦、召公奭辅佐周天子的事业，大王如果任用了他，那么楚国还能世世代代保有方圆几千里的土地吗？
English: Now Confucius recounts the regulatory laws of the three emperors and five emperors, affirms the cause of Zhou Gongdan and Zhou Tianzi. If the great king had appointed him, would Chu still be able to retain thousands of miles of land for generations to come?

古文：夫文王在丰，武王在镐，百里之君卒王天下。
现代文：想当年文王在丰邑、武王在镐京，作为只有百里之地的主，最终称王天下。
English: To think that King Wen was in Fengyi and King Wu was in Beijing, as the lord of the land of only a hundred miles, he was eventually called the king of the world.

古文：今孔丘得据土壤，贤弟子为佐，非楚之福也。 
现代文：现在如让孔丘拥有那七百城土地，再加上那些有才能的弟子辅佐，这并不是楚国的福气。 
English: Now, if Confucius is allowed to own the seven hundred city lands, plus those talented disciples and assistants, this is not the blessing of Chu.

古文：昭王乃止。
现代文：昭王听了就打消了原来的想法。
English: Upon hearing this, Akio dismissed his original idea.

古文：其秋，楚昭王卒于城父。
现代文：这年秋天，楚昭王死在了城父。
English: This autumn, King Chu Zhao died in Chengdu.

古文：楚狂接舆歌而过孔子，曰： 凤兮凤兮，何德之衰！
现代文：楚国的狂人接舆有一天唱着歌走过孔子的车子，说： 凤凰呀，凤凰呀，你的德行怎么会降低了啊？
English: One day, a madman from the state of Chu picked me up, sang a song and walked past Confucius' car, saying: "Phoenix, phoenix, how could your virtue have declined?

古文：往者不可谏兮，来者犹可追也！
现代文：过去的事情不能再挽回，未来的还可以再赶得上，算了吧，算了吧！
English: The past can no longer be undone, the future can still catch up, forget it, forget it!

古文：已而已而，今之从政者殆而！ 
现代文：现在当权的人都不可救药了！ 
English: The people in power now are beyond redemption!

古文：孔子下，欲与之言。
现代文：孔子下了车，想和他谈谈，但他却快步走开了，没能跟他说上话。
English: Confucius got out of the car and wanted to talk to him, but he walked away quickly and could not talk to him.

古文：趋而去，弗得与之言。於是孔子自楚反乎卫。
现代文：于是孔子从楚国返回了卫国。这一年，孔子六十三岁，是鲁哀公六年。
English: So Confucius returned from Chu to defend the country. This year, Confucius was sixty-three years old, six years older than Lu Aigong.

古文：是岁也，孔子年六十三，而鲁哀公六年也。其明年，吴与鲁会缯，徵百牢。
现代文：第二年，吴国和鲁国在一个叫缯的地方会盟，吴国要求鲁国提供百牢的祭品。
English: In the second year, Wu and Lu formed an alliance in a place called Shao. Wu asked Lu to provide a hundred dungeons of offerings.

古文：太宰嚭召季康子。
现代文：吴国的太宰嚭召见季康子。
English: The Grand Vizier of the State of Wu summoned Ji Kangzi.

古文：康子使子贡往，然后得已。
现代文：季康子就派子贡前往交涉，然后这件事才得以作罢。
English: Ji Kangzi sent Zigong to negotiate, and then the matter could be abandoned.

古文：孔子曰： 鲁卫之政，兄弟也。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲁国、卫国的政治情况，如同兄弟一般相似。 
English: Confucius said: The political situations of the two countries are generally similar, like brothers.

古文：是时，卫君辄父不得立，在外，诸侯数以为让。
现代文：这个时候，卫出公辄的父亲蒯聩没有继位做国君，流亡在外，诸侯对此事屡加指责。
English: At this time, Wei De Gongye's father, Yao, did not succeed to the throne as the sovereign and went into exile, and the princes repeatedly criticized him for this.

古文：而孔子弟子多仕於卫，卫君欲得孔子为政。
现代文：而孔子的弟子很多在卫国做官，卫出公辄也想请孔子出来执政。
English: However, many disciples of Confucius worked as officials in the defense of the country, and the Wei government also wanted to invite Confucius to come out and govern.

古文：子路曰： 卫君待子而为政，子将奚先？ 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 卫国国想请您出来执政，您打算首先做什么呢？ 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius, "If the motherland wants to invite you to come and govern, what do you plan to do first?

古文：孔子曰： 必也正名乎！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 那我一定首先正名分！ 
English: Confucius replied, "Then I must first set things right!"

古文：子路曰： 有是哉，子之迂也！
现代文：子路说： 有这样的事吗，老师您太迂阔了！
English: Zi Lu said: Is there such a thing? Teacher, you are too broad-minded!

古文：何其正也？ 
现代文：为什么要首先正名份呢？ 
English: Why do you have to change your name in the first place?

古文：孔子曰： 野哉由也！
现代文：孔子说： 鲁莽啊，仲田！
English: Confucius said, "How reckless, Nakata!

古文：夫名不正则言不顺，言不顺则事不成，事不成则礼乐不兴，礼乐不兴则刑罚不中，刑罚不中则民无所错手足矣。
现代文：要知道，名分不正，说出的话来就不顺当；说话不顺当，那么事情就办不成；事情办不成，那么礼乐教化就不能兴盛；乐教化不兴盛，那么刑罚不准确适度，那么老百姓就年足无措，不知怎么办才好。
English: You must know that if the name is not right, the words spoken will not be appropriate; if the words are not appropriate, then things will not be done; if things are not done, then the culture of etiquette and music cannot flourish; if the culture of music and education does not flourish, then the punishment is not accurate and appropriate, then the common people are at a loss and do not know what to do.

古文：夫君子为之必可名，言之必可行。
现代文：所以君子办事必须符合名分，说出来的话，一定要切实可行。
English: Therefore, a gentleman's work must be in line with the name, and if it comes out, it must be practical.

古文：君子於其言，无所苟而已矣。 
现代文：君子对于他所说出来的话，应该毫不苟且随便才行啊。 
English: A gentleman should be scrupulous and casual about what he says.

古文：其明年，厓有为季氏将师，与齐战於郎，克之。
现代文：第二年，冉有为季氏统率军队，在郎地同齐国作战，打败了齐国的军队。
English: In the second year, Ran Youwei led the army to fight against Qi in Langdi and defeated Qi's army.

古文：季康子曰： 子之於军旅，学之乎？
现代文：季康子对冉求说： 您的军事才能，是学来的呢？
English: Ji Kangzi said to Ran Qiu: Is your military talent learned?

古文：性之乎？ 
现代文：还是天生的呢？ 
English: Or is it innate?

古文：厓有曰： 学之於孔子。 
现代文：冉有回答说： 我是从孔子那里学来的。 
English: Ran You replied, "I learned from Confucius."

古文：季康子曰： 孔子何如人哉？ 
现代文：季康子又问： 孔子是怎样的一个人呢？ 
English: Ji Kangzi also asked: What kind of person was Confucius?

古文：对曰： 用之有名；播之百姓，质诸鬼神而无憾。
现代文：冉有回答说： 任用他要符合名分，他的学说不论是传布到百姓中，还是对质于鬼神前，都是没有遗憾的。
English: Ran replied, "His appointment should be commensurate with his reputation. His teachings are not regrettable, whether they are spread among the people or preached to ghosts and gods.

古文：求之至於此道，虽累千社，夫子不利也。 康子曰： 我欲召之，可乎？ 
现代文：我对于军事，虽然有功而累计封到二千五百户人家，而孔子却会毫不动心的。 康子说： 我想召请他回来，可以吗？ 
English: As far as the military is concerned, although I have accumulated 2,500 households due to my achievements, Confucius would not be impressed.Kang Zi said: Can I call him back?

古文：对曰： 欲召之，则毋以小人固之，则可矣。 
现代文：冉有说： 你想召请他回来，只要不让小人从中阻碍他，就可以了。 
English: Ran You said: If you want to call him back, as long as you don't let the villain hinder him, it's fine.

古文：而卫孔文子将攻太叔，问策於仲尼。
现代文：当时，卫国大夫孔文子准备攻打太叔，向孔子问计策。
English: At that time, Confucius, the doctor of national defense, was preparing to attack the great uncle, and asked Confucius for a strategy.

古文：仲尼辞不知，退而命载而行，曰： 鸟能择木，木岂能择鸟乎！ 
现代文：孔子推辞说不知道，他回到住处便立即吩咐备车离开了卫国，说道： 鸟能选择树木栖息，树木怎能选择鸟呢？ 
English: Confucius replied that he did not know, and when he returned to his residence, he immediately ordered a car to leave the country, saying: Birds can choose trees to roost in, but how can trees choose birds?

古文：文子固止。
现代文：孔文子坚决拘留他。
English: Confucius resolutely detained him.

古文：会季康子逐公华、公宾、公林，以币迎孔子，孔子归鲁。
现代文：恰好季康子派来公华、公宾、公林，带着礼物迎接迎孔子，孔子就回鲁国去了。
English: It just so happened that Ji Kangzi sent Gonghua, Gongbin and Gonglin to welcome Confucius with gifts. Confucius then went back to Lu.

古文：孔子之去鲁凡十四岁而反乎鲁。
现代文：孔子离开鲁国十四年又回到鲁国。
English: Fourteen years after leaving Lu, Confucius returned to Lu.

古文：鲁哀公问政，对曰： 政在选臣。 
现代文：鲁哀公向孔子问为政的道理，孔子回答说： 为政最重要的是选择臣子。 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius about the principle of politics. Confucius replied: The most important thing in politics is to choose a vassal.

古文：季康子问政，曰： 举直错诸枉，则枉者直。 
现代文：季康子也向孔子问为政的道理，孔子说： 要举用正直的人，抛弃心术不正的人，那样就使心术不正的人变得正直。 
English: Ji Kangzi also asked Confucius about the principle of politics. Confucius said, "We should promote honest people and discard dishonest people. In this way, dishonest people will become honest."

古文：康子患盗，孔子曰： 苟子之不欲，虽赏之不窃。 
现代文：季康子忧虑盗窃，孔子说： 如果你自己没有欲的话，就是给奖赏，人们也是不会去偷窃的。 
English: Ji Kangzi worried about theft, Confucius said: If you don't have the desire, even if you give a reward, people won't steal.

古文：然鲁终不能用孔子，孔子亦不求仕。
现代文：但是鲁国最终也没能任用孔子，孔子也不要求出来做官。
English: However, in the end, the State of Lu was not able to appoint Confucius, and Confucius did not ask to be made an official.

古文：孔子之时，周室微而礼乐废，诗书缺。
现代文：孔子的时代，周王衰微，礼崩乐坏，《诗》、《书》也殊缺不全了。
English: In the era of Confucius, King Zhou was fading away, etiquette was fading away, music was fading away, and "poetry" and "books" were also severely lacking.

古文：追迹三代之礼，序书传，上纪唐虞之际，下至秦缪，编次其事。
现代文：孔子探究夏、商、西周三代的礼仪制度，编定了《书传》的篇次，上起唐尧、虞舜之时，下至秦穆公，依照事情的先后，加以整理编排。
English: Confucius explored the etiquette system of the Xia, Shang, and Western dynasties, and compiled the order of the "Book Biography." From the time of Tang Xi and Yu Xi, down to Qin Mu Gong, according to the sequence of events, it was sorted out and arranged.

古文：曰： 夏礼吾能言之，杞不足徵也。
现代文：孔子说： 夏代的礼仪制度我还能讲出来，只是夏的后代杞国没有留下足够证明这些的文献了。
English: Confucius said: I can still tell you about the etiquette system of the Xia Dynasty, but Xia's descendants, the Qiang, did not leave enough documents to prove this.

古文：殷礼吾能言之，宋不足徵也。
现代文：殷商的礼仪制度我也能讲出来，只是殷商的后宋国没有留下足够证明这些制度的文献了。
English: I can also tell you about the etiquette system of the Yin merchants, but the post-Song Dynasty of the Yin merchants did not leave enough documents to prove these systems.

古文：足，则吾能徵之矣。 
现代文：如果杞、宋两国有足够的文献，我就能证明这些制度了。 
English: If there are enough documents from the Song and Zhou Dynasties, I will be able to prove these systems.

古文：观殷夏所损益，曰： 後虽百世可知也，以一文一质。
现代文：孔子考察了殷代继承夏代对礼仪制度所作的增减之后说： 将来即使经过一百，那增减的也是可以预知的，因为一种是重视文采，另一种是重视朴实。
English: After examining the additions and subtractions made to the etiquette system by the Yin dynasty, which succeeded the Xia dynasty, Confucius said: In the future, even if it takes a hundred years, the additions and subtractions can be predicted, because one attaches importance to literature, and the other attaches importance to simplicity.

古文：周监二代，郁郁乎文哉。吾从周。 故书传、礼记自孔氏。
现代文：周代的礼仪制度是在参照了夏代和殷代的基础上制定的，多么丰富多采呀，我主张用周代的礼仪 所以《书传》、《礼记》都是孔子编定的。
English: The etiquette system of the Zhou dynasty was developed on the basis of the Xia and Yin dynasties. How rich and colorful it is. I advocate using the etiquette of the Zhou dynasty. Therefore, "Biography" and "Rituals" were compiled by Confucius.

古文：孔子语鲁大师： 乐其可知也。
现代文：孔子曾对鲁国的乐官太师说： 音乐是可以通晓的。
English: Confucius once said to the Grand Master of Music of the State of Lu: Music can be understood.

古文：始作翕如，纵之纯如，皦如，绎如也，以成。 
现代文：刚开始演奏的时候要互相配合一致，继续下去是节奏和谐，声音清晰，连续不断，这样直到整首乐曲演奏完成。 
English: At the beginning of the performance, it is necessary to coordinate with each other, and the rhythm is harmonious, the sound is clear and continuous, until the entire piece is completed.

古文： 吾自卫反鲁，然後乐正，雅颂各得其所。 
现代文：孔子又说： 我从卫国返回鲁国之后，就开始订正诗乐，使《雅》、《颂》都恢复了原来的曲调。 
English: Confucius also said, "After I returned from the homeland to the country of Lu, I began to revise the poetry and music, so that "Ya" and "Ode" were restored to their original tunes.

古文：古者诗三千馀篇，及至孔子，去其重，取可施於礼义，上采契后稷，中述殷周之盛，至幽厉之缺，始於衽席，故曰 关雎之乱以为风始，鹿鸣为小雅始，文王为大雅始，清庙为颂始 。
现代文：古代留传下来的《诗》有三千多篇，到孔子时，他把重复的删掉了，选取中合于义的用于礼义教化，最早的是追述殷始祖契、周始祖后稷，其次是叙述殷、周两代的兴盛，直到周幽王、周厉王的政治缺失，而开头的则是叙述男女夫妇关系和感情的诗篇，所以说： 《关睢》这一乐章作为《国风》的第一篇，《鹿鸣》作为《小雅》的第一篇；《文王》作为《大雅》的第一篇；《清庙》作为《颂》的第一篇 。
English: There are more than three thousand "poems" that have been handed down from ancient times. When Confucius arrived, he deleted the ones that were repetitive and selected the ones that were suitable for use in the teaching of etiquette and righteousness. The earliest one was a recitation of the Yin and Zhou dynasties, followed by a description of the prosperity of the Yin and Zhou dynasties, up to the political failures of King Zhou Yu and King Zhou Li. At the beginning, there was a poem describing the relationship and feelings between a man and a woman. Therefore, it was said that: "Guanzhang" this movement is the first movement of "National Style," "De

古文：三百五篇孔子皆弦歌之，以求合韶武雅颂之音。
现代文：三百零五篇诗孔子都能将演奏歌唱，以求合于《韶》、《武》、《雅》《颂》这些乐曲的音调。
English: The three hundred and five poems of Confucius can be played and sung to match the tone of the music of "Shu," "Wu," "Ya" and "Ode."

古文：礼乐自此可得而述，以备王道，成六艺。孔子晚而喜易，序彖、系、象、说卦、文言。
现代文：先王的乐制度从此才恢复旧观而得以称述，王道完备了，孔子也完成了被称为 六艺 的《诗》、《书》、《乐》、《易》、《春秋》的编修。孔子晚年喜欢钻研《周易》，他详细解释了《彖辞》、《系辞》、《卦》、《文言》等。
English: It was only after this that the previous emperor's music system was restored to the old view and could be described. The royal road was complete, and Confucius also completed the compilation of "Poetry," "Book," "Music," "Ease," and "Spring and Autumn," which are known as the six arts. In his later years, Confucius liked to study "Zhou Yi," and he explained in detail "Dictionary," "Lineage," "Drama," "Writing," and so on.

古文：读易，韦编三绝。曰： 假我数年，若是，我於易则彬彬矣。 
现代文：孔子读《周易》刻苦勤奋，以致把编穿书简的牛皮绳子也弄断了多次。他还说： 再让我多活几年，这样的话，我对《周易》的文辞和义理就能够充分掌握理解了。 
English: Confucius read "Zhou Yi" assiduously and diligently, so much so that he broke the cowhide rope that was used to tie the book together several times. He also said, "If I live a few more years, I will be able to fully grasp and understand the words and principles of "Zhou Yi."

古文：孔子以诗书礼乐教，弟子盖三千焉，身通六艺者七十有二人。
现代文：孔子用《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》作教材教育弟子，就学的弟子大约在三千人，中能精通礼、乐、射、御、数、术这六种技艺的有七十二人。
English: Confucius used "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music" as teaching materials to educate his disciples. There are about three thousand students, among whom there are seventy-two people who can master the six skills of etiquette, music, shooting, control, arithmetic and art.

古文：如颜浊邹之徒，颇受业者甚众。孔子以四教：文，行，忠，信。
现代文：至于像颜浊邹那样的人，多方面受到孔子的教诲却没有正式入籍的弟子就更多了。孔子教育弟子有四个方面：学问、言行、忠恕、信义。
English: As for people like Yan Qi, there are many more disciples who have been taught by Confucius in many ways but have not been officially naturalized.Confucius's education of disciples has four aspects: learning, words and deeds, loyalty, and faithfulness.

古文：绝四：毋意，毋必，毋固，毋我。
现代文：为弟子订四条禁律：不揣测、不武断、不固执、不自以为是。
English: There are four prohibitions for disciples: no speculation, no arbitrariness, no stubbornness, and no self-righteousness.

古文：所慎：齐，战，疾。
现代文：他认为应当特别谨慎处理的是：斋戒、战争、疾病。
English: In his opinion, the following should be handled with special care: fasting, war, and disease.

古文：子罕言利与命与仁。
现代文：孔子很少谈到利，如果谈到，就与命运、仁德联系起来。
English: Confucius rarely spoke of interest, and if he did, he associated it with fate and benevolence.

古文：不愤不启，举一隅不以三隅反，则弗复也。其於乡党，恂恂似不能言者。
现代文：他教育弟子的时候，不到人家真正遇到困难，烦闷发急的时候，不去启发开导他。他出一个道理，弟子不能触类旁通地推演出似的道理，他就不再重复讲述了。孔子在自己的乡里，谦恭得像个不善言谈的人。
English: When he was educating his disciples, he did not enlighten them until they were really in difficulties, when they were bored and anxious. When he came up with a principle, he would not repeat it. A disciple should not push a performance-like principle by analogy. Confucius was so humble in his hometown that he was like a person who was not good at talking.

古文：其於宗庙朝廷，辩辩言，唯谨尔。
现代文：他在宗庙祭祀和朝廷议政这些场合，却能言善辩，言辞明晰而又通达，然而又很恭谨小心。
English: On occasions such as his ancestral temple's rituals and the imperial court's deliberation on politics, he was able to speak well, his words were clear and comprehensive, yet he was very respectful and careful.

古文：朝，与上大夫言，訚訚如也；与下大夫言，侃侃如也。
现代文：上朝时，与上大夫交谈，态度和悦，中正自然；与下大夫交谈，就显得和乐安详了了。
English: When talking with the upper doctor in the morning, the attitude was pleasant and natural; when talking with the lower doctor, it appeared to be pleasant and peaceful.

古文：入公门，鞠躬如也；趋进，翼如也。
现代文：孔子进入国君的公门，低头弯腰，恭敬谨慎，进门后急行而前，恭敬有礼。
English: Confucius entered the public gate of the sovereign, bowed his head, respectfully and cautiously, and rushed forward after entering the door, respectful and courteous.

古文：君召使儐，色勃如也。
现代文：国君命他迎接宾客，容色庄重认真。
English: The sovereign ordered him to welcome the guests, and his appearance was solemn and serious.

古文：君命召，不俟驾行矣。
现代文：国君召见他，不等待车驾备好，就动身起行。
English: The sovereign summoned him, and without waiting for the carriage to be ready, he set off.

古文：鱼馁，肉败，割不正，不食。
现代文：鱼不新鲜，肉有变味，或不按规矩切割，孔子不吃。
English: If the fish is not fresh, the meat has a bad taste, or it is not cut according to regulations, Confucius will not eat it.

古文：席不正，不坐。
现代文：席位不正，孔子不就坐。
English: If the seat is not right, Confucius will not sit.

古文：食於有丧者之侧，未尝饱也。
现代文：在有丧事的人旁边吃饭，从来没有吃饱过。
English: Eating next to mourners, he never had enough to eat.

古文：是日哭，则不歌。
现代文：在一天内哭泣过，就不会再歌唱。
English: If you cry for a day, you don't sing again.

古文：见齐衰、瞽者，虽童子必变。
现代文：看见穿孝服的人和盲人，即使是是个小孩，也必定改变面容以示同情。
English: Even a small child must change his face to show sympathy when he sees a person in filial piety and a blind person.

古文： 三人行，必得我师。 
现代文：孔子说： 三个人同行，其中一定有可以做我老师的。 
English: Confucius said: If three men walk together, one of them must be able to be my teacher.

古文： 德之不脩，学之不讲，闻义不能徙，不善不能改，是吾忧也。 
现代文：又说： 不去修明道德，不去探求学业，听到正直的道理又不前往学习，对缺点错误又不能改正，这些是我是忧虑提心的问题。 
English: He also said: I am worried and anxious about the problems of not clarifying morals, not pursuing studies, hearing the truth of honesty and not going to study, and not being able to correct shortcomings and mistakes.

古文：使人歌，善，则使复之，然后和之。
现代文：孔子请人唱歌，要是唱得好，就请人再唱一遍，然后自己也和唱起来。
English: Confucius asked someone to sing a song. If the song was good, he asked the person to sing it again, and then he sang it himself.

古文：子不语：怪，力，乱，神。
现代文：孔子不谈论怪异、暴力、鬼神有关的事情。
English: Confucius doesn't talk about weird, violent, ghost-related things.

古文：子贡曰： 夫子之文章，可得闻也。
现代文：子贡说： 老师传授给我们的文献方面的文辞知识，是能够听到而得知的。
English: Zigong said, "The literary knowledge that the teacher taught us about literature can be learned by listening.

古文：夫子言天道与性命，弗可得闻也已。 
现代文：老师教导我们的和天道与天性有关的言论，是不能够听到并知晓的。 
English: What the teacher teaches us about heaven and nature cannot be heard and known.

古文：颜渊喟然叹曰： 仰之弥高，钻之弥坚。
现代文：颜渊赞叹说： 老师的学说，越是抬头仰望，越觉得崇高；越是去钻研，就越能体会到其中的坚实与深厚。
English: Yan Yuan said with admiration: The more you look up to the teacher's teaching, the more sublime it feels; the more you delve into it, the more you can appreciate its solidity and depth.

古文：瞻之在前，忽焉在後。
现代文：看到它就在前方，忽然又跑到后面。
English: He saw it in front of him and suddenly ran to the back.

古文：夫子循循然善诱人，博我以文，约我以礼，欲罢不能。
现代文：老师善于有条理有计划地诱导人，用文献典籍来丰富我们的知识，用礼仪规范来约束我们的言行，即使想停止学习都不能做到。
English: Teachers are good at systematically inducing people, using literature to enrich our knowledge, and using etiquette to restrict our words and deeds. Even if you want to stop learning, you can't.

古文：既竭我才，如有所立，卓尔。
现代文：已然竭尽了我所有的才力，似乎能在社会中独立了，但是想要再前进一步，却不知如何着手了。 
English: I've exhausted all my talents and seem to be able to stand on my own in society, but I don't know how to get started if I want to move forward.

古文：虽欲从之，蔑由也已。 
现代文：达巷那个地方的人说： 伟大啊！
English: The people in that part of Daxiang said, "Great!

古文：达巷党人曰： 大哉孔子，博学而无所成名。 子闻之曰： 我何执？
现代文：孔子，博学却并未因为某项专长而出名。 孔子听说了这话，说： 我有什么专长呢？
English: When Confucius heard this, he said, "What is my specialty?

古文：执御乎？
现代文：驾车吗？
English: Do you drive?

古文：执射乎？
现代文：射箭吗？
English: Is it archery?

古文：我执御矣。 
现代文：我还是擅长驾车吧。 
English: I'm still good at driving.

古文：牢曰： 子云 不试，故艺 。 
现代文：牢说： 老师曾说过 没能得到任用，这才学会了这么多技艺 。 
English: The teacher once said that it was because he couldn't get an appointment that he learned so many skills.

古文：鲁哀公十四年春，狩大野。
现代文：鲁哀公十四年的春天，在大野这个地方狩猎。
English: In the spring of Rui's fourteenth year, he went deer hunting in Ono.

古文：叔孙氏车子鉏商获兽，以为不祥。
现代文：给叔孙氏驾车的商猎获了一头怪兽，他们以为这是不祥之兆。
English: The merchants who had given the car to Mr. Sun's uncle hunted down a monster, which they thought was an ominous sign.

古文：仲尼视之，曰： 麟也。 
现代文：孔子看了后说： 这是麒麟。 
English: Confucius looked at it and said, "This is the unicorn."

古文：取之。
现代文：于是便将它取走了。
English: So they took it away.

古文：曰： 河不出图，雒不出书，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 黄河上再不见神龙负图出现，洛水上再不见神龟负洛书出现，我也就快要完啦！ 
English: Confucius said, "If the Yellow River no longer bears the image of the dragon, and the Luo River no longer bears the image of the turtle, I will soon be finished!"

古文：颜渊死，孔子曰： 天丧予！ 
现代文：渊死了，孔子说： 这是老天要我死呀！ 
English: When Yuanyuan died, Confucius said, "It was God's will for me to die!"

古文：及西狩见麟，曰： 吾道穷矣！ 
现代文：等到他西去大野狩猎见到麒麟，说： 我的主张到尽头了！ 
English: When he went west to Ono to hunt, he met Kirin and said, "My claim is at an end!"

古文：喟然叹曰： 莫知我夫！ 
现代文：感慨地说： 没有人能了解我了！ 
English: He said with emotion: No one can understand me anymore!

古文：子贡曰： 何为莫知子？ 
现代文：子贡说： 为什么说没有人了解您？ 
English: Zigong said: Why do you say no one knows you?

古文：子曰： 不怨天，不尤人，下学而上达，知我者其天乎！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 我不抱怨天，也不怪罪人，下学人事，上通天理，能了解我的，只有上天了吧！ 
English: Confucius replied, "I do not complain about heaven, nor do I blame sinners. I am a student of human affairs and a student of heavenly wisdom. Only heaven can understand me."

古文： 不降其志，不辱其身，伯夷、叔齐乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 不降低自己的志向，不使自己的人格受到侮辱，只有伯夷、叔齐丙人吧！ 
English: Confucius said: Only those who do not lower their aspirations and do not allow their personality to be insulted are the people of Bo Yi and Uncle Qi Ping!

古文：谓 柳下惠、少连降志辱身矣 。
现代文：又说： 柳下惠、少连降低了自己的志向，使人格受到了侮辱 。
English: He also said: Liu Shimo Hui and Shao Lian lowered their aspirations, and their personalities were insulted.

古文：谓 虞仲、夷逸隐居放言，行中清，废中权 。 我则异於是，无可无不可。 
现代文：又说 虞仲、夷逸隐居，不言世务，行为合干清高纯洁，自我废弃合于权变 。
English: It is also said that Yu Zhong and Yiyi lived in seclusion, but did not talk about worldly affairs, their behavior was clean and pure, and their self-abandonment coincided with the coup.

古文：子曰： 弗乎弗乎，君子病没世而名不称焉。
现代文：又说： 我就跟他们不同了，既不降志辱身以求进取，也不隐居避世脱离尘俗，没有绝对的可以，也没有绝对的不可以 。孔子说： 不行啊，不行！
English: He also said, "I'm different from them. I don't lower myself and humiliate myself to seek advancement, nor do I live in seclusion to escape from the world. There is no absolute yes, and there is no absolute no." Confucius said, "No way, no way!"

古文：吾道不行矣，吾何以自见於後世哉？ 
现代文：君子最提忧的就是死后没有留下好的名声。我的主张不能实行，我要把什么留给后世之人呢？ 
English: A gentleman's greatest worry is that he will not leave a good reputation after his death. If I cannot carry out what I advocate, what will I leave behind for future generations?

古文：乃因史记作春秋，上至隐公，下讫哀公十四年，十二公。
现代文：于是就根据鲁国的史书作了《春秋》，上起鲁隐公元年，下止鲁哀公十四年，共包括鲁国十二个国君。
English: Therefore, he wrote "Spring and Autumn" based on the history books of Lu. It begins with the year of Luyin and ends with the 14th year of Luye, including a total of 12 sovereigns of Lu.

古文：据鲁，亲周，故殷，运之三代。约其文辞而指博。
现代文：以鲁国为中心记述，尊奉周王室为正统，以殷商的旧为借鉴，推而上承夏、商、周在法统，文辞简约而旨意广博。
English: With Lu as the center of the narrative, it reveres the Zhou royal family as the orthodox, takes the old Shang dynasty as a reference, and then moves on to the Shensha, Shang, and Zhou dynasties. The wording is concise, but the intention is broad.

古文：故吴楚之君自称王，而春秋贬之曰 子 ；践土之会实召周天子，而春秋讳之曰 天王狩於河阳 ：推此类以绳当世。
现代文：所以吴、楚的国自称为王的，在《春秋》中仍贬称为子爵；晋文公在践土与诸侯会盟，实际上是召周襄王入会的，而《春秋》中却避讳说 周天子巡狩来到到河阳 。
English: Therefore, the self-proclaimed king of the state of Wu and Chu is still degraded to a viscount in "Spring and Autumn"; Jinwen Gong is actually calling Zhou Xiang Wang to join the association when he is trampling the soil and the association of the princes, but in "Spring and Autumn" he avoids saying that Zhou Tianzi came to Kheyang on a hunting trip.

古文：贬损之义，後有王者举而开之。春秋之义行，则天下乱臣贼子惧焉。
现代文：依此类推，《春秋》就是用这一原则，来褒贬当时的各种事件，后有的国君加以称推广开来，使《春秋》的义法在天下通行，天下那些乱臣奸贼就都害怕起来了。
English: By analogy, "Spring and Autumn" used this principle to praise and disparage various events at that time. Later, some sovereigns promoted it, so that the teachings of "Spring and Autumn" were popular all over the world, and all those rascals and traitors in the world were afraid.

古文：孔子在位听讼，文辞有可与人共者，弗独有也。
现代文：孔子担任官职时审案，文辞上如果有需要和别人商量的，从不肯擅专独行。
English: Confucius tried cases when he held an official position. In terms of literature, if there was a need to consult with others, he would never do it alone.

古文：至於为春秋，笔则笔，削则削，子夏之徒不能赞一辞。
现代文：到了他编撰《春秋》时，认为该记录下来的就记录下来，该删减的就删减，即使像子夏这样的长于文采的弟子都不能改动一字一词。
English: When he compiled "Spring and Autumn," he thought that what should be recorded should be recorded, and what should be deleted should be deleted, even if a disciple like Zixia, who was good at literature, could not change a word.

古文：弟子受春秋，孔子曰： 後世知丘者以春秋，而罪丘者亦以春秋。 
现代文：弟子们听孔子讲《春秋》时，孔子说： 后世要了解我孔丘，需要凭借《春秋》，而要责怪我孔丘，也要凭借《春秋》。 
English: When his disciples were listening to Confucius lecture on "Spring and Autumn," Confucius said: "Later generations will have to rely on "Spring and Autumn" to understand me, Confucius, and will have to rely on "Spring and Autumn" to blame me, Confucius."

古文：明岁，子路死於卫。
现代文：第二年，子路死在卫国。
English: The following year, Zilu died in the motherland.

古文：孔子病，子贡请见。
现代文：孔子生病了，子贡请求看望他。
English: Confucius was ill, and Zigong asked to see him.

古文：孔子方负杖逍遥於门，曰： 赐，汝来何其晚也？ 
现代文：孔子正拄着拐杖在口修闲散步，说： 赐，你为什么来得这样迟啊？ 
English: Confucius was taking a leisurely walk with a cane in his mouth and said, "Gee, why did you come so late?

古文：孔子因叹，歌曰： 太山坏乎！
现代文：孔子叹息，随即唱道： 泰山要倒了！
English: Confucius sighed and then sang: "Taishan is about to fall!

古文：梁柱摧乎！哲人萎乎！ 
现代文：梁柱要断了，哲人要死了！ 
English: The beam is about to break, the philosopher is about to die!

古文：因以涕下。
现代文：他边唱边流下了眼泪。
English: He shed tears as he sang.

古文：谓子贡曰： 天下无道久矣，莫能宗予。
现代文：对子贡说： 天下失去常道已经很久了，没有人主张我的学说。
English: To Zigong, he said: It has been a long time since the world lost its common sense, and no one upholds my doctrine.

古文：夏人殡於东阶，周人於西阶，殷人两柱间。
现代文：夏人死了停棺在东厢的台阶，周人死了停棺在西厢的台阶，殷人死了停棺在堂屋的两柱之间。
English: Xia Ren died and his coffin was parked on the steps of the east wing, Zhou Ren died and his coffin was parked on the steps of the west wing, Yin Ren died and his coffin was parked between the two pillars of the hall.

古文：昨暮予梦坐奠两柱之间，予始殷人也。 
现代文：昨天晚上我梦见自己坐在两柱之间受人祭奠，我的始祖是殷商之。 
English: Last night I dreamed that I was sitting between two pillars and was being worshipped. My ancestor was Yin Shangzhi.

古文：後七日卒。
现代文：过了之后孔子就去世了。
English: After that, Confucius passed away.

古文：孔子年七十三，以鲁哀公十六年四月己丑卒。
现代文：孔子享年七十三岁，死在鲁哀公十六年四月的己丑日。
English: Confucius died at the age of seventy-three, on his birthday in April of the sixteenth year of Lu Yigong.

古文：哀公诔之曰： 旻天不吊，不玦遗一老，俾屏余一人以在位，茕茕余在疚。
现代文：鲁哀公为他作了一篇悼词说： 老天爷不仁慈，不肯留下这位老人，让他扔下我，孤零零一人在位，我孤独而又伤痛。啊！
English: Lu Aiguo wrote a eulogy for him, saying: "God is not merciful, he did not want to leave this old man, let him throw me down, alone and alone, I am lonely and hurt. Ah!

古文：呜呼哀哉！尼父，毋自律！ 
现代文：多么痛！尼父啊，没有人可以作为我学习的楷模了！ 
English: What a pain! My father, there is no one left for me to learn from!

古文：子贡曰： 君其不没於鲁乎！
现代文：子贡说： 鲁君他难道不能终老在鲁国吗？
English: Zigong said: Lu Jun, can't he stay in Lu all the time?

古文：夫子之言曰： 礼失则昏，名失则愆。
现代文：老师的话说： 法丧失就会昏乱，名分丧失就会产生过失。
English: Teacher's words: The loss of law will lead to confusion, and the loss of prestige will lead to mistakes.

古文：失志为昏，失所为愆。 
现代文：丧失了意志就会昏乱，失去所宜就会出现过错。 
English: If you lose your will, you will be confused, and if you lose what you want, you will make mistakes.

古文：生不能用，死而诔之，非礼也。
现代文：老师活着的时候不能用他，死了作祭文哀悼他，这是不合礼的。
English: When a teacher is alive, you can't use him. When he dies, you can't use him as an offering to mourn him. It's not proper.

古文：称 余一人 ，非名也。 
现代文：以诸侯身份称 余一人 ，是不合名分的啊。 
English: To call the other one a vassal is a misnomer.

古文：孔子葬鲁城北泗上，弟子皆服三年。
现代文：孔子死后葬在鲁城北面的泗水岸边，弟子们都在心里为他服丧三年。
English: After his death, Confucius was buried on the shore of Surabaya, north of the city of Lu. His disciples mourned him in their hearts for three years.

古文：三年心丧毕，相诀而去，则哭，各复尽哀；或复留。
现代文：三年心丧完毕，大家道别离去时，都相对而哭，又各尽哀；有的就又留了下来。
English: After three years of heartbreak, when everyone said goodbye and left, they all cried and mourned; some stayed.

古文：唯子赣庐於冢上，凡六年，然後去。
现代文：只有子贡在墓旁搭子一间小房住下，守墓总共六年，然后才离去。
English: Only Zigong lived in a small room next to the tomb and guarded the tomb for a total of six years before leaving.

古文：弟子及鲁人往从冢而家者百有馀室，因命曰孔里。
现代文：弟子及鲁国他人，相率前往墓旁居住的一百多家。因而就把这里命名为 孔里 。
English: More than a hundred disciples and Lu people went to live next to the tomb, so they named it Kongli.

古文：鲁世世相传以岁时奉祠孔子冢，而诸儒亦讲礼乡饮大射於孔子冢。孔子冢大一顷。
现代文：鲁国世世代代相传，每年都定时到孔子墓前祭拜，而儒生们也在这时来这里讲习礼仪，行乡学业考校的饮酒礼，以及比射等仪式。孔子的墓地有一顷大。
English: It has been handed down from generation to generation in the country of Lu. Every year, people regularly come to worship at the tomb of Confucius, and Confucian scholars also come here at this time to study etiquette, the drinking ceremony of going to the village for the school entrance examination, as well as the shooting and other ceremonies. The cemetery of Confucius is one hectare in size.

古文：故所居堂弟子内，後世因庙藏孔子衣冠琴车书，至于汉二百馀年不绝。
现代文：孔子故居的堂屋以及弟子们所居住的内室，后来就改成庙，借以收藏孔子生前穿过的衣服，戴过的帽子，使用过的琴、车子、书籍等，直到汉代，二百多年间没有废弃。
English: The hall of Confucius's former residence and the inner room where his disciples lived were later converted into a temple to collect the clothes worn by Confucius in his lifetime, the hats he wore, the guitars, cars, books, etc. that he used, until the Han Dynasty, and have not been abandoned for more than two hundred years.

古文：高皇帝过鲁，以太牢祠焉。
现代文：高皇帝高皇帝刘邦经过鲁地，用牛羊猪三牲俱全的太牢祭祀孔子。
English: Emperor Gao and Emperor Liu Bang passed through Ludi and made a sacrifice to Confucius in the dungeon with cattle, sheep and pigs.

古文：诸侯卿相至，常先谒然後从政。
现代文：诸侯、卿大夫、宰相一到任，常是先去拜谒孔子墓，然后才去就职处理政务。
English: Princes, nobles, doctors, and chancellors, upon taking office, would often visit the tomb of Confucius before taking office to deal with government affairs.

古文：孔子生鲤，字伯鱼。
现代文：孔子生了鲤，字伯鱼。
English: Confucius gave birth to a dragonfly, the word Bo fish.

古文：伯鱼年五十，先孔子死。
现代文：伯鱼享年五十岁，死在孔子之前。
English: He was fifty years old and died before Confucius.

古文：伯鱼生伋，字子思，年六十二。
现代文：伯鱼生了伋，字子思，郭年六十二岁。
English: The egret gave birth to a pup, named Zi Si, in the 62nd year of the Guo Dynasty.

古文：尝困於宋。
现代文：曾经受困于宋国。
English: Once trapped in the Song Dynasty.

古文：子思作中庸。
现代文：子思作了《中庸》。
English: Zi Si wrote "Middle Way."

古文：子思生白，字子上，年四十七。
现代文：子思生了白，字子上，享年四十七岁。
English: Zi Si was born white and died at the age of forty-seven.

古文：子上生求，字子家，年四十五。
现代文：子上生了求，字子家，享年四十五岁。
English: His eldest son, who was born into a poor family, died at the age of forty-five.

古文：子家生箕，字子京，年四十六。
现代文：子家生了箕，字子京，享年四十六岁。
English: Zong Jia gave birth to a daughter, Zi Jing, who died at the age of 46.

古文：子京生穿，字子高，年五十一。
现代文：子京生了穿，字子高，享年五十一岁。
English: Zi Jing was born with a high birth weight and height, and died at the age of 51.

古文：子高生子慎，年五十七，尝为魏相。
现代文：子高生了慎，享年五十七岁，曾经做过魏国的相。
English: Zi Gao Sheng, who was born and died at the age of fifty-seven, once served as the minister of Wei.

古文：子慎生鲋，年五十七，为陈王涉博士，死於陈下。
现代文：子慎生了鲋，享年五十七岁，做过陈胜王的博士，死在陈这个地方。
English: Zishen was 57 years old when he died. He was a doctor of Chen Shengwang and died in this place, Chen.

古文：鲋弟子襄，年五十七。
现代文：鲋的弟弟叫子襄，享年五十七岁。
English: Zou's younger brother, Zixiang, passed away at the age of 57.

古文：尝为孝惠皇帝博士，迁为长沙太守。
现代文：曾经做过汉孝惠皇帝的博士，后被提升为长沙郡的太守。
English: He once did a doctorate for Emperor Han Xiao Hui, and was later promoted to the governor of Changsha County.

古文：长九尺六寸。
现代文：身高九尺六寸。
English: He is nine feet six inches tall.

古文：子襄生忠，年五十七。
现代文：子襄生了忠，享年五十七岁。
English: Zixiang gave birth to Zhong, who died at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：忠生武，武生延年及安国。
现代文：忠生了武，武生了延年和安国。
English: Tadanobu begat Takeshi, Takeshi begat Ennengatsu and Ankoku.

古文：安国为今皇帝博士，至临淮太守，蚤卒。
现代文：安国做了当今孝武皇帝的博士，官至临淮郡太守，寿短早死。
English: An Guo became the doctor of today's Emperor Xiaowu, the official of Linhuai County, and died prematurely.

古文：安国生卬，卬生驩。
现代文：安国生了卬，卬生了驩。
English: An Guo gave birth to a dragonfly, and a dragonfly gave birth to a dragonfly.

古文：太史公曰：诗有之： 高山仰止，景行行止。 
现代文：太史公说：《诗》中有这样的话： 崇高的山岭引人瞻仰，宽阔的大道让人遵循。 
English: Taishi Gong said: "In the poem, there is this saying: The lofty mountains are eye-catching, and the broad avenue is easy to follow.

古文：虽不能至，然心乡往之。
现代文：虽然我没能赶得上孔子的时代，但是心里却向往着他。
English: Although I have not been able to catch up with the times of Confucius, I yearn for him in my heart.

古文：余读孔氏书，想见其为人。
现代文：我读孔子的著作，可以想见到他的为人。
English: When I read the works of Confucius, I want to see him as a person.

古文：適鲁，观仲尼庙堂车服礼器，诸生以时习礼其家，余祗回留之不能去云。
现代文：到了鲁地，参观了孔子的庙堂、车辆、衣服、礼器，目睹了读书的学生们按时到孔子旧宅中演习礼仪的情景。我怀着崇敬的心情徘徊留恋不愿离去。
English: When I arrived in Ludi, I visited Confucius's temple, vehicles, clothes, and ceremonial objects, and witnessed the scene of students going to Confucius's old house on time to practice etiquette. I lingered with reverence, reluctant to leave.

古文：天下君王至于贤人众矣，当时则荣，没则已焉。
现代文：自古以来，天下的君王直和贤人有很多，活着的时候都显贵荣耀，可是一死什么也就没有了。
English: Since ancient times, there have been many emperors and sages in the world. When they are alive, they are noble and glorious, but when they die, there is nothing left.

古文：孔子布衣，传十馀世，学者宗之。
现代文：孔子是一个平民，他的名声和学说已经传了十几，读书的人仍然崇他为宗师。
English: Confucius was a commoner, and his fame and teachings have been passed down for more than a dozen generations. People who study Confucius still revere him as their guru.

古文：自天子王侯，中国言六艺者折中於夫子，可谓至圣矣！
现代文：从天子王侯一直到全国谈六艺的人，都把孔子的学说来做为判断衡的最高准则，可以说孔子是至高无上的圣人啊。
English: From the Prince of Heaven all the way to the people who talk about the six arts throughout the country, they all take Confucius's doctrine as the highest standard of judgment and balance. It can be said that Confucius is the supreme saint.

