古文：大舜云∶ 诗言志，歌永言。 
现代文：虞舜曾说过： 诗是思想情感的表达，歌则是丰富这种表达方式。 
English: Yu Yao once said: "Poetry is the expression of thoughts and emotions, while songs enrich this mode of expression."

古文：圣谟所析，义已明矣。
现代文：圣人分析了经典之后，诗歌的含义已经明确了。
English: After the sage analyzed the classic, the meaning of the poem has become clear.

古文：是以 在心为志，发言为诗 ，舒文载实，其在兹乎！
现代文：所以， 在作者内心时是情志，表达出来就是诗歌 。
English: Therefore, in the author's heart is the sentiment, and the expression is poetry.

古文：诗者，持也，持人情性；三百之蔽，义归 无邪 ，持之为训，有符焉尔。
现代文：诗歌创作要通过文辞来表达情志，道理就是这样。 诗 的含义是扶持，扶持人的性情。孔子说过：《诗经》三百篇的内容，用一句话来概括，就是 没有不正当的思想 。
English: The creation of poetry should express sentiments through words, this is the reason. The meaning of poetry is to support, support people's disposition. Confucius said: "The content of the 300 poems of the Book of Songs can be summed up in one sentence, that is, there is no improper thought.

古文：人禀七情，应物斯感，感物吟志，莫非自然。
现代文：现在用扶持情性来解释诗歌，和孔子说的道理是不谋而合的。人具有各种各样的情感，受了外物的刺激，便产生一定的感应。
English: Nowadays, poetry is explained with the concept of "supporting emotion," which is consistent with what Confucius said. People have all kinds of emotions, and when they are stimulated by external things, they produce a certain amount of response.

古文：昔葛天乐辞，《玄鸟》在曲；黄帝《云门》，理不空弦。
现代文：心有所感，而发为吟咏，这是很自然的事情。从前葛天氏的时候，将《玄鸟歌》谱入歌曲；黄帝时的《云门舞》，按理是不会只配上管弦而无歌词的。
English: It is a natural thing for the heart to feel something and become a minstrel. Once upon a time, when Ge Tianshi was at the helm, he composed "The Song of the Blackbird" into a song; "The Cloud Gate Dance" at the time of the Yellow Emperor, by definition, would not be accompanied only by an orchestra without lyrics.

古文：至尧有《大唐》之歌，舜造《南风》之诗，观其二文，辞达而已。
现代文：到唐尧有《大唐歌》，虞舜有《南风诗》。这两首歌辞，仅仅能做到达意的程度。
English: To Tang Xuan, there is "Great Tang Song," and to Yu Xuan, there is "Southern Wind Poem." These two lyrics can only do so much.

古文：及大禹成功，九序惟歌；太康败德，五子咸怨：顺美匡恶，其来久矣。
现代文：后来夏禹治水成功，各项工作都上了轨道，受到了歌颂。夏帝太康道德败坏，他的兄弟五人便作《五子之歌》来表示自己的怨恨。
English: Later, Xia Yu succeeded in controlling the water, and all the work was on track and received praise. Xia Di was too corrupt, and his five brothers made "Song of the Five Sons" to express their resentment.

古文：自商暨周，《雅》、《颂》圆备，四始彪炳，六义环深。
现代文：由此可见，用诗歌来歌颂功德和讽刺过失，是很早以来就有的做法了。从商朝到周朝，风、雅、颂各体都已齐全完备；《诗经》的 四始 既极光辉灿烂，而 六义 也周密精深。
English: It can be seen that the practice of using poetry to praise merits and ironize faults has been around for a long time. From the Shang Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, the style, elegance, and ode have all been completed and perfected; the four beginnings of the "Book of Songs" are extremely brilliant, and the six meanings are also detailed and profound.

古文：子夏监绚素之章，子贡悟琢磨之句，故商赐二子，可与言诗。
现代文：孔子的学生子夏能理解到 素以为绚兮 等诗句的深意，子贡领会到《诗经》中 如琢如磨 等诗句的道理，所以孔子认为他们有了谈论《诗经》的资格。
English: Confucius' student Zixia was able to understand the profound meaning of the poem "I Thought I Was Brilliant" and Zigong was able to understand the meaning of the poem "Like a Brush" in the "Book of Songs," so Confucius thought that they had the qualifications to talk about the "Book of Songs."

古文：自王泽殄竭，风人辍采，春秋观志，讽诵旧章，酬酢以为宾荣，吐纳而成身文。
现代文：后来周王朝的德泽衰竭，采诗官停止采诗；但春秋时许多士大夫，却常常在外交场所中，朗诵某些诗章来表达自己的观感愿望。
English: Later, when the Zhou Dynasty's Dezer was exhausted, the poetry collectors stopped collecting poems. However, in spring and autumn, many scholars often recited certain poems in diplomatic venues to express their desire to watch and feel.

古文：逮楚国讽怨，则《离骚》为刺。
现代文：这种相互应酬的礼节，可以对宾客表示敬意，也可以显出自己能说会道的才华。
English: This kind of etiquette of reciprocal entertainment can show respect for the guests, and it can also show one's talent of being able to speak well.

古文：秦皇灭典，亦造《仙诗》。
现代文：到了楚国，就有讽刺楚王的《离骚》产生。秦始皇大量焚书，但也叫他的博士们作了《仙真人诗》。
English: When it came to Chu, King Chu's satire "Issao" was produced. Qin Shi Huang burned a large number of books, but he also asked his doctors to write "Senzhen Poetry."

古文：汉初四言，韦孟首唱，匡谏之义，继轨周人。
现代文：汉代初期有了四言诗，第一个著文章的是韦孟，他的作品意义在于讽谏，是继承了周朝文章的风格。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there were four-character poems. The first to write an article was Wei Meng. The significance of his work lies in the irony, inheriting the style of the Zhou Dynasty article.

古文：孝武爱文，柏梁列韵；严马之徒，属辞无方。
现代文：孝武帝爱好文学，便有了柏梁诗；严助、司马相如等人写作则没有一定的格式。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's love of literature gave rise to Bai Liang's poetry; Yan Su and Sima Xiangru's writing, on the other hand, did not have a certain format.

古文：至成帝品录，三百馀篇，朝章国采，亦云周备。
现代文：西汉时期，刘向受成帝王的命令对诗歌进行了评论整理，一共三百多篇，所收集的都是当时具有代表性和文采的作品，可以说非常丰富了。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, Liu Xiang was ordered by Emperor Chengdu to review and sort poems, a total of more than three hundred. The collected works were all representative and literary works at that time, which can be said to be very rich.

古文：而辞人遗翰，莫见五言，所以李陵、班婕妤见疑于后代也。
现代文：但这些诗人遗留下的作品中，没有见到五言诗，因此李陵和班婕妤分别作的《与苏武》《怨诗》就被后人怀疑。
English: However, among the works left behind by these poets, there are no five-character poems, so Li Ling's and Ban Qi's separately written "and Su Wu" and "poem of resentment" were doubted by later generations.

古文：按《召南·行露》，始肇半章；孺子《沧浪》，亦有全曲；《暇豫》优歌，远见春秋；《邪径》童谣，近在成世：阅时取证，则五言久矣。
现代文：从《召南·行露》就开始有了半章五言；孩子唱的《沧浪歌》，全首诗都是五言了；往远一点看，春秋的时候就有《暇豫歌》；往近时看，西汉有孩童唱的《邪径谣》。
English: From "Summoning the South, Walking the Dew," there have been half-chapters with five words; "Canglang Song" sung by children, the whole poem is five words; if you look further afield, there is "Leisure Yu Song" in spring and autumn; if you look closer, there is "Evil Paths" sung by children in Western Han.

古文：又古诗佳丽，或称枚叔，其《孤竹》一篇，则傅毅之词。
现代文：由此可见，五言诗出现得很早。再说一个古代诗歌的好作品，那就是《古诗十九首》，有人说是枚乘作的，其中的《冉冉孤生竹》为傅毅所作。
English: From this, it can be seen that five-character poems appeared very early. Furthermore, there is a good work of ancient poetry, that is, "Nineteen Ancient Poems." Some people say that it is a multiplication, and one of them, "Ran Ran, Solitary Bamboo" was written by Fu Yi.

古文：比采而推，两汉之作也。
现代文：根据这些诗歌的辞藻判断，应当都是两汉时期的佳作。
English: Judging by the vocabulary of these poems, they should all be excellent works of the Han period.

古文：观其结体散文，直而不野，婉转附物，怊怅切情，实五言之冠冕也。
现代文：从行文中推敲，质朴而不粗野，婉转附于实物，惆怅贴切真情，真是五言诗中的优秀作品。
English: It is an excellent work in the five-character poem, which is elaborated from the text, simple but not rough, gently attached to the real thing, and has an appropriate truth.

古文：至于张衡《怨篇》，清典可味；《仙诗缓歌》，雅有新声。
现代文：至于说张衡的《怨诗》，则清丽典雅，耐人寻味；《仙诗缓歌》之类的诗歌，则清雅新奇。
English: As for Zhang Heng's "Poem of Resentment," it is beautiful, elegant, and intriguing; poems such as "Sentimental Song" are elegant and novel.

古文：暨建安之初，五言腾踊，文帝陈思，纵辔以骋节；王徐应刘，望路而争驱；并怜风月，狎池苑，述恩荣，叙酣宴，慷慨以任气，磊落以使才；造怀指事，不求纤密之巧，驱辞逐貌，唯取昭晰之能∶此其所同也。
现代文：到了建安初年，五言诗空前活跃。曹丕、曹植、王粲、徐幹、应玚、刘桢等人都有不错的作品。这些人喜欢风月，爱游美苑，诗歌中有恩宠荣耀，也有宴会上的酣畅淋漓，慷慨激昂抒发心志，光明磊落施展才华。他们叙述中不追求细腻的技巧，在写景方面追求清晰明了。这些都是建安诗人共有的文章风格。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, the five-character poems were more active than ever. Cao Jun, Cao Zhi, Wang Jun, Xu Gan, Ying Jun, Liu Jun and others all had good works. These people liked the wind and the moon, loved to visit the beautiful gardens, had grace and glory in their poems, and also had a lively atmosphere at the banquet, were impassioned to express their aspirations, and displayed their talents openly. They did not pursue delicate techniques in their narration, but pursued clarity in the depiction of scenery. These are the common writing styles of Jian'an poets.

古文：及正始明道，诗杂仙心；何晏之徒，率多浮浅。
现代文：到了正始年间，道家思想流行，于是诗歌中夹杂了修仙的心情；其中何晏等人，作品内涵较为浅薄。
English: In the early years, Taoist thought became popular, so the poems were mixed with the sentiment of cultivating immortality; among them, He Yao and others, the connotation of the works was relatively shallow.

古文：唯嵇志清峻，阮旨遥深，故能标焉。
现代文：只有嵇康阮籍等人的诗词还算可圈可点，所以他们比同时代的其他诗人成就更高。
English: Only the poems of Gong Kang Ruan Ji and others can be regarded as remarkable, so their achievements are higher than those of other contemporary poets.

古文：若乃应璩《百一》，独立不惧，辞谲义贞，亦魏之遗直也。
现代文：另外，应璩的《百一诗》，也能独树一帜，文辞曲折而含义正直，继承了建安时代的遗风。
English: In addition, the "One Hundred and One Poems" of Ying Zhuo can also be unique, the words are tortuous and the meaning is honest, inheriting the legacy of the Jianan era.

古文：晋世群才，稍入轻绮。
现代文：晋代的诗人们，创作开始走上了浮浅绮丽的道路。
English: The poets of the Jin Dynasty began to take the path of superficial beauty.

古文：张潘左陆，比肩诗衢，采缛于正始，力柔于建安。
现代文：张载、张协、张亢、潘岳、潘尼、左思、陆机、陆云等，在诗坛上并驾齐驱。他们诗歌的文采，比正始时期更加繁多，但内容的感染力却比建安时期软弱。
English: Zhang Zhao, Zhang Xie, Zhang Xuan, Pan Yue, Panyi, Zuo Si, Lu Ji, Lu Yun, and so on, are neck and neck on the poetry altar. Their poetry is more varied than in the early period, but the appeal of the content is weaker than in the Jian'an period.

古文：或析文以为妙，或流靡以自妍，此其大略也。
现代文：他们或者以讲究字句为能事，或者偏重靡丽的笔调来自逞其美：这就是西晋诗坛的大概情况。
English: Either they are able to pay attention to the words, or the emphasis on elegant tone comes from their beauty: this is the general situation of the West Jin poet.

古文：江左篇制，溺乎玄风，嗤笑徇务之志，崇盛忘机之谈，袁孙已下，虽各有雕采，而辞趣一揆，莫与争雄，所以景纯《仙篇》，挺拔而为隽矣。
现代文：到了东晋的时候，诗歌创作便淹没在玄学的风气之中；这些玄言诗人讥笑人家过于关心时务，而推崇那种忘却世情的空谈。所以自袁宏、孙绰以后的诗人，虽然作品各有不同的文采雕饰，但内容上却一致倾向于玄谈，再没有别的诗可以和玄言诗争雄。因此，郭璞的《游仙诗》，在当时就算是杰出的佳作了。
English: By the time of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the creation of poetry had been submerged in the culture of metaphysics; these poets of mysticism ridiculed people for being too concerned with current affairs, while praising the kind of empty talk that forgets the world. Therefore, although the works of poets from Yuan Hong and Sun Cao have different literary decorations, they all tend to be mystical in content, and no other poem can compete with the poetry of mysticism. Therefore, Guo Gan's "Poem of the Wandering Immortal" was an outstanding masterpiece at that time.

古文：宋初文咏，体有因革。
现代文：南朝宋初的诗歌，对于前代的诗风有所继承，也有所改革；庄周和老子的思想在诗歌中渐渐减少，描绘山水的作品却日益兴盛。
English: The poetry of the Southern Dynasty and the early Song Dynasty both inherited and reformed the poetic style of the previous generation; the thoughts of Zhuang Zhou and Lao Zi gradually decreased in poetry, but the works depicting landscapes and rivers increasingly flourished.

古文：庄老告退，而山水方滋；俪采百字之偶，争价一句之奇，情必极貌以写物，辞必穷力而追新，此近世之所竞也。
现代文：于是诗人们努力在全篇的对偶中显示文采，在每一句的新奇上竞逞才华；内容方面要求逼真地描绘出景物的形貌，文辞方面要求尽可能地做到新异。这就是近来诗人们所追求的。
English: Poets, therefore, have endeavoured to display excellence in the whole of the couplet, and to excel in the novelty of each stanza; in the matter of content, to depict the appearance of the scene as truly as possible, and in the matter of diction, to be as novel as possible; and this has been the pursuit of poets of late.

古文：故铺观列代，而情变之数可监；撮举同异，而纲领之要可明矣。
现代文：所以总观历代的诗歌，其发展变化的情况是可以看得很清楚的。归纳一下它们相同和相异的特色，就可以看出诗歌创作的要点了。
English: Therefore, it is possible to have a clear overview of the development and changes of poetry throughout the ages. By summarizing their common and different characteristics, we can see the main points of poetry creation.

古文：若夫四言正体，则雅润为本；五言流调，则清丽居宗，华实异用，惟才所安。
现代文：譬如四言诗的正规体制，主要是雅正而润泽；五言诗的常见格调，是清新华丽。对于这些不同特点的掌握，那就随作者的才华而定。
English: For example, the formal structure of the four-character poem is mainly elegant and smooth; the common style of the five-character poem is fresh and gorgeous. For the mastery of these different characteristics, it depends on the talent of the author.

古文：故平子得其雅，叔夜含其润，茂先凝其清，景阳振其丽，兼善则子建仲宣，偏美则太冲公干。
现代文：如张衡得到四言诗的雅正的一面，嵇康具有润泽的一面；张华学到五言诗的清新的一面，张协发挥了华丽的一面。各种特点都兼备的是曹植和王粲，只偏长于某一方面的是左思和刘桢。
English: For example, Zhang Heng got the elegant and positive side of the four-character poem, and Jikang got the moist side; Zhang Hua learned the fresh side of the five-character poem, and Zhang Xie played the gorgeous side. Cao Zhi and Wang Qian both have various characteristics, but Zuo Si and Liu Qian are only superior in one aspect.

古文：然诗有恒裁，思无定位，随性适分，鲜能通圆。
现代文：但是作品的体裁是有一定的，而人的思想却各不相同；作者只能随着个性的偏好来进行创作，所以很少能兼长各体。
English: However, the genre of the work is certain, but people's thoughts are different; the author can only create according to personal preferences, so it is rare to be able to do both.

古文：若妙识所难，其易也将至；忽以为易，其难也方来。
现代文：如果作者深知创作中的难处，那么实际写作起来还可能比较容易；如果轻率地认为写诗很简单，那么他反而会碰到不少的困难。
English: If the author is well aware of the difficulties in the creation, then the actual writing may be easier; if he rashly believes that writing poetry is simple, then he will encounter a lot of difficulties.

古文：至于三六杂言，则出自篇什；离合之发，则萌于图谶；回文所兴，则道原为始；联句共韵，则柏梁馀制；巨细或殊，情理同致，总归诗囿，故不繁云。
现代文：除了上述四言、五言诗外，还有三言、六言、杂言诗，它们都起源于《诗经》。至于 离合诗 的产生，是从汉代的图谶文字开始的； 回文诗 的兴起，则是南北朝贺道庆开的头；而几人合写的 联句诗 ，那是继承《柏梁诗》来的。这种种作品，虽然大小各异，主次有别，但写作的情况和道理是一样的；它们都属于诗的范围，因此不必逐一详论。总结：
English: In addition to the four- and five-syllable poems mentioned above, there are also three-syllable, six-syllable and miscellaneous poems, all of which originated in the "Book of Poems." As for the emergence of acrostic poems, it began with the Han Dynasty's Tu Han script; the rise of palindromic poems was the beginning of the celebration of the Northern and Southern Dynasties; and the joint poem, which was co-written by several people, was inherited from the "Bo Liang Poem." Although these kinds of works are different in size and have different priorities, the writing situation and reason are the same; they all belong to the scope of

古文：赞曰∶民生而志，咏歌所含。
现代文：人生来都有情志，诗歌就是表达这种情志的。
English: All of us have a passion in our lives, and poetry is an expression of this passion.

古文：兴发皇世，风流《二南》。
现代文：诗歌产生在上古时期，一直发展到《诗经》就更加成熟。
English: Poetry was born in ancient times, and developed until the "Book of Songs" became more mature.

古文：神理共契，政序相参。
现代文：它应该和自然之道一致，并和政治秩序相结合。
English: It should be consistent with the way of nature and integrated with the political order.

古文：英华弥缛，万代永耽。
现代文：如此一来，优秀的诗歌便会越来越繁荣，为后世万代永远喜爱。
English: In this way, excellent poetry will flourish more and more, and will be loved forever by future generations.

