古文：宋子曰：天生五谷以育民，美在其中，有黄裳之意焉。
现代文：宋先生讲过：自然界中生长的各种谷物养活了人，五谷中精华和美好的部分，都包藏在如同金黄外衣的谷壳下，带有《易经》中所说的 黄裳 ，有美在其中的意味。
English: Mr. Song said: All kinds of grains grown in nature have nourished people. The essence and beautiful parts of the grain are all hidden under the grain shell, which is like a golden coat, with the meaning of "beauty" in the "I Ching."

古文：稻以糠为甲，麦以麦夫为衣，粟、粱、黍、稷毛羽隐然。
现代文：稻谷以糠皮作为甲壳，麦子用麸皮当做外衣，粟、粱、黍、稷都如同隐藏在毛羽之中。
English: The rice uses the bran as a carapace, the wheat uses the bran as a coat, and the millet, bean sprouts, bean sprouts, and bean sprouts are all hidden in the fluff.

古文：播精而择粹，其道宁终秘也。
现代文：通过扬簸和碾磨等工序将谷物去壳、加工成米和面，这些方法对于人们难道永远是一种秘密吗？
English: Will the process of husking and milling grains into rice and noodles remain a secret forever?

古文：饮食而知味者，食不厌精。
现代文：讲究饮食滋味的人们，都希望粮食加工得越精美越好。
English: People who pay attention to the taste of food want the food to be processed as beautifully as possible.

古文：杵臼之利，万民以济，盖取诸《小过》。
现代文：靠着杵臼的使用，人们解决谷物加工的问题而带来了巨大的便利，这大概是受到了《易经》中 小过 一卦的卦意的启示吧。
English: With the use of the mortar and pestle, people solved the problem of grain processing and brought great convenience, which was probably inspired by the meaning of the passage in the I Ching.

古文：为此者岂非人貌而天者哉？
现代文：发明这一系列方法的人，难道不是凭借人类的超凡才智而只是凭神秘的天意吗？
English: Didn't the person who invented this series of methods rely on the extraordinary intelligence of mankind, but only on the mysterious providence?

古文：○攻稻
现代文：攻稻
English: Tackling rice

古文：凡稻刈获之后，离稿取粒。
现代文：稻子收割后需要让谷粒从稻杆上脱落，这个工艺叫做脱粒。
English: After the rice is harvested, it is necessary to allow the grains to fall off the rice stalks. This process is called threshing.

古文：束稿于手而击取者半，聚稿于场而曳牛滚石以取者半。
现代文：脱粒的办法有两种，一种是靠人手握一把稻秆使劲拍打取得谷粒，另一种是用牛拉石磙在空地上碾稻秆，使谷粒从稻秆上脱落。
English: There are two ways of threshing, one is by hand holding a pair of rice hoes and beating them hard to obtain grains, the other is to use a stone roller to grind the rice hoes in the open ground, so that the grains fall off the rice hoes.

古文：凡束手而击者，受击之物或用木桶，或用石板。
现代文：用手拍打稻秆脱粒，就根据当时情况用稻秆在木桶或石板上拍打。
English: The rice husk is beaten by hand to remove the grains, and then, according to the situation at the time, the rice husk is beaten on a wooden barrel or a stone plate.

古文：收获之时雨多霁少，田稻交湿，不可登场者，以木桶就田击取。
现代文：收获时如果碰上雨天，田地和稻谷都很潮湿，稻谷无法运到晒谷场，也可以用木桶直接在田里脱粒。
English: If it rains during the harvest, the fields and the rice will be very wet. The rice cannot be transported to the drying field, but can be threshed directly in the field with a wooden barrel.

古文：晴霁稻干，则用石板甚便也。
现代文：但天气好稻子也干燥时，还是使用石板比较方便。
English: However, when the weather is good and the rice is dry, it is still more convenient to use a stone plate.

古文：凡服牛曳石滚压场中，视人手击取者力省三倍。
现代文：用牛拉石磙在晒场上压稻谷，要比手工摔打省力三倍。
English: It is three times more labor-saving to press rice grains on the sunbathing field with ox-drawn stone ploughs than to beat them by hand.

古文：但作种之谷，恐磨去壳尖，减削生机。故南方多种之家，场禾多藉牛力，而来年作种者则宁向石板击取也。
现代文：但是留着当稻种的稻谷，恐怕被磨掉保护谷胚的壳尖而使种子发芽率减弱，因此南方种植水稻较多的人家，大部分稻谷都是用牛力脱粒，但是留为种子的稻谷就宁可在石板上摔打脱粒。
English: However, rice grains that are kept as rice seeds are likely to be worn away from the tip of the shell that protects the grain embryo and weaken the seed germination rate. Therefore, people who grow more rice in the south, most of the rice grains are threshed with cow power, but the rice grains that are left as seeds would rather be threshed on a stone plate.

古文：凡稻最佳者九穰一秕，倘风雨不时，耘耔失节，则六穰四秕者容有之。
现代文：上好的稻谷，有九成颗粒都很饱满结实，只有一成是空壳或者颗粒瘦小，俗称秕谷。
English: In the best rice, 90% of the grains are full and firm, and only 10% are empty shells or thin grains, commonly known as cocoons.

古文：凡去秕，南方尽用风车扇去；北方稻少，用扬法，即以扬麦、黍者扬稻，盖不若风车之便也。
现代文：如果这一年该下雨的时候没有下，或者施肥拔草的时机不好，稻子很可能就只有六成饱满，而秕谷则多达四成。去除重量较轻的秕谷时，南方的做法是用风车把轻的秕谷吹走。北方的稻子少，就采用扬的方法，即用扬麦子和黍子的方法来清除秕谷，但这样使用人力远不如使用工具方便。
English: If it does not rain at the right time of the year, or the timing of fertilization and weeding is not good, the rice is likely to be only 60% full, while the stubble is as much as 40%. When removing the lighter weight of the stubble, the southern approach is to use a windmill to blow away the light stubble. In the north, when there are few rice, the Yang method is used, that is, the method of using Yang wheat and hazelnuts to remove the stubble, but this use of manpower is far less convenient than using tools.

古文：凡稻去壳用砻，去膜用舂、用碾。然水碓主舂，则兼并砻功。
现代文：稻谷去掉谷壳用的是砻，去掉糠皮用的是舂或者碾；但是用水碓来舂，也就同时起了砻的作用。
English: When removing the husk from rice, the rice is husked, and when removing the husk, the rice is husked or milled; however, when using water to husk rice, it also acts as a pestle.

古文：燥干之谷入碾亦省砻也。
现代文：干燥的稻谷用碾加工也可以不用砻。
English: Dry rice can also be milled without stalks.

古文：凡砻有二种：一用木为之，截木尺许，斫合成大磨形，两扇皆凿纵斜齿，下合植┺穿贯上合，空中受谷。
现代文：砻有两种：一种是用木头做的，锯下一尺多长的原木砍削并合成磨盘形状，两扇都凿出纵向的斜齿，下扇安一根轴穿进上扇，将上扇中间挖空以便稻谷能从孔中注入。
English: There are two types of fans: one is made of wood, sawing a log more than a foot long and cutting it into the shape of a grinding disc. Both fans have longitudinal oblique teeth, the lower fan and a shaft penetrate the upper fan, and the middle of the upper fan is hollowed out so that rice can be injected from the hole.

古文：木砻攻米二千余石，其身乃尽。
现代文：木砻如果加工到二千多石米就不能再用了。
English: If the logs are processed to more than two thousand stone meters, they can no longer be used.

古文：凡木砻，谷不甚燥者入砻亦不碎，故入贡军国漕储千万，皆出此中也。
现代文：用木砻加工，即便是不太干燥的稻谷也不会被磨碎，因此上缴的军粮和官粮，无论是大量运走或就地储藏的大量稻谷都要用木砻加工。
English: Even rice that is not too dry will not be crushed when processed with wooden tongs. Therefore, the military grain and government grain that is handed over, whether it is a large amount of rice that is transported or stored locally, must be processed with wooden tongs.

古文：一土砻析竹匡围成圈，实洁净黄土于内，上下两面各嵌竹齿。上合ド空受谷，其量倍于木砻。
现代文：另一种是土砻，破开竹子编织成一个圆筐，中间用干净的黄土填充压实，上下两扇都镶上竹齿，上扇安个竹篾漏斗用来装稻谷。
English: The other is a mound basket. The bamboo is broken and woven into a round basket. The middle is filled with clean loess and compacted. The upper and lower doors are both inlaid with bamboo teeth. A bamboo funnel is attached to the upper door to hold rice.

古文：谷稍滋湿者入其中即碎断。土砻攻米二百石，其身乃朽。
现代文：稻谷从上扇用竹篾围成的孔中注入，土砻的装谷量比木砻要多一倍。
English: The rice is fed through a hole in the top fan, which is surrounded by a bamboo raft. The raft holds twice as much grain as the wooden raft.

古文：凡木砻必用健夫，土砻即孱妇弱子可胜其任。
现代文：稻谷稍微潮湿一点，在土砻中就会磨碎。土砻加工二百石米就坏了。
English: If the rice is a little wet, it will grind in the mortar. If the mortar is processed, 200 koku of rice will be spoiled.

古文：庶民饔飧皆出此中也。
现代文：使用木砻的必须是身体强壮的劳动力，而土砻即使是体弱力小的妇女儿童也能胜任。
English: The use of wooden ploughs requires a physically strong workforce, while the use of earthen ploughs is suitable even for small women and children.

古文：凡既砻，则风扇以去糠秕，倾入筛中团转。
现代文：老百姓吃的米都是用土砻加工的。稻谷用砻磨去外壳之后，就要用风车吹掉谷糠和空谷，然后倒进筛子里晃动。
English: The rice eaten by the common people is processed using earthenware. After the rice is ground with a pestle to remove the outer shell, it is necessary to use a windmill to blow off the stalks and empty valleys, and then pour into a sieve and shake.

古文：谷未剖破者浮出筛面，重复入砻。
现代文：那些没有破壳的稻谷会浮在筛面上，要收集起来再倒入砻中去壳。
English: The rice grains without broken shells will float on the sieve surface. They should be collected and then poured into the crucible to be shelled.

古文：凡筛大者围五尺，小者半之。大者其中心偃隆而起，健夫利用。小者弦高二寸，其中平洼，妇子所需也。
现代文：筛也分为两种，大筛周边长约五尺，中间的部位稍稍隆起，是那些壮丁或大力士使用的；小筛周边约二尺五寸长，边高有二寸，中心稍凹陷，是妇女们使用的。
English: The sieve is also divided into two types. The large sieve, with a circumference of about five feet and a slight bulge in the middle, is used by those who are strong or powerful; the small sieve, with a circumference of about two feet and five inches, a height of two inches at the edges, and a slight depression in the center, is used by women.

古文：凡稻米既筛之后，入臼而舂，臼亦两种。
现代文：稻米筛过以后，放到臼里舂，臼也有两种。
English: After the rice is sieved, it is placed in a mortar and pestle, of which there are two types.

古文：八口以上之家堀地藏石臼其上，臼量大者容五斗，小者半之。
现代文：八口以上的人家，一般是在地上挖坑埋石臼。大臼的容量是五斗，小臼的容量约为大臼的一半。
English: In a family of eight or more people, it is common to dig a pit on the ground to bury a stone mortar. The capacity of the large mortar is five buckets, and the capacity of the small mortar is about half of the large mortar.

古文：横木穿插碓头，足踏其末而舂之。
现代文：另外用横木一条穿插入碓头，用脚踩踏横木的末端舂米。
English: In addition, use a crossbar to pierce and insert the chopsticks, and use your foot to step on the end of the crossbar to scoop the glutinous rice.

古文：不及则粗，太过则粉，精粮从此出焉。
现代文：舂得不够时，米就会粗糙，舂得太过分，米就细碎了，精米都是这样加工出来的。
English: If it is not stewed enough, the rice will be coarse. If it is stewed too much, the rice will be finely chopped. This is how polished rice is processed.

古文：晨炊无多者，断木为手杵，其臼或木或石以受舂也。
现代文：人口不多的人家就截木做成手杵，用木头或石头做臼来舂米。
English: People with a small population cut wood to make bracelets, and used wood or stone to make a mill to grind rice.

古文：既舂以后，皮膜成粉，名曰细糠，以供犬豕之豢。
现代文：舂过以后糠皮都变成了粉，叫做 细糠 ，用来喂猪狗。
English: After stewing, the bran is turned into powder, called fine bran, which is used to feed pigs and dogs.

古文：荒歉之岁，人亦可食也。
现代文：遇到荒年，人也可以吃。
English: In a bad year, people can also eat cucumbers.

古文：细糠随风扇播扬分去，则膜尘净尽而粹精见矣。
现代文：细糠被风车扇净后，糠皮灰尘都去除干净，留下的就是加工出来的大米了。
English: After the fine stalks are cleaned by the fan, the bran dust is removed cleanly, and what is left is the processed rice.

古文：凡水碓，山国之人居河滨者之所为也。攻稻之法省人力十倍，人乐为之。
现代文：水碓是山区住在河边的人们创造的。用它来加工稻谷，要比人工省力十倍，因此人们都乐意使用水碓。
English: The leeches were created by people living by the river in mountainous areas. Using them to process rice is ten times more labor-saving than doing it manually, so people are happy to use leeches.

古文：引水成功，即筒车灌田同一制度也。
现代文：利用水力带动水碓和利用筒车浇水灌田是同样的方法。
English: It is the same method to use hydraulic power to drive the sprinkler and to use a barrel truck to water the fields.

古文：设臼多寡不一。值流水少而地窄者，或两三臼。
现代文：设臼的多少没有一定的限制，如果流水量小而地方也狭窄，就设置两至三个臼。
English: There is no definite limit to the number of mortars that can be placed. If the water flow is small and the area is narrow, two to three mortars can be placed.

古文：流水洪而地室宽者，即并列十臼无忧也。
现代文：如果流水量大而地方又宽敞，那么并排设置十个臼也不成问题。
English: If the flow rate is large and the place is spacious, then it is no problem to set up ten mortars side by side.

古文：江南信郡水碓之法巧绝。
现代文：江西上饶一带建造水碓的方法非常巧妙。
English: In the Shangrao area of Jiangxi Province, the method of building water reservoirs is very ingenious.

古文：盖水碓所愁者，埋臼之地卑则洪潦为患，高则承流不及。
现代文：建造水碓的困难在于选择埋臼的地方，如果臼石设置的地势太低，就有可能被水淹没，臼石设在地势太高的地方，水就上不去。
English: The difficulty of building a water mill lies in the choice of where to bury the mortar. If the mortar is placed too low, it may be flooded. If the mortar is placed too high, the water will not rise.

古文：信郡造法即以一舟为地，橛桩维之。
现代文：上饶一带造水碓的方法是用一条船作为地，把船系在木桩上。
English: The method of building a raft in the Shangrao area is to use a boat as the ground and tie the boat to a wooden stake.

古文：筑土舟中，陷臼于其上，中流微堰石梁，而碓已造成，不烦木壅坡之力也。又有一举而三用者，激水转轮头，一节转磨成面，二节运碓成米，三节引水灌于稻田，此心计无遗者之所为也。
现代文：在船中填土埋臼，再在河中筑一个小石坝，这样小碓也就造成功了。此外，水碓还有一举三用：利用水流的冲击来使水轮转动，用第一节带动水磨磨面，第二节带动水碓舂米，第三节用来引水浇灌稻田，这是心思十分周密的人才能想到的。
English: In addition, there are three other uses for the waterwheel: using the impact of the water flow to turn the water wheel, using the first section to drive the water mill to grind the surface, the second section to drive the water milled rice, and the third section to divert water to irrigate rice paddies, which can only be thought of by a very thoughtful person.

古文：凡河滨水碓之国，有老死不见砻者，去糠去膜皆以臼相终始，惟风筛之法则无不同也。
现代文：在使用水碓的河滨地区，有人一辈子也没有见过砻，那里的稻谷去壳去糠皮始终都是用臼，唯独使用风车和筛子，各个地方都相同。
English: In the riverside areas where leeches are used, there are people who have never seen a leech in their lives, and the rice is always shelled and peeled with a mill, except for windmills and sieves, which are the same everywhere.

古文：凡砌石为之，承藉、转轮皆用石。
现代文：碾则是用石头砌成的，碾盘和转轮都是石头做的。
English: The grinders are made of stone, and the grinding discs and wheels are made of stone.

古文：牛犊、马驹惟人所使，盖一牛之力日可得五人。但入其中者，必极燥之谷，稍润则碎断也。○攻麦
现代文：用牛犊或马驹来拉碾都可以，随人自便。一头牛干一天的劳动量，相当于五个人一天的劳动量，但是要碾的稻谷必须是晒得很干燥的，哪怕有一点点潮湿，米就碎了。攻麦
English: The amount of work done by one cow in one day is equivalent to the amount of work done by five people in one day, but the rice to be milled must be very dry, even if it is a little wet, the rice will be broken.

古文：凡小麦其质为面。
现代文：对小麦而言，它的精华部分是面。
English: As far as wheat is concerned, its essence is noodles.

古文：盖精之至者，稻中再舂之米；粹之至者，麦中重罗之面也。
现代文：如果说稻谷最精华的部分是舂过两次的米，那么小麦加工后最上品的部分则是经过多次过罗的面粉。
English: If the best part of rice is rice that has been pounded twice, then the best part of wheat after processing is flour that has been pounded many times.

古文：小麦收获时，束稿击取如击稻法。
现代文：小麦收成后，要用手握麦秆拍打脱粒，这个方法跟稻谷脱粒相同。
English: After the wheat harvest, it is necessary to use the hand-held straw to beat the threshing, this method is the same as the rice threshing.

古文：其去秕法北土用，盖风扇流传未遍率土也。
现代文：去除麦子的秕粒，北方地区使用扬的方法，这是因为当时风车还没有传到北方的缘故。
English: In the north, the Yang method was used to remove the mildew from wheat, because windmills had not yet spread to the north at that time.

古文：凡不在宇下，必待风至而后为之。
现代文：扬麦不能选在屋檐下，而且必须要等到有风时才能进行。
English: The threshing cannot take place under the eaves and must wait until it is windy.

古文：风不至，雨不收，皆不可为也。
现代文：没有风或是雨后的天气都不适宜。
English: The weather is not suitable without wind or after rain.

古文：凡小麦既之后，以水淘洗尘垢净尽，又复晒干，然后入磨。
现代文：小麦扬过后，用水淘洗将灰尘污垢完全洗干净，再晒干，然后入磨。
English: After the wheat is harvested, the dust and dirt are completely washed away with water, dried in the sun, and then ground.

古文：凡小麦有紫、黄二种，紫胜于黄。
现代文：小麦有紫皮和黄皮两种，其中紫皮的比黄皮的好些。
English: There are two types of wheat, purple-skinned and yellow-skinned, and the purple-skinned is better than the yellow-skinned.

古文：凡佳者每石得面一百二十斤，劣者损三分之一也。
现代文：好的小麦每石可磨得面粉一百二十斤，差一点儿的所得要减少三分之一。
English: Good wheat can grind a hundred and twenty pounds of flour per stone, and the income of a little less should be reduced by one third.

古文：凡磨大小无定形，大者用肥健力牛曳转，其牛曳磨时用桐壳掩眸，不然则眩晕。
现代文：磨的大小没有一定的规格，大的磨要用肥壮有力的牛来拉。牛拉磨时要用桐壳遮住牛的眼睛，否则牛就会转晕了。
English: The size of the mill does not have a certain specification. A big mill should be pulled by a fat and powerful ox. When the ox pulls the mill, the cow's eyes should be covered with a paulownia shell, otherwise the cow will be dizzy.

古文：其腹系桶以盛遗，不然则秽也。
现代文：牛的肚子上要系上一只桶用来盛装牛的排泄物，否则就会把面弄脏了。
English: A bucket is tied to the cow's stomach to contain the cow's excrement, otherwise it will stain the face.

古文：次者用驴磨，斤两稍轻。
现代文：小一点的磨用驴来拉，重量相对较轻些。
English: Smaller mills are pulled by donkeys and are relatively light.

古文：又次小磨，则止用人推挨者。
现代文：再小一点的磨则只需用人来推。
English: Smaller mills only need to be pushed by a person.

古文：凡力牛一日攻麦二石，驴半之。人则强者攻三斗，弱者半之。
现代文：一头壮牛一天能磨两石麦子，一头驴一天只能磨一石，强壮的人一天能磨麦三斗，而体弱的人只能磨一斗半。
English: A strong ox can grind two stone of wheat a day, a donkey can only grind one stone a day, a strong man can grind three buckets of wheat a day, and a weak man can only grind one and a half buckets.

古文：若水磨之法，其详已载《攻稻》 水碓 中，制度相同，其便利又三倍于牛犊也。
现代文：至于使用水磨的办法，已经在《攻稻·水碓》一节的记述中详细讲述了，方法还是一样的，但水磨的功效却要比牛犊的效率高出三倍。
English: As for the method of using the water mill, it has been described in detail in the section of "Attacking rice and leeches," the method is still the same, but the effectiveness of the water mill is three times higher than the efficiency of the calf.

古文：凡牛、马与水磨，皆悬袋磨上，上宽下窄。贮麦数斗于中，溜入磨眼。人力所挨则不必也。
现代文：用牛马或水磨磨面，都要在磨上方悬挂一个上宽下窄的袋子，里面装上几斗小麦，能够慢慢自动滑入磨眼，而人力推磨时就用不着了。
English: If you use a horse or water mill to grind the surface, you must hang a bag with a narrow top and bottom above the grinder. It contains several buckets of wheat, which can slowly slide into the grinding eye automatically, and you don't need to use your hands when grinding.

古文：凡磨石有两种，面品由石而分。
现代文：造磨的石料有两种，面粉品质的好坏也随石料的差异而有所不同。
English: There are two kinds of stone materials for grinding, and the quality of flour also varies with the difference of stone materials.

古文：江南少粹白上面者，以石怀沙滓，相磨发烧，则其麦夫并破，故黑参和面中，无从罗去也。
现代文：江南很少出上等的精白面粉，就是因为磨石里含有渣滓，磨面时会发热，以致带色的麸皮破碎与面掺和在一起而无法罗去。
English: The south of the Yangtze River rarely produces high-quality refined white flour. This is because the grinding stone contains slag, which heats up when the noodles are ground. As a result, the broken and discolored bran is mixed with the noodles and cannot be removed.

古文：江北石性冷腻，而产于池郡之九华山者美更甚。
现代文：江北的石料性凉而且细腻，安徽池州九华山出产的石料质地更好。
English: The stone in northern Jiangsu Province is cool and delicate, while the stone produced in Jiuhuashan, Chizhou, Anhui Province has a better texture.

古文：以此石制磨，石不发烧，其麦夫压至扁秕之极不破，则黑疵一毫不入，而面成至白也。
现代文：用这种石头制成的磨，磨面时石头不会发热，麸皮虽然也轧得很扁但不会破碎，所以麸皮一点都不会掺混到面里，这样磨成的面粉就非常白了。
English: With a mill made of this stone, the stone does not heat up when the surface is ground. Although the bran is also rolled very flat, it does not break, so the bran is not mixed into the surface at all, so the milled flour is very white.

古文：凡江南磨二十日即断齿，江北者经半载方断。
现代文：江南的磨用二十天就可能磨钝了磨齿，而江北的磨要用半年才能磨钝一次磨齿。
English: The mill in the south of the Yangtze River may use twenty days to blunt the grinding teeth, while the mill in the north of the Yangtze River may use half a year to blunt the grinding teeth.

古文：南磨破麦夫得面百斤，北磨只得八十斤，故上面之值增十之二，然面角力、小粉皆从彼磨出，则衡数已足，得值更多焉。
现代文：南方的磨由于把麸子一起磨碎，所以可以磨得一百斤面，北方的磨就只得八十斤上等面粉，所以上等面粉的价钱就要贵十分之二。但是从北方的磨里出来的麸皮还可以提取面筋和小粉，所以磨面的总体分量也是足够了，而得到的收益就更多了。
English: Since the southern mill grinds the hazelnuts together, it can grind a hundred pounds of noodles, while the northern mill only grinds eighty pounds of first-class flour, so the price of the first-class flour is two-tenths more expensive. However, the bran coming out of the northern mill can also extract gluten and fine flour, so the total weight of the ground flour is also sufficient, and the income is more.

古文：凡麦经磨之后，几番入罗，勤者不厌重复。
现代文：麦子磨过以后，还要多次入罗，勤劳的人们不怕精心劳作。
English: After the wheat is milled, it needs to be milled several times. Hardworking people are not afraid to work hard.

古文：罗匡之底用丝织罗地绢为之。
现代文：罗的底是用丝织的罗地绢制作的。
English: The bottom of the straw is made from a silk-woven straw mat.

古文：湖丝所织者，罗面千石不损，若他方黄丝所为，经百石而已朽也。
现代文：如果用浙江湖州一带出产的丝织制成的罗地绢做罗底，罗一千石面也不坏。如果用其他地方的黄丝织成的，罗过一百石面就坏了。
English: If you use a loofah made of silk fabric produced in the Huzhou area of Zhejiang Province to make a loofah, a thousand stone loofah is not bad. If it is woven with yellow silk from other places, a hundred stone loofah will be broken.

古文：凡面既成后，寒天可经三月，春夏不出二十日则郁坏。
现代文：面粉在磨好以后，在寒冷季节里可以存放三个月，春夏时节存放不到二十天就会受潮而变质。
English: After the flour has been ground, it can be stored for three months in the cold season. If it is stored for less than twenty days in the spring and summer, it will be damp and deteriorate.

古文：为食适口，贵及时也。
现代文：因此，为了面能质真味美，就必须随磨随吃。
English: Therefore, in order for the noodles to be authentic and delicious, they must be eaten as they are ground.

古文：凡大麦则就舂去膜，炊饭而食，为粉者十无一焉。
现代文：大麦一般是舂掉外皮后用来煮成饭而食用的，把大麦磨成面粉的不到十分之一。
English: Barley is generally eaten after the husk is peeled off and used to cook rice. It is less than one-tenth of grinding barley into flour.

古文：荞麦则微加舂杵去衣，然后或舂或磨以成粉而后食之。
现代文：荞麦则是先用杵棒稍微舂一下，捣掉外皮，然后再舂或磨成面来吃。
English: Buckwheat, on the other hand, is first lightly pounded with a pestle and mortar, the outer skin removed, and then pounded or ground into noodles for eating.

古文：盖此类之视小麦，精粗贵贱大径庭也。
现代文：这些粮食与小麦相比，精粗贵贱也就差得太远啦！
English: Compared with wheat, these grains are too far from being fine, coarse, precious or cheap!

古文：○攻黍稷粟粱麻菽
现代文：攻黍、稷、粟、粱、麻、菽
English: 攻,,粟,,麻,

古文：凡攻治小米，扬得其实，舂得其精，磨得其粹。
现代文：小米是这样加工的：扬净后得到实粒，舂后得到小米，磨后得到小米粉。
English: Millet is processed in this way: after polishing, solid grains are obtained, after milling, millet is obtained, and after grinding, millet flour is obtained.

古文：风扬、车扇而外，簸法生焉。
现代文：除去风扬、车扇两法外，还有一种簸法。
English: In addition to the two methods of wind blowing and car fan, there is also a winding method.

古文：其法篾织为圆盘，铺米其中，挤匀扬播。
现代文：簸法是用蔑条编成圆盘，把谷子铺在上面，均匀地扬簸。
English: The braiding method is to weave a disc with slats, spread the millet on it, and roll it evenly.

古文：轻者居前，簸弃地下；重者在后，嘉实存焉。
现代文：轻的扬到前面，就从箕口丢弃地下。重的留在后面，那就是饱满的实粒了。
English: The light ones go to the front and are thrown away from the bottom. The heavy ones stay behind and are full of solid particles.

古文：凡小米舂、磨、扬、播制器，已详《稻》、《麦》之中。
现代文：小米加工用的舂、磨、扬、播等工具，已经详述于《攻稻》《攻麦》两节中。
English: Tools such as hoeing, grinding, pulling and spreading for millet processing have been described in detail in the two sections of "Tackling Rice" and "Tackling Wheat."

古文：唯小碾一制在《稻》、《麦》之外。
现代文：只是小碾这个工具，在《攻稻》《攻麦》两章节没有谈到。
English: It's just that the tool of small milling is not mentioned in the two chapters of "Attacking Rice" and "Attacking Wheat."

古文：北方攻小米者，家置石墩，中高边下，边沿不开槽。
现代文：北方加工小米，在家里安置一个石墩，中间高，四边低，边沿不开槽。
English: Beifang processed millet and set up a stone basin at home. The basin is high in the middle and low on all four sides, and there is no groove along the edges.

古文：铺米墩上，妇子两人相向，接手而碾之。
现代文：碾石是长圆形的，好像牛拉的石磙子，两头插上木柄。碾时，把谷子铺在墩上，妇女两人面对面，相互用手交接碾柄来碾压。
English: The grindstone is oblong, like a cowherd's ploughshare, with a wooden handle at each end. When grinding, the grain is spread on the plough, and the two women face each other and grind it by passing the grindstone between their hands.

古文：其碾石图长如牛赶石，而两头插木柄。
现代文：米落到碾的边沿时，就随手用小扫帚扫进去。
English: When the rice falls to the edge of the mill, sweep it in with a small broom.

古文：米堕边时随手以小扫上。
现代文：家里有了这种工具，就用不着杵臼了。
English: With this tool at home, there is no need for a ploughshare.

古文：家有此具，杵臼竟悬也。凡胡麻刈获，于烈日中晒干，束为小把，两手执把相击。麻粒绽落，承藉以簟席也。
现代文：芝麻收割后，在烈日下晒干，扎成小把，然后两手各拿一把相互拍打，芝麻壳就会裂开，芝麻粒也就脱落了，下面用席子承接。
English: After the sesame is harvested, it is dried under the hot sun, tied into a small handle, and then the two hands take a handful of each and beat each other, the sesame shell will crack, the sesame seeds will fall off, and the bottom is covered with a mat.

古文：凡麻筛与米筛小者同形，而目密五倍。
现代文：芝麻筛和小的米筛形状相同，但筛眼比米筛密五倍。
English: A sesame sieve has the same shape as a small rice sieve, but the mesh is five times denser than a rice sieve.

古文：麻从目中落，叶残角屑皆浮筛上而弃之。
现代文：芝麻粒从筛眼中落下，叶屑和碎片等杂物浮在筛上抛掉。
English: The sesame seeds fall through the sieve, and debris such as leaves and debris float on the sieve and are thrown away.

古文：凡豆菽刈获，少者用枷，多而省力者仍铺场，烈日晒干，牛曳石赶而压落之。
现代文：豆类收割之后，数量不多的话可以用打枷的方法脱粒，如果数量较多，最省力的办法仍然是把它们铺在晒场上，等到在烈日下晒干后，靠牛拉动石磙来脱粒。
English: After harvesting beans, if the quantity is not large, they can be threshed by means of a yoke. If the quantity is large, the most labor-saving method is still to spread them on the drying field. After drying in the hot sun, the cow pulls the stone roller to thresh the beans.

古文：凡打豆枷，竹木竿为柄，其端锥圆眼，拴木一条长三尺许，铺豆于场，执柄而击之。
现代文：打豆子的枷是用竹竿或木条作柄，在前端钻个圆孔，绑上一条长三尺左右的木棍。使用时，先把豆铺在晒场上，手握着枷柄甩打。
English: The yoke for beating beans is made with a bamboo pole or a wooden bar as a handle, with a round hole drilled in the front end and a wooden stick about three feet long tied to it. When using it, first spread the beans on the drying field and shake the yoke by hand.

古文：凡豆击之后，用风扇扬去荚叶，筛以继之，嘉实洒然入禀矣。
现代文：子打落后，先用风车吹去残叶，再过筛，就可以得到饱满的豆粒了。
English: After beating, first use the windmill to blow away the remaining leaves, and then sieve, you can get full beans.

古文：是故舂磨不及麻，碾不及菽也。
现代文：所以，芝麻加工用不着去皮和磨碎的工序，豆类加工则省去了磨碎和去壳这两个步骤。
English: Therefore, the sesame processing does not require the peeling and grinding process, while the bean processing eliminates the grinding and shelling process.

