古文：司马褧，字元素，河内温人也。
现代文：司马褧字元素，是河内温人。
English: Sima Xizhe's character element is Hanoi Wenren.

古文：曾祖纯之，晋大司农高密敬王。
现代文：曾祖父名纯之，晋朝大司农高密敬王。
English: His great-grandfather, Myochun, was a high-ranking official of the Jin Dynasty, and his great-great-grandfather, Nonggao Mi, was a high-ranking official of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖让之，员外常侍。
现代文：祖父名让之，任员外常侍。
English: His grandfather, Nayoretsu, was appointed to the position of non-commissioned officer.

古文：父燮，善《三礼》，仕齐官至国子博士。
现代文：父亲司马燮，擅长《三礼》，在齐朝做官至国子博士。
English: His father, Sima Qian, was good at the "Three Rites" and rose through the ranks in the Qi Dynasty to the position of provincial doctor.

古文：褧少传家业，强力专精，手不释卷，其礼文所涉书，略皆遍睹。
现代文：司马褧年轻时承传家业，做事刚强专精，手不释卷，有涉及礼文的书籍，大略皆浏览到。
English: When Sima Ye was young, he inherited the family business. He was a tough specialist in doing things, and he never let go of anything. There were books related to etiquette, and he read them all.

古文：沛国刘献为儒者宗，嘉其学，深相赏好。
现代文：沛国人刘献被儒者所宗奉，也表彰他的学问，极欣赏他。
English: Liu Xian, a native of Pei Province, was worshipped by Confucians, who also commended his learning and greatly admired him.

古文：少与乐安任昉善，昉亦推重焉。
现代文：年轻时舆乐安人任防友善，任防也推重他。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Renfen, and Renfen also promoted him.

古文：初为国子生，起家奉朝请，稍迁王府行参军。
现代文：初为国子生，起家任奉朝请，稍迁任王府行参军。
English: At first he was a son of the country, he started his family as a servant of the imperial court, and later moved to the royal palace to join the army.

古文：天监初，诏通儒治五礼，有司举褧治嘉礼，除尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：天监初年，韶令学识渊博的儒者研治五礼，有关官吏推举司马装研治嘉礼，授任尚书祠部郎中。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, the scholarly Confucian scholar was ordered to study the Five Rites of Confucianism, and the relevant officials elected Sima Soo to study the Five Rites of Confucianism, and was awarded the post of junior minister of the Shoshu Shrine.

古文：是时创定礼乐，褧所议多见施行。
现代文：这时国家创定礼乐，司马装所提议的多被施行。
English: At this time, the state created ceremonial music, and much of the music proposed by Sima Zang was implemented.

古文：除步兵校尉，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：授任步兵校尉，兼任中书通事舍人。
English: He was appointed as an infantry lieutenant and concurrently served as a secretary.

古文：褧学尤精于事数，国家吉凶礼，当世名儒明山宾、贺蒨等疑不能断，皆取决焉。
现代文：司马装的学问尤其精通推测人事吉凶的术敷，国家的吉凶礼仪，当世名儒明山宾、贺场等有疑问不能决断时，皆取决于他。
English: Sima Soo's knowledge is particularly proficient in predicting the fortunes of personnel, the etiquette of the country's fortunes, and when there is a question that cannot be decided, such as the world-famous Junmingshan guests and the congratulatory field, it all depends on him.

古文：累迁正员郎、镇南谘议参军，兼舍人如故。
现代文：累经升迁任正员郎、镇南谘议参军，兼任舍人照旧。
English: After promotion, he was appointed to the post of official member, and Zhenan advised him to join the army, and concurrently served as a subordinate as before.

古文：迁尚书右丞。
现代文：迁任尚书右丞。
English: He was promoted to Shoshu Ujo.

古文：出为仁威长史、长沙内史。
现代文：出任仁威长史、长沙内史。
English: Jinwei Changshi and Changsha Neishi were appointed.

古文：还除云骑将军，兼御史中丞，顷之即真。
现代文：回京师授云骑将军，兼任御史中丞，不久兼职改为实任。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was given the title of General of the Cloud Cavalry and concurrently held the position of Vice-Commander of the Imperial Historian's Office, which was soon changed from a part-time to a full-time position.

古文：十六年，出为宣毅南康王长史、行府国并石头戍军事。
现代文：十六年，出任宣毅南康王长史、行府国并石头戍军事。
English: In 16 years, he served as the long history of Xuan Yi Nankang Wang, went to the prefecture and became a military leader.

古文：褧虽居外官，有敕预文德、武德二殿长名问讯，不限日。
现代文：司马装虽任外官，有诏令让他参预文德、武德二殿拟定官吏铨补名单，互相通问请教，不限时。
English: Although Sima So was a foreign minister, he was ordered by imperial edict to participate in the drafting of a supplementary list of officials by the Second Prefectures of Wende and Wude, and to consult with them for an unlimited period of time.

古文：十七年，迁明威将军、晋安王长史，未几卒。
现代文：十七年，迁任明威将军、晋安王长史，不久去世。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was transferred to the post of Mingwei General and Jinan Wang Changshi, and died soon after.

古文：王命记室庾肩吾集其文为十卷，所撰《嘉礼仪注》一百一十二卷。
现代文：晋安王命记室庾肩吾收集他的文章编成十卷，所撰《嘉礼仪注》一百一十二卷。
English: The Jinan King's Life Records Office collected and compiled his articles into ten volumes, and compiled "Jiali Yi Zhu" into one hundred and twelve volumes.

古文：到溉，字茂灌，彭城武原人。
现代文：到溉字茂灌，是彭城武原人。
English: He is a native of Pengcheng Wuyuan.

古文：曾祖彦之，宋骠骑将军。
现代文：曾祖父到彦之，在宋朝为骠骑将军。
English: His great-grandfather Zu Yanzhi was a cavalry general in the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖仲度，骠骑江夏王从事中郎。
现代文：祖父到仲度，任骠骑江夏王从事中郎。
English: His grandfather, Zhongdu, was a middle-aged man who rode the Xiawang River.

古文：父坦，齐中书郎。
现代文：父亲到坦，在齐朝任中书郎。
English: His father went to Tang and became the Qi Dynasty's second-in-command.

古文：溉少孤贫，与弟洽俱聪敏有才学，早为任昉所知，由是声名益广。
现代文：到溉年幼时父亲去世家境贫寒，与弟弟到洽都聪敏有才学，早被任防所赏识，从此声名更广。
English: When he was young, his father died and the family was poor. He and his younger brother were both intelligent and talented, and were already appreciated by Ren Fang. Since then, their fame has become even wider.

古文：起家王国左常侍，转后军法曹行参军，历殿中郎。
现代文：起家任王国左常侍，转任后军法曹行参军，历任殿中郎。
English: He started his family as the left-hand attendant of the kingdom, joined the army after being transferred to the military legal officer, and successively served as the palace middle-man.

古文：出为建安内史，迁中书郎，兼吏部，太子中庶子。
现代文：出任建安内史，迁任中书郎，兼吏部郎，太子中庶子。
English: He was appointed to the position of Kenan Naishi, moved to the position of Chushiro, concurrently the Ritsuburo, and became the Prince's illegitimate son.

古文：湘东王绎为会稽太守，以溉为轻车长史、行府郡事。
现代文：湘东王萧绎任会稽太守时，任到溉为轻车长史、行府郡事。
English: When Wang Xiaoyuan of Hunan was appointed as the auditor-general of the association, he was responsible for the history of light vehicles and the administration of county affairs.

古文：高祖敕王曰： 到溉非直为汝行事，足为汝师，间有进止，每须询访。 
现代文：高祖对王说： 到溉不衹是为你行事，足可当你的老师，如有进止的事情，必须向他询访。 
English: Gao Zu said to Wang: To Irrigation is to act for you, it is enough to be your teacher, if there is something to be done, you must inquire with him.

古文：遭母忧，居丧尽礼，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：遭逢母亲丧事，服丧尽礼，朝廷称赞他。
English: When his mother passed away, he paid his respects, and the imperial court praised him.

古文：服阕，犹蔬食布衣者累载。
现代文：服丧期满除服，还食蔬菜穿布衣多年。
English: After the mourning period, they take off their clothes, eat vegetables and wear cloth clothes for many years.

古文：除通直散骑常侍，御史中丞，太府卿，都官尚书，郢州长史、江夏太守，加招远将军，入为左民尚书。
现代文：授通直散骑常侍，御史中丞，太府卿，都官尚书，郢州长史、江夏太守，加任招远将军，入任左民尚书。
English: He was awarded the titles of Zhi Zangjie, Zhi Zhongzheng, Dafu Jing, Dukan Shangshu, Zhaozhou Shangshu, Jiangxia Dazhong, Zhaoyuan General, and Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：溉身长八尺，美风仪，善容止，所莅以清白自修。
现代文：到溉身高八尺，有美好的风仪，和善的容止，所任官职，以清白自律。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a beautiful demeanor, a kind demeanor, has held public office, and is self-disciplined with innocence.

古文：性又率俭，不好声色，虚室单床，傍无姬侍。自外车服，不事鲜华，冠履十年一易，朝服或至穿补，传呼清路，示有朝章而已。
现代文：本性又很节俭，不喜好声色，屋子空虚衹有一张床，身旁没有侍妾，外出车服，不追求鲜华，冠履穿戴十年一换，朝服甚至有补丁，传声呼喊使道路清静，衹是显示有朝章而已。
English: They are also very frugal by nature, they don't like loud noises, their house is empty except for a bed, they don't have a concubine around, they don't go out in car clothes, they don't pursue freshness, they change their shoes every ten years, they even have patches on their morning clothes, they shout to make the road clear, but they only show the morning chapter.

古文：顷之，坐事左迁金紫光禄大夫，俄授散骑常侍、侍中、国子祭酒。
现代文：不久，因受事牵连降任金紫光禄大夫，不久授任散骑常侍、侍中、国子祭酒。
English: Soon after, he was demoted to the position of Jinzikangroku-dokufu due to his involvement in the matter, and soon after that he was awarded the positions of Sanzhishi-no-saji, Samurai-no-chū, and Kuniko-no-matsuri.

古文：溉素谨厚，特被高祖赏接，每与对棋，从夕达旦。
现代文：到溉平素为人谨厚，特被高祖赏识接纳，每与他对棋，都是从夕达旦。
English: He was always a dignified person, and was especially appreciated and accepted by Gao Zu. Every time he played against him, it was from sunset.

古文：溉第山池有奇石，高祖戏与赌之，并《礼记》一部，溉并输焉，未进，高祖谓硃异曰； 卿谓到溉所输可以送未？ 
现代文：到溉府第山池中有奇石，高祖开玩笑用奇石打赌，并加一部《礼记》，到溉一并输了，却没有进奉赌物，高祖对朱异说： 卿告诉到溉所输的东西可以送来否? 
English: There was a strange stone in the mountain pond in Irrigation Prefecture. Gaozu jokingly bet with the strange stone, and added a copy of "Rituals." He lost the bet at Irrigation, but did not pay the bet. Gaozu said to Zhu Ying: Sir, tell me whether the thing lost at Irrigation can be sent?

古文：溉敛板对曰： 臣既事君，安敢失礼。 
现代文：到溉收起手板回答说： 臣既事君，安敢失礼。 
English: When he came to the irrigation, he put up his hand and replied, "It's all right, my lord. Please excuse me.

古文：高祖大笑，其见亲爱如此。
现代文：高祖听了大笑，他被亲爱就像这样。
English: Gao Zu laughed loudly, he was loved just like this.

古文：后因疾失明，诏以金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍，就第养疾。
现代文：后眼睛得病失明，下诏让他以金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍的职务，在府第养疾。
English: After his eyes became blind from an illness, he was ordered to take on the duties of gold, purple, and light doctor and horseback riding attendant in order to treat his illness in the palace.

古文：溉家门雍睦，兄弟特相友爱。
现代文：到溉家族人相处和睦，兄弟之间特别友爱。
English: To irrigate the family people get along harmoniously, and there is a special friendship between brothers.

古文：初与弟洽常共居一斋，洽卒后，便舍为寺，因断腥膻，终身蔬食，别营小室，朝夕从僧徒礼诵。
现代文：当初与弟弟到洽常共居一斋，到洽去世后，便施舍建寺庙，由此不食荤腥，终生吃素食蔬菜，另建造小室，朝夕跟从僧徒礼拜诵经。
English: At first, he and his younger brother lived together for a while in Tsuchicho. After Tsuchicho's death, he gave alms to build a temple. As a result, he did not eat meat and vegetables, and ate vegetarian vegetables for the rest of his life. He also built a small room, and prayed and chanted sutras with the monks in the morning and evening.

古文：高祖每月三致净馔，恩礼甚笃。
现代文：高祖每月为他三置素食，给他的恩礼极厚。
English: Gao Zu provides him with three sets of vegetarian food every month, and is extremely grateful to him.

古文：蒋山有延贤寺者，溉家世创立，故生平公俸，咸以供焉，略无所取。
现代文：蒋山有延贤寺，是到溉先世创立的，所以他平生俸禄，都供给寺裹，略无所取。
English: Jiangshan has Yanxian Temple, which was founded in the previous generation of irrigation, so his lifetime salary has been provided to the temple, but little has been taken.

古文：性又不好交游，惟与硃异、刘之遴、张绾同志友密。
现代文：本性又不好交游，祇与朱异、刘之遴、张绾志同友密。
English: He is not a good friend by nature, and only has close friendships with Zhu Yixing, Liu Zhixuan, and Zhang Xizhi.

古文：及卧疾家园，门可罗雀，三君每岁时常鸣驺枉道，以相存问，置酒叙生平，极欢而去。
现代文：当他卧疾家园时，门可罗雀，三君每年时常出行就绕道到他家，互相问候，置酒畅叙平生事，极欢而去。
English: When he was bedridden at home, the three princes would often take a detour to his house, greet each other, have a drink, talk about their lives, and go away happily.

古文：临终，托张、刘勒子孙以薄葬之礼，卒时年七十二。
现代文：临终时，托付张、刘管束他的子孙用俭约的礼仪安葬他，去世时年七十二岁。
English: At the time of his death, he entrusted his grandchildren Zhang and Liu Guanzhong to bury him with the etiquette of thrift. He was 72 years old at the time of his death.

古文：诏赠本官。
现代文：下诏追赠他本官。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded him his original post.

古文：有集二十卷行于世。
现代文：有集二十卷流传于世。
English: A collection of twenty volumes has been handed down to the world.

古文：时以溉、洽兄弟比之二陆，故世祖赠诗曰： 魏世重双丁，晋朝称二陆，何如今两到，复似凌寒竹。 
现代文：时人以到溉、到洽兄弟舆 二陆 相比，因此世祖的赠诗说： 魏朝尊重 双丁 ，晋朝称赞 二陆 ，何如今日 两到 ，又像凌寒的翠竹。 
English: At that time, people compared the two continents as brothers who came to irrigate and negotiate, so the ancestor's gift poem said: The Wei Dynasty respected Shuangding, and the Jin Dynasty praised the two continents. What is today's Shuangding, and it is like the cold green bamboo.

古文：子镜，字圆照，安西湘东王法曹行参军，太子舍人，早卒。
现代文：子镜，字圆照，任安西湘束王法曹行参军，太子舍人，早就去世了。
English: Zi Zi, Zi Yuan Zhao, Anxi Xiangzhu Wang Fa Cao joined the army, the prince was reluctant, and died long ago.

古文：镜子荩，早聪慧，起家著作佐郎，历太子舍人，宣城王主簿，太子洗马，尚书殿中郎。
现代文：到子镜到盖，从小就聪慧，起家任著作佐郎，历任太子舍人，宣城王主簿，太子洗马，尚书殿中郎。
English: From the mirror to the lid, he was clever from an early age. He started his career as a book seller, and successively served as the prince's secretary, the chief bookkeeper of the Prince of Xuancheng, the prince's washer, and the junior bookkeeper of the Prince of Song.

古文：尝从高祖幸京口，登北顾楼赋诗，荩受诏便就，上览以示溉曰： 荩定是才子，翻恐卿从来文章假手于荩。 
现代文：曾经跟从高祖幸临京，登北顾楼赋诗，到盖受诏立即写成，上览赋以示到溉说： 到萋一定是才子，反而恐怕卿从来写的文章是藉助到盖的手。 
English: He once followed Gao Zuoxing to Beijing, climbed the North Gu Lou to compose a poem, and wrote it immediately after receiving the imperial edict from Gui. Gui said, "Guan Xuan must be a genius, but I'm afraid that the articles he has ever written are with the help of Gui."

古文：因赐溉《连珠》曰： 研磨墨以腾文，笔飞毫以书信。
现代文：因而赐给到溉《连珠》说： 研磨墨奋起写文章，笔飞毫而书信。
English: Therefore, "Lian Zhu" said: "Grind the ink and write an article, the pen flies and the letter flies."

古文：如飞蛾之赴火，岂焚身之可吝。
现代文：像飞蛾赴向火焰，不惜牺牲而有所作为。
English: Like a moth to a flame, sacrifice to make a difference.

古文：必耄年其已及，可假之于少荩。 
现代文：必定已到老年，可藉助年轻的到董。 
English: He must have reached old age, but he can call on the help of a young assistant director.

古文：其见知赏如此。
现代文：他被知遇称赏就像这样。
English: He's been known to receive accolades like this.

古文：除丹阳尹丞。
现代文：授丹阳尹丞。
English: His posthumous name is Danyang Yinzheng.

古文：太清乱，赴江陵卒。
现代文：太清年间战乱，赴江陵时去世。
English: He died when he went to Gangneung during the war in the Taichung period.

古文：刘显，字嗣芳，沛国相人也。
现代文：刘显字嗣芳，是沛国相人。
English: Liu Xianzi Zifang is the cousin of Pei Guo.

古文：父鬷，晋安内史。
现代文：父亲刘酦，任晋安内史。
English: His father, Liu Hui, was the secretary of the Jinan Inner Court.

古文：显幼而聪敏，当世号曰神童。
现代文：刘显年幼而聪敏，当世人称他神童。
English: Liu Xian is young and intelligent, and the world calls him a child prodigy.

古文：天监初，举秀才，解褐中军临川王行参军，俄署法曹。
现代文：天监初年，举秀才，出仕任中军临川王行参军，不久署法曹。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Inspector, he promoted talents, served as the Chinese army's Linchuan Wang Xing to join the army, and soon became a legal assistant.

古文：显好学，博涉多参通，任昉尝得一篇缺简书，文字零落，历示诸人，莫能识者，显云是《古文尚书》所删逸篇，昉检《周书》，果如其说，昉因大相赏异。
现代文：刘显好学，涉猎广博通晓许多事情，任防曾得一篇残缺简书，文字脱落，多次示舆诸人，没有人能知晓，刘显说是《古文尚书》中被删去而佚失的一篇，任防检阅《周书》，果然像他说的，因此大加赞赏称异。
English: Liu Xian is eager to learn, dabbles in a wide range of things, and knows a lot of things. He once got a damaged simple book, the text fell off, and repeatedly showed it to everyone, no one could know. Liu Xian said that it was a deleted and lost article in the "Ancient Texts," and he was allowed to review the "Weekly Book," as he said, so he greatly appreciated the difference.

古文：丁母忧，服阕，尚书令沈约命驾造焉，于坐策显经史十事，显对其九。
现代文：居母亲丧，服丧期满除服，尚书令沈约命驾车拜访他，在坐席上策问塑呓经史中十个问题，塑团答对九个。
English: In his mother's funeral, when the mourning period was over, he ordered Shen Yiming to drive to visit him. At the table, he asked ten questions about the history of plastic surgery, and the plastic surgery group answered nine.

古文：约曰： 老夫昏忘，不可受策；虽然，聊试数事，不可至十也。 
现代文：选垫说： 老夫糊涂忘事，不可接受策问了；虽然这样，姑且试问几件事，但不可至十件。 
English: The selection pad said: The old man is confused and forgetful, and cannot accept questions; although, I will try to ask a few things, but not up to ten.

古文：显问其五，约对其二。
现代文：刘显问五件事，沈约答对二件。
English: Liu Xian asked five questions, and Shen Youyou answered two correctly.

古文：陆倕闻之叹曰： 刘郎可谓差人，虽吾家平原诣张壮武，王粲谒伯喈，必无此对。 
现代文：陆佳听说后赞叹说： 刘郎可称是特异的人，即使像我家陆机前往张华处，王粲谒见蔡邕，必无此对答。 
English: Lu Jia said with admiration after hearing about it: Liu Lang can be called a special person. Even if my land plane went to Zhang Hua's place and Wang Qian saw Cai Qian, there would be no such response.

古文：其为名流推赏如此。
现代文：他被名流推赏就像这样。
English: He was feted by celebrities just like this.

古文：及约为太子少傅，乃引为五官掾，俄兼廷尉正。
现代文：沈约任太子少傅，便引进他任五官掾，不久兼任廷尉正。
English: Shen Yotong was appointed as the prince's junior tutor, and then he was appointed as the fifth official, and soon he was also appointed as the court lieutenant.

古文：五兵尚书傅昭掌著作，撰国史，引显为佐。
现代文：五兵尚书傅昭掌著作，编撰国史，引进刘显辅佐他。
English: Wu Bei Shang Shufu Zhaopu wrote books, compiled national history, and introduced Liu Xianfu to assist him.

古文：九年，始革尚书五都选，显以本官兼吏部郎，又除司空临川王外兵参军，迁尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：九年，开始更改尚书五都选，刘显以原职兼吏部郎，又授司空临川王外兵参军，迁任尚书仪曹郎。
English: In the ninth year, he began to change the selection of the five capitals of Shangshu, and Liu Xian was transferred to the post of the secretary of Shangshu and the secretary of foreign soldiers to join the army, and transferred to the post of the secretary of Shangshu.

古文：尝为《上朝诗》，沈约见而美之，时约郊居宅新成，因命工书人题之于壁。
现代文：曾作《上朝诗》，沈约看了很欣赏，当时沈约在郊外新建住宅，便让擅长书法的人把此诗写在墙壁上。
English: He once wrote "Shangchao Poem," which Shen Yoyo appreciated very much. At that time, Shen Yoyo was building a new house in the suburbs, so he asked a person who was good at calligraphy to write this poem on the walls.

古文：出为临川王记室参军。
现代文：出任临川王记室参军。
English: He joined the army after being appointed to the office of the Prince of Linchuan.

古文：建康平，复入为尚书仪曹侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：平定建康后，再次入任尚书仪曹侍郎，兼任中书通事舍人。
English: After the settlement of Jiankang, he was re-appointed as the secretary of Shangshui Cao, and also served as the secretary of Zhongshui.

古文：出为秣陵令，又除骠骑鄱阳王记室，兼中书舍人，累迁步兵校尉、中书侍郎，舍人如故。
现代文：出任秣陵令，又授骠骑鄱阳王记室，兼任中书舍人，累经升迁任步兵校尉、中书侍郎，舍人照旧。
English: He was appointed as the commander of the Imperial Mausoleum, and was also given the post of the secretary of the King of Shenyang. He also served as the secretary of the Middle School. After promotion, he was appointed as the infantry lieutenant, the secretary of the Middle School, and the secretary of the Middle School, as before.

古文：显与河东裴子野、南阳刘之遴、吴郡顾协，连职禁中，递相师友，时人莫不慕之。
现代文：刘显与河东人裴子野、南阳人刘之遴、吴郡人顾协，连续在宫禁中任职，互为师友，时人很羡慕他们。
English: Liu Xian, Peizhino from Hedong, Liu Zhuxuan from Nanyang, and Gu Jie from Wuxi County all served in the imperial court consecutively. They were each other's mentors and friends, and people envied them at the time.

古文：显博闻强记，过于裴、顾，时魏人献古器，有隐起字，无能识者，显案文读之，无有滞碍，考校年月，一字不差，高祖甚嘉焉。
现代文：刘显博闻强记，胜过裴、顾，当时有北魏人进献古器，上面有隐起的文字，没有人能识别，刘显按文读之，非常通畅，考校古器年月，一字不差，高祖极赞许他。
English: Liu Xianbo was better at memorizing than Pei and Gu. At that time, there were Northern Wei people who presented ancient vessels with hidden words on them, which no one could recognize. Liu Xian read according to the text, which was very smooth. In the examination of ancient vessels, he did not miss a word. Gao Zu highly praised him.

古文：迁尚书左丞，除国子博士。
现代文：迁任尚书左丞，授国子博士。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoshu-zojo and awarded the title of Kuniko hakase.

古文：出为宣远岳阳王长史，行府国事，未拜，迁云麾邵陵王长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：出任宣远岳阳王长史，行府国事，未拜，迁任云麾邵陵王长史、寻阳太守。
English: He assumed the post of Xuanyuan Yueyang Wang Changshi, and was in charge of the state affairs of the capital, but was transferred to the post of Yunnan Shaoling Wang Changshi and Huanyang Dazhong.

古文：大同九年，王迁镇郢州，除平西谘议参军，加戎昭将军。
现代文：大同九年，邵陵王镇守郢州，授刘显任平西谘议参军，加授戎昭将军。
English: In the ninth year of Datong, Shao Ling Wang Zhen guarded Bozhou, awarded Liu Xian the post of Pingxi Advisory to join the army, and awarded him the post of General Rong Zhao.

古文：其年卒，时年六十三。
现代文：当年去世，时年六十三岁。
English: He died that year, aged 63.

古文：友人刘之遴启皇太子曰： 之遴尝闻，夷、叔、柳惠，不逢仲尼一言，则西山饿夫，东国黜士，名岂施于后世。
现代文：友人刘之遴启禀皇太子说： 之遴曾听说，伯夷、叔齐、柳下惠，没有得到孔子一句赞美，他们衹能是西山挨饿的人，被束国罢黜的人，他们的美名哪能传到后代?
English: Liu Zhizhu, a friend of the crown prince, said: "Zhizhu had heard that Bo Yi, Shu Qi, and Liu Xia Hui did not receive a single word of praise from Confucius. Could they be starving people in the West Mountain, people who were ousted by the shogunate, and how could their good name be passed on to future generations?

古文：信哉！
现代文：确实如此呀!
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：生有七尺之形，终为一棺之土。
现代文：生有七尺长的身体，死去放在棺中被土埋没。
English: Born with a seven-foot-long body, he died in a coffin and was buried in the dirt.

古文：不朽之事，寄之题目，怀珠抱玉，有殁世而名不称者，可为长太息，孰过于斯。
现代文：不朽的事情，写在文章中才能流传，怀才不随波逐流的人，死去而得不到颂扬，应为这样的事情叹息，没有超过这样的。
English: Immortal things, written in articles, can only be passed on. People who cherish talent and do not drift with the tide, die without being praised, should sigh for such things, no more than this.

古文：窃痛友人沛国刘显，韫椟艺文，研精覃奥，聪明特达，出类拔群。
现代文：我私下悲痛友人沛国人，收藏在木柜中的典籍，精心研究它的深奥，聪明特通达，出类拔群。
English: I privately grieve for my friend Pei Guo Ren, who collects classics in a wooden cabinet, meticulously studies its profundity, is extremely intelligent, and is outstanding.

古文：阖棺郢都，归魂上国，卜宅有日，须镌墓板。
现代文：盖棺于郢都，归魂京师，选好墓地安葬时日已定，需要琢刻墓碑。
English: The casket will be placed in the capital of Shandong Province, the soul will return to the capital of China, the cemetery will be selected and the time of burial has been set, and the tombstone needs to be engraved.

古文：之遴已略撰其事行，今辄上呈。
现代文：之遒已简略撰写他的事迹，今就上呈。
English: I have already written a brief account of his life, which I am now presenting.

古文：伏愿鸿慈，降兹睿藻，荣其枯骴，以慰幽魂。
现代文：希望皇上能给他大慈爱，为他写诗文，使他的枯骨得到荣耀，以此慰藉他的幽魂。
English: I hope that the Emperor will show him great mercy and comfort his ghost by writing poetry for him, so that his dead bones will be glorified.

古文：冒昧尘闻，战栗无地。 
现代文：冒昧地奏报，战栗无地自容。 
English: He had the temerity to file a report, trembling with embarrassment.

古文：乃蒙令为志铭曰： 繁弱挺质，空桑吐声，分器见重，播乐传名。
现代文：于是蒙受命令为刘显写墓志铭说： 繁弱有美质，空桑弹出声，分授宝器被看重，播弄乐器传名声。
English: Therefore, he was ordered to write an epitaph for Liu Xian, which said, "Fragility has beauty, the hollow mulberry makes a popping sound, the awarding instrument is valued, and the playing instrument transmits fame."

古文：谁其均之？
现代文：谁为他调节?
English: Who regulates him?

古文：美有髦士。
现代文：美有英才。
English: Beauty has talent.

古文：礼著幼年，业明壮齿。
现代文：幼年懂得礼仪，壮年学业有成。
English: Children understand etiquette, adults are successful in their studies.

古文：厌饫典坟，研精名理。
现代文：饱读古代文籍，精研名理。
English: He read a lot of ancient literature and studied philosophy.

古文：一见弗忘，过目则记。
现代文：一见不忘，过目牢记。
English: Don't forget what you see, remember what you see.

古文：若访贾逵，如问伯始。
现代文：像询访贾逵，像访问胡广。
English: Like visiting Jia Ye, like visiting Hu Guang.

古文：颖脱斯出，学优而仕。
现代文：脱颖而出，学优而仕。
English: Stand out, learn from the best and become the best.

古文：议狱既佐，芸兰乃握。
现代文：辅佐议狱，是君王近臣。
English: He was an aide-de-camp to the regent and a close adviser to the king.

古文：抟凤池水，推羊太学。
现代文：在中书任职展现才能，在太学推算吉祥。
English: In Chinese calligraphy, it shows talent, and in Chinese astrology, it is auspicious.

古文：内参禁中，外相籓岳。
现代文：在内参预宫禁事，在外辅佐诸王。
English: In the inner palace, it is forbidden to participate in activities, and in the outer palace, it is forbidden to assist the kings.

古文：斜光已道，殒彼西浮；百川到海，还逐东流。
现代文：夕阳已在道上，他死在流寓的西方；百川汇入大海，还要追逐东来的流水。
English: The setting sun is already on the road, he died in the west of the exile; the hundred rivers flow into the sea, and he still has to chase the flowing water from the east.

古文：营营返魄，泛泛虚舟。
现代文：忙碌返回遣体，轻捷之舟在浮行。
English: Busy returning to the anchorage, the light boat is floating.

古文：白马向郊，丹旒背巩。
现代文：办丧事所乘白马趋向郊外，丧礼用的铭旌已从巩地送去。
English: The funeral home is riding a white horse towards the suburbs, and the funeral urns have been sent from Gongdi.

古文：野埃兴伏，山云轻重。
现代文：野尘兴伏，山云淡浓。
English: The dust of the field is stirring, and the mountains and clouds are thick.

古文：吕掩书坟，扬归玄冢。
现代文：吕不韦著书掩盖群书，扬雄归回玄冢。
English: Lü Buwei wrote a book to cover up the books, and Yang Xiong returned to Xuanzang.

古文：尔其戒行，途穷土垄。
现代文：他恪守戒律的情操，道路穷尽进入土垄。
English: He adhered to the moral of the precepts, and the road was exhausted into a dirt ridge.

古文：弱葛方施，丛柯日拱。
现代文：柔弱的葛草刚种下，丛聚的柯树环绕日光。
English: The tender kudzu has just been planted, and clumps of oak trees surround the sunlight.

古文：遂柳荑春，禽寒敛氄。
现代文：墓道的柳树春天发芽，鸟兽在寒冷时收聚绒毛。
English: The willow trees in the graveyard sprout in spring, and the birds and beasts collect the down when it is cold.

古文：长空常暗，阴泉独涌。
现代文：长空经常黑暗，地下的泉水独涌。
English: The sky is often dark, and underground springs gush.

古文：祔彼故茔，流芬相踵。 
现代文：合葬在祖先的墓地，好名声流传相继不断。 
English: Buried together in the cemetery of their ancestors, their good reputation has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：显有三子：莠，荏，臻。
现代文：刘显有三子：刘莠、刘荏、刘臻。
English: Liu Xian has three sons: Liu Xuan, Liu Xuan and Liu Zhen.

古文：臻早著名。
现代文：刘臻早年著名。
English: Liu Zhen was famous in his early years.

古文：刘之遴，字思贞，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：刘之遴字思贞，是南阳涅阳人。
English: Liu Zichuan's character, Sizhen, is a Nanyang Niyang person.

古文：父虬，齐国子博士，谥文范先生。
现代文：父亲刘纠，在齐朝任国子博士，谧号文范先生。
English: His father, Liu Guo, held the title of Dr. Guo Zi in the Qi Dynasty, and his nickname was Mr. Wen Fan.

古文：之遴八岁能属文，十五举茂才对策，沈约、任昉见而异之。
现代文：之遴八岁就会写文章，十五岁举茂才的对策，沈约、任防看了都很惊异。
English: The eight-year-old will write an article, and the 15-year-old's countermeasures are surprising to see.

古文：起家宁朔主簿。
现代文：起家任宁朔主簿。
English: He was appointed as the chief accountant of Ningshuo.

古文：吏部尚书王瞻尝候任昉，值之遴在坐，昉谓瞻曰： 此南阳刘之遴，学优未仕，水镜所宜甄擢。 
现代文：吏部尚书王瞻曾探望任防，恰巧之遴在座，任防对王瞻说： 此是南阳人刘之遴，学优而未做官，明鉴的人应当遴选擢用他。 
English: Wang Zhan, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, once visited Ren Zheng, and Ren Zheng happened to be present. Ren Zheng said to Wang Zhan: This is Liu Zheng from Nanyang, who is a good student but has not been an official. Those who know this should select and promote him.

古文：瞻即辟为太学博士。
现代文：王瞻立即征召他任太学博士。
English: Wang Zhan immediately conscripted him as a doctor of science.

古文：时张稷新除尚书仆射，托昉为让表，昉令之遴代作，操笔立成。
现代文：当时张稷新被授任尚书仆射，托任吩写辞让官职的奏章，任防让之遴代作，执笔立成。
English: At that time, Zhang Yuxin was assigned to be Shang Shu's assistant, entrusted to write the official's speech and play the official's song, and allowed to write and write.

古文：昉曰： 荆南秀气，果有异才，后仕必当过仆。 
现代文：任防说： 荆南地方有秀气，果然有异才，以后做官必当超过我。 
English: Ren Fang said, "Jingnan is a beautiful place, and it is true that there are exceptional talents. In the future, officials will surpass me.

古文：御史中丞乐蔼，即之遴舅，宪台奏弹，皆之遴草焉。
现代文：御史中丞乐蔼，是之遴舅舅，御史台的奏弹，皆是之遴起草。
English: The grandmaster of the middle school of the imperial history is Le Er Er, the uncle of the grandmaster of the middle school of the imperial history, and the music of the grandmaster of the imperial history are all drafted by the grandmaster of the middle school of the imperial history.

古文：迁平南行参军，尚书起部郎，延陵令，荆州治中。
现代文：迁任平南行参军，尚书起部郎，延陵令，荆州治中。
English: He was transferred to Pingnan to join the army, and became a member of Shangshu Kibu-ro, Yanling-liang, and Jingzhou Jizhong.

古文：太宗临荆州，仍迁宣惠记室。
现代文：太宗幸临荆州，便迁任他为宣惠记室。
English: When Emperor Taizong was fortunate enough to visit Jingzhou, he moved there and appointed him as the recorder of Xuan Hui.

古文：之遴笃学明审，博览群籍。
现代文：之遴笃学明审，博览群书。
English: The selection of the winners was made after a rigorous academic review, and the books were widely read.

古文：时刘显、韦稜并强记，之遴每与讨论，咸不能过也。
现代文：当时刘显、韦棱都有很强的记忆力，之遴每舆他们讨论，都不能胜过之遴。
English: At that time, Liu Xian and Wei Ren both had a strong memory, and every time they discussed the selection, they could not beat the selection.

古文：还除通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：回到京师授任通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he was appointed as Tsuchina Sanzhi Jiro, and concurrently as Chusho Tsuchimoto.

古文：迁正员郎，尚书右丞，荆州大中正。
现代文：迁任正员郎，尚书右丞，塑鼬大中正。
English: He was transferred to the position of Seikanro, Shoshu Ujo, and Shokugei Daigaku Chujo.

古文：累迁中书侍郎，鸿胪卿，复兼中书舍人。
现代文：累经升迁任中书侍郎，鸿胪卿，再兼中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to the position of the junior secretary of the middle school, the honorable secretary of the middle school, and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：出为征西鄱阳王长史、南郡太守，高祖谓曰： 卿母年德并高，故令卿衣锦还乡，尽荣养之理。 
现代文：出任征西鄱阳王长史、南郡太守，高祖对他说： 卿母亲年高德重，因此让卿衣锦还乡，尽赡养母亲的孝心。 
English: Gao Zu said to him: "Your mother is old and virtuous. Therefore, let your mother return to her hometown and support her mother's filial piety.

古文：后转为西中郎湘东王长史，太守如故。
现代文：后转任西中郎湘束王长史，太守照旧。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of West Chūro, Shōsaku Wang Chōshi, and remained as the de facto ruler.

古文：初，之遴在荆府，尝寄居南郡廨，忽梦前太守袁彖谓曰： 卿后当为折臂太守，即居此中。 
现代文：当初，之遴在荆州官府，曾寄居南郡官舍，忽梦见前任太守袁彖对他说： 卿以后当为折臂太守，就居住此地。 
English: At the beginning, Zhichuan was in the Jingzhou government office, and had been living in the Nan County government house. Suddenly, he dreamed that the former governor Yuan Qi said to him: "After you become the governor, you should live here."

古文：之遴后果损臂，遂临此郡。
现代文：之遴后来果然损伤手臂，而且来此郡任职。
English: However, he later injured his arm and came to work in this county.

古文：丁母忧，服阕，征秘书监，领步兵校尉。
现代文：居母亲丧，服丧期满除服，征入任秘书监，领步兵校尉。
English: After his mother's death, he was discharged at the end of the mourning period, conscripted as a secretary supervisor, and became an infantry captain.

古文：出为郢州行事，之遴意不愿出，固辞，高祖手敕曰： 朕闻妻子具，孝衰于亲；爵禄具，忠衰于君。
现代文：出任郢州行事，之遴本意不想出任，便坚决推辞，高祖亲笔诏书说： 朕闻妻与子俱在，对亲人的孝心就减退了；爵与禄俱有，对君主的忠诚就减退了。
English: Gao Zu personally wrote an imperial edict saying: "When I hear that my wife and children are together, my filial piety toward my relatives is diminished; when I hear that I have a peerage and a stipend, my loyalty to the monarch is diminished.

古文：卿既内足，理忘奉公之节。 
现代文：卿内心得到满足，理应忘记奉公的操节。 
English: When he is satisfied in his heart, he should forget the discipline of public service.

古文：遂为有司所奏免。
现代文：于是有司上奏免去他的职务。
English: As a result, the superintendent relieved him of his duties.

古文：久之，为太府卿，都官尚书，太常卿。
现代文：很久，才任太府卿，都官尚书，太常卿。
English: It was a long time before he was appointed tofu-kyo, tokan-shosho, or tojoken-kyo.

古文：之遴好古爱奇，在荆州聚古器数十百种。
现代文：之遴好古爱奇，在荆州收聚古器敷十百种。
English: and collected over ten hundred kinds of ancient utensils in Jingzhou.

古文：有一器似瓯，可容一斛，上有金错字，时人无能知者。
现代文：有一古器像瓯，容量为一斛，上有嵌饰的金字，时人不知这是什么。
English: There was an ancient vessel resembling an urn, the capacity of which was one urn, with inlaid gold lettering. At the time, no one knew what it was.

古文：又献古器四种于东宫。
现代文：又进献古器四种给太子。
English: In addition, four kinds of antique vases were presented to the prince.

古文：其第一种，镂铜鸱夷榼二枚，两耳有银镂，铭云 建平二年造 。
现代文：第一种，缕铜鸱夷桩二枚，两耳有雕刻，中间嵌银，刻文 建平二年造 。
English: The first one is a pair of two-stranded copper Zhaiyi piles, with engravings on both sides, silver inlay in the middle, and inscriptions made by Jianping in the second year of his reign.

古文：其第二种，金银错镂古樽二枚，有篆铭云 秦容成侯适楚之岁造 。
现代文：第二种，是用金银镶嵌雕刻的古樽二枚，刻有篆文 秦容成侯适楚之岁造 。
English: The second type is made of two old barrels carved with gold and silver inlaid, engraved with the inscription "Qin Rongcheng Hou Shichu no Rongcheng."

古文：其第三种，外国澡灌一口，铭云 元封二年，龟兹国献 。
现代文：第三种，外国人洗涤用的罐子一口，刻文 元封二年，龟兹国献 。
English: The third type, a jar for washing used by foreigners, engraved with the inscription "Two years since the founding of the People's Republic of China, presented by the People's Republic of China."

古文：其第四种，古制澡盘一枚，铭云 初平二年造 。
现代文：第四种，古制澡盘一枚，刻文 初平二年造 。
English: The fourth type, an old-fashioned bath tray, inscribed Hatsuhira two years old.

古文：时鄱阳嗣王范得班固所上《汉书》真本，献之东宫，皇太子令之遴与张缵、到溉、陆襄等参校异同。
现代文：当时鄱阳嗣王萧范得到班固进呈的《漠书》、真本，将它献给皇太子，皇太子让之遴舆张缆、到溉、陆襄等人校核它舆现行本子的异同。
English: At that time, Wang Xiao Fan, the successor of Shenyang, received the "Desert Book," the original, presented by Ban Gujin, and dedicated it to the crown prince. The crown prince asked Zhang Cai, Zu Rong, Lu Xiang and others to check the differences and similarities between it and the current book.

古文：之遴具异状十事，其大略曰： 案古本《汉书》称 永平十六年五月二十一日己酉，郎班固上 ；而今本无上书年月日字。
现代文：之遴列举十条不同之处，大略说： 查古本《汉书》记载 永平十六年五月二十一日己酉，郎班固上，而今本无上书年月日字。
English: The following is a list of ten differences, roughly speaking: The ancient book "Hanshu" records that on May 21, Yongping 16th year, he died and was succeeded by his brother, but the present book does not have the date of publication.

古文：又案古本《叙传》号为中篇；今本称为《叙传》。
现代文：又查古本《叙传》称作中篇，今本称作《叙传》。
English: In addition, the ancient book "Narrative" is called the middle chapter, and the present book is called "Narrative."

古文：又今本《叙传》载班彪事行；而古本云 稚生彪，自有传 。
现代文：又今本《叙传》记载班彪的事迹，而古本说 稚生彪，自有传，又今本纪及表、志、列传排列次序彼此不一致。
English: Also, the present "Narrative" records the deeds of Ban Biao, while the ancient book says that "Chosho Biao" is self-translated, and the present chronicle and the table, epitaphs, and the order of the chronicles are inconsistent with each other.

古文：又今本纪及表、志、列传不相合为次，而古本相合为次，总成三十八卷。又今本《外戚》在《西域》后；古本《外戚》次《帝纪》下。又今本《高五子》、《文三王》、《景十三王》、《武五子》、《宣元六王》杂在诸传秩中；古本诸王悉次《外戚》下，在《陈项传》前。又今本《韩彭英卢吴》述云 信惟饿隶，布实黥徒，越亦狗盗，芮尹江湖，云起龙骧，化为侯王 ；古本述云 淮阴毅毅，杖剑周章，邦之杰子，实惟彭、英，化为侯王，云起龙骧 。
现代文：而古本排列次序彼此一致，总成三十八卷。又今本《外戚》排在《西域》后，古本《外戚》排在《帝纪》后。又今本《高五子》、《文三王》、《景十三王》、《武五子》、《宣元六王》夹杂在诸传卷次中，古本诸王全部排在《外戚》后，在《陈项传》前。又今本《韩彭英卢吴》述说 信惟饿隶，布实黥徒，越亦狗盗，芮尹江湖，云起龙骧，化为侯王 ，古本述说 淮阴毅毅，杖剑周章，邦之杰子，实惟彭、英，化为侯王，云起龙骧 。
English: The ancient books are arranged in the same order as each other, totaling thirty-eight volumes. And the present book "Mother-in-law" is ranked after "Western Regions," and the ancient book "Mother-in-law" is ranked after "Imperial History." And the present books "High Five Sons," "Three Kings of Literature," "Thirteen Kings of Literature," "Five Sons of Wu" and "Six Kings of the Yuan Dynasty" are included in the sequence of books, and all the kings of the ancient books are ranked after "Mother-in-law" and before "The Legend of Chen Xiang." And the present book "Han Peng Ying Lu Wu" narrates that

古文：又古本第三十七卷，解音释义，以助雅诂，而今本无此卷。 
现代文：又古本第三十七卷，解释音义，以助轨范训诂，而今本无此卷。 
English: In addition, the 37th volume of the old book, explaining the meaning of sounds, begins with the auxiliary model, but there is no such volume in the present book.

古文：之遴好属文，多学古体，与河东裴子野、沛国刘显常共讨论书籍，因为交好。
现代文：之遴喜好写文章，多学古体写法，与河东人裴子野、沛国人刘显常共同讨论书籍，因此彼此友好。
English: He likes to write articles, and often studies the ancient style of writing. He often discusses books with Peizhino from Hedong and Liu Xian from Peiguo, so they are friendly with each other.

古文：是时《周易》、《尚书》、《礼记》、《毛诗》并有高祖义疏，惟《左氏传》尚阙。之遴乃著《春秋大意》十科，《左氏》十科，《三传同异》十科，合三十事以上之。
现代文：当时《周易》、《尚书》、《礼记》、《毛诗》均有高祖的义疏，惟有《左氏传》尚缺，之遴便着《春秋大意》十科，《左氏》十科，《三传同异》十科，合三十事上奏。
English: At that time, "Zhou Yi," "Shang Shu," "Li Ji" and "Mao Shi" all had Gao Zu's teachings, but "Zao Shi Zhuo" was still missing, so the selection was "Spring and Autumn" ten subjects, "Zao Shi" ten subjects, "Three Passages with Differences" ten subjects, a total of thirty.

古文：高祖大悦，诏答之曰： 省所撰《春秋》义，比事论书，辞微旨远。
现代文：高祖大悦，在诏书中回答他说： 省阑所撰的《春秋》义，评比事情论述书籍，言辞精微含意深远。
English: Gao Zu Daye, in his edict, replied to him, saying: "The Spring and Autumn Classic, which was written by Guo Yu, is a book that evaluates and discusses things, and its words are subtle and far-reaching.

古文：编年之教，言阐义繁，丘明传洙泗之风，公羊禀西河之学，鐸椒之解不追，瑕丘之说无取。
现代文：编年的文体，言显义繁，丘明传承洙泗儒家风格，公羊禀受西河人卜商的学问，铎椒的解说比配不上，瑕丘江公的解说不可取。
English: The style of the chronicle, the words show the meaning of the words, the Qiu Ming inherits the Confucian style, the ram is influenced by the learning of the West River people and merchants, the explanation of the pepper is not comparable, and the explanation of the Kechu River is not desirable.

古文：继踵胡母，仲舒云盛，因修《谷梁》，千秋最笃。
现代文：继承跟踵胡母生，董仲舒达到顶盛，因循《谷梁》，夏侯千秋最忠诚。
English: Succession followed Hu's mother and son, and Dong Zhongshu reached its peak. According to "Guliang," Xia Hou was the most loyal.

古文：张苍之传《左氏》，贾谊之袭荀卿，源本分镳，指归殊致，详略纷然，其来旧矣。
现代文：张苍传布《左传》，买谊承袭荀卿，起源相同而后人分道扬镳，主旨相殊，详略纷然，其来已久了。
English: Zhang Cang promulgated "Zhu Chuan" (Zhu Chuan), which was inherited by Zou Qing. The origin was the same, but later people went their separate ways. The theme was different, and the details were a bit confusing. It's been a long time coming.

古文：昔在弱年，乃经研味，一从遗置，迄将五纪。
现代文：过去年少时，便经常研味，一旦遣置，竟快六十年。
English: When he was young in the past, he often studied the taste of rice. Once he was discharged, it was almost sixty years.

古文：兼晚冬晷促，机事罕暇，夜分求衣，未遑搜括。
现代文：兼有晚冬光短促，处理机事很少有空暇，有时还要夜半起床，所以没有时间搜括。
English: Due to the short daylight in late winter, there is little time to deal with things, and sometimes you have to get up in the middle of the night, so there is no time to search.

古文：须待夏景，试取推寻，若温故可求，别酬所问也。 
现代文：须待夏，试取推寻，若温故有新解，再酬答所问。 
English: It is necessary to wait for the summer, try to find a solution, if there is a new solution, then answer the question.

古文：太清二年，侯景乱，之遴避难还乡，未至，卒于夏口，时年七十二。
现代文：太清二年，侯景叛乱，之遴避难返回家乡，未至，在夏口去世，时年七十二岁。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, when Houjing rebelled, he chose to take refuge and returned to his hometown. Before he arrived, he died in Xiakou at the age of seventy-two.

古文：前后文集五十卷，行于世。
现代文：前后有文集五十卷，流传于世。
English: There are around fifty volumes of the anthology, which have been handed down to the world.

古文：之亨字嘉会，之遴弟也。
现代文：之亨字嘉会，是之遴的弟弟。
English: Zhiheng Zi Jia Hui is the younger brother of Zizhu Zhan.

古文：少有令名。
现代文：年轻时有美名。
English: He was famous when he was young.

古文：举秀才，拜太学博士，稍迁兼中书通事舍人，步兵校尉，司农卿。
现代文：举秀才，授太学博士，稍迁兼任中书通事舍人，步兵校尉，司农卿。
English: He was awarded the title of "Distinguished Scholar," conferred the title of "Doctor of Science," and concurrently held the posts of "Secretary of the General Office of the People's Republic of China," "Infantry Lieutenant," and "Minister of Agriculture."

古文：又代兄之遴为安西湘东王长史、南郡太守。
现代文：又代兄之遴任安西湘束王长史、南郡太守。
English: In addition, his brother's successor, Wang Changshi of Hunan Province, was appointed governor of Nan County.

古文：在郡有异绩。
现代文：在郡有突出的政绩。
English: He has a distinguished record in county politics.

古文：数年卒于官，时年五十。
现代文：数年后在官任上去世，时年五十岁。
English: He died in office a few years later, aged 50.

古文：荆士至今怀之，不忍斥其名，号为 大南郡 、 小南郡 云。
现代文：荆地人至今怀念他，不忍直呼其名，便称他俩 大南郡 、 小南郡 。
English: People in Jing still remember him fondly. They can't bear to call him by his first name, so they call the two of them Dainan County and Xiaonan County.

古文：许懋，字昭哲，高阳新城人，魏镇北将军允九世孙。
现代文：许懋字昭哲，是高阳新城人，魏朝镇北将军许允的九世孙。
English: Xu Rongzhi Zhaozhe, a native of Gaoyang New Town, was the ninth-generation grandson of the Wei Dynasty general Xu Yun.

古文：祖珪，宋给事中，著作郎，桂阳太守。
现代文：祖父许珪，在宋朝任给事中，著作郎，桂阳太守。
English: Grandfather Xu Xi, in the Song Dynasty, was appointed to the post, the author's son, the governor of Guiyang.

古文：父勇惠，齐太子家令，冗从仆射。
现代文：父亲许勇慧，在齐朝任太子家令，冗从仆射。
English: Her father, Xu Yonghui, served as a prince in the Qi Dynasty and was a diligent servant.

古文：懋少孤，性至孝，居父忧，执丧过礼。
现代文：许懋年少时父亲去世，生性极孝，在为父亲服丧时，守孝超过常礼。
English: His father died when he was very young, and he was very filial by nature. When he was in mourning for his father, his filial piety exceeded the usual rituals.

古文：笃志好学，为州党所称。
现代文：笃志好学，被乡里称赞。
English: He was praised by the village for his eagerness to learn.

古文：十四入太学，受《毛诗》，旦领师说，晚而覆讲，座下听者常数十百人，因撰《风雅比兴义》十五卷，盛行于世。
现代文：十四岁入太学，从师学《毛诗》，清晨领受老师的说解，傍晚便能复讲，座下听讲的人常有数十百，因此编撰《风雅比兴义》十五卷，盛传于世。
English: At the age of fourteen, he entered Taigaku, learned "Mao Poetry" from his teacher, received the teacher's explanation in the morning, and was able to repeat the lecture in the evening. There are often tens of hundreds of people listening to the lecture, so he compiled fifteen volumes of "Fuyabi Xingyi," which has been passed down to the world.

古文：尤晓故事，称为仪注之学。
现代文：尤其通晓旧事，称之为仪注学。
English: In particular, they are well versed in ancient history, which is called the study of etiquette.

古文：起家后军豫章王行参军，转法曹，举茂才，迁骠骑大将军仪同中记室。
现代文：起家任后军豫章王行参军，转任法曹，举茂才，迁任骠骑大将军仪同中记室。
English: After the founding of the army, Yu Zhang Wang Xing joined the army, was transferred to the legal assistant, promoted to Shao Cai, and moved to the cavalry general's office.

古文：文惠太子闻而召之，侍讲于崇明殿，除太子步兵校尉。
现代文：文惠太子闻其名而召见他，让他在崇明殿侍讲，授太子步兵校尉。
English: When his name became known, the Crown Prince Wen Hui summoned him and had him attend a lecture at the Chongming Palace. He was awarded the title of Prince Infantry Captain.

古文：永元中，转散骑侍郎，兼国子博士。
现代文：永元年间，转任散骑侍郎，兼国子博士。
English: In the first year of the Eisho era, he was transferred to the post of Sanzhiyajiro, concurrently serving as Kuniko hakase.

古文：与司马褧同志友善，仆射江祏甚推重之，号为 经史笥 。
现代文：与司马装志同友好，仆射江柘极推重他，称他 经史笥 。
English: He was like-minded and friendly with Sima Zhuang, and he was highly respected by his subordinates, who called him Zheng Shijie.

古文：天监初，吏部尚书范云举懋参详五礼，除征西鄱阳王谘议，兼著作郎，待诏文德省。
现代文：天监初年，吏部尚书范云举荐许懋酌定五礼，授征西鄱阳王谘议，兼著作郎，待韶文德省。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, the personnel department recommended Shang Shufangyun to be recommended to be awarded the Five Rites, to be awarded the King of Xishuangyang for consultation, and to be a writer, and to be appointed to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：时有请封会稽禅国山者，高祖雅好礼，因集儒学之士，草封禅仪，将欲行焉。
现代文：当时有人奏请在会稽筑坛祭天，在国山辟基祭地，高祖雅好礼仪，便召集儒学人士，草拟封挥礼仪，将要举行封襻事。
English: At that time, someone requested that the construction of the altar and the sacrificial heavens be carried out in the meeting, and the foundation of the sacrificial ground be set up on the national mountain. Gao Zu had a good etiquette, so Confucian scholars were convened to draft the sealing ceremony, and the sealing ceremony was to be held.

古文：懋以为不可，因建议曰：
现代文：许懋认为不能举行此事，就建议说：
English: Xu Rong thought that the event could not be held, so he suggested:

古文：臣案舜幸岱宗，是为巡狩，而郑引《孝经钩命决》云 封于泰山，考绩柴燎，禅乎梁甫，刻石纪号 。
现代文：臣查考舜幸临岱宗，是为了视察邦国州郡，而郑玄引《孝经钩命决》说是 在泰山祭天，考核官吏的政绩烧柴祭天，在梁甫祭地，刻石记号 。
English: Zheng Xuan quoted "The Book of Filial Piety" as saying that in Mount Taishan, officials should offer sacrifices to heaven, while in the Liangfu Temple, they should carve stone marks.

古文：此纬书之曲说，非正经之通义也。
现代文：这是纬书的曲说，不是正经的通义。
English: This is a literary allusion, not a literal translation.

古文：依《白虎通》云， 封者，言附广也；禅者，言成功相传也 。
现代文：依《白虎通的说法， 封，是将刚死的人与祖先合葬之祭；禅，是说成功相传 。
English: According to "The Tale of the White Tiger," "Feng" is the ritual of burying the newly dead with their ancestors; "Zen" is the passing down of success.

古文：若以禅授为义，则禹不应传启至桀十七世也，汤又不应传外丙至纣三十七世也。
现代文：如果以禅授解释，则禹不应传授启至桀十七世而灭亡，汤不应传授外丙至纣三十七世而灭亡。
English: If the interpretation is based on Zen teachings, then Yu should not have taught Kai to the 37th generation and perished, and Tang should not have taught Gaibi to the 37th generation and perished.

古文：又《礼记》云： 三皇禅奕奕，谓盛德也。
现代文：又《礼记》说： 三皇在奕奕山祭地，称为盛德。
English: Also, "Li Ji" said: The three emperors are at the Yiyi Mountain festival site, known as Shengde.

古文：五帝禅亭亭，特立独起于身也。
现代文：五帝在亭亭山祭地，是特立独自起身。
English: The Five Emperors stood up alone at the Tingting Mountain Festival Grounds.

古文：三王禅梁甫，连延不绝，父没子继也。 
现代文：三王在梁甫祭地，是为了连延不断绝，父没子继。 
English: The three kings are at the Liang Fu Festival Grounds in order to perpetuate the line of succession. The father has no son.

古文：若谓 禅奕奕为盛德者，古义以伏羲、神农、黄帝，是为三皇。
现代文：如果说在奕奕山祭地称为盛德，古代以伏羲、神农、黄帝称为三皇。
English: If it is said that Shengde is called Shengde in the Yiyishan Festival, Fuxi, Shennong and Huangdi were called the Three Emperors in ancient times.

古文：伏羲封泰山，禅云云，黄帝封泰山，禅亭亭，皆不禅奕奕，而云盛德，则无所寄矣。
现代文：然而伏羲在泰山祭天，云云山祭地，黄帝在泰山祭天，亭亭山祭地，都不是在奕奕山祭地，那么称作盛德，则没有依据。
English: However, Fuxi in the Mount Tai Festival, Yunyun Mountain Festival, Huangdi in the Mount Tai Festival, and Tingting Mountain Festival are not in the Mount Yi Festival, so there is no basis for calling it Shengde.

古文：若谓五帝禅亭亭，特立独起于身者，颛顼封泰山，禅云云，帝喾封泰山，禅云云，尧封泰山，禅云云，舜封泰山，禅云云，亦不禅亭亭，若合黄帝以为五帝者，少昊即黄帝子，又非独立之义矣。
现代文：如果说五帝在亭亭山祭地，是特立独自起身，然而颛顼在泰山祭天，云云山祭地，帝医在泰山祭天，云云山祭地，尧在泰山祭天，云云山祭地，舜在泰山祭天，在云云山祭地，都不在亭亭山祭地，如果加上黄帝就是五帝，少吴是黄帝儿子，又不是独立的意思。
English: If it is said that the Five Emperors stood up alone at the Tingting Mountain Festival, however, the Five Emperors stood up alone at the Taishan Festival, the Yunyun Mountain Festival, the Imperial Physician stood up at the Taishan Festival, the Yunyun Mountain Festival, the Five Emperors stood up at the Taishan Festival, the Yunyun Mountain Festival, the Five Emperors stood up at the Taishan Festival, the Yunyun Mountain Festival, and the Five Emperors stood up alone at the Tingting Mountain Festival. If the Yellow Emperor is added, it is the Five Emperors, and Shao Wu is the son of the

古文：若谓三王禅梁甫，连延不绝，父没子继者，禹封泰山，禅云云，周成王封泰山，禅社首，旧书如此，异乎《礼说》，皆道听所得，失其本文。
现代文：如果说三王在梁甫祭地，是为了连延不断，父死子继，然而禹在泰山祭天，云云山祭地，且鱼廷在画山祭天，这苴祭地，旧书这样记载，与《礼说》说法有不同，造皆是得之道听，失去本意。
English: If it is said that the three kings are at the Liangfu Festival in order to perpetuate the succession of father and son, but Yu is at the Taishan Festival, the Yunyun Mountain Festival, and Yu Ting is at the Painting Mountain Festival, the old book records that this kind of festival is different from the "Rite of Spring" saying. All things are made to be heard, and lose their original intention.

古文：假使三王皆封泰山禅梁甫者，是为封泰山则有传世之义，禅梁甫则有揖让之怀，或欲禅位，或欲传子，义既矛盾，理必不然。
现代文：假使三王皆在泰山祭天梁甫山祭地，这是在泰山祭天有传世的意义，在梁甫山祭地有让位贤者的胸怀，但或想禅位，或想传子，两意相矛盾，这个道理必不是这样。
English: Assuming that the three kings all came to the Liangfushan Festival in the Taishan Festival day, this is because the Taishan Festival day has the significance of passing down to the next generation, and the Liangfushan Festival day has the mind of a sage who wants to give up his position. However, this is not the case.

古文：又七十二君，夷吾所记，此中世数，裁可得二十余主：伏羲、神农、女娲、大庭、柏皇、中央、栗陆、骊连、赫胥、尊卢、混沌、昊英、有巢、硃襄、葛天、阴康、无怀、黄帝、少昊、颛顼、高辛、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，中间乃有共工，霸有九州，非帝之数，云何得有七十二君封禅之事？
现代文：又七十二个君主，夷吾所记，此中世数，才可得二十多主名，这就是：伏羲、神农、女娲、大庭、柏皇、中央、栗陆、骊连、赫胥、尊卢、混沌、昊英、有巢、硃襄、葛天、阴康、无怀、黄帝、少昊、颛顼、高辛、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，中间还有共工，称霸九州，不算帝王数列，如何说有七十二君封禅的事情?
English: Another seventy-two monarchs, according to the records of the Middle Ages, were able to obtain more than twenty main names. These are: Fuxi, Shennong, Niang, Datu, Bao, Chuo, Li, Qilian, He, Zonglu, Chaos, Hao Ying, Yixing, Juxiang, Ge Tian, Yin Kang, Wuhai, Huangdi, Shao Hao, Yao, Gao Xin, Yao, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu. In the middle, there are co-workers who dominate Kyushu, not counting the number of emperors. How can we say that there are seventy-two kings of

古文：且燧人以前至周之世，未有君臣，人心淳朴，不应金泥玉检，升中刻石。
现代文：而且燧人以前至周之世，没有君臣，人心淳朴，不应有封禅所用告天书函，祭天告成而刻石。
English: Moreover, there were no princes and ministers in the Zhou dynasty, and the people were simple-hearted. There should not have been a letter to the heavens used to seal the Zen, and a stone carved with a prayer to the heavens.

古文：燧人、伏羲、神农三皇结绳而治，书契未作，未应有镌文告成。
现代文：燧人、伏羲、神农三皇是用绳子打结为记事的方法治理国家，没有文字，不应有镑文记载告成的事情。
English: The three emperors, Xianren, Fuxi, and Shennong, governed the country by tying knots with ropes as a method of record-keeping. There was no written language, and there should not have been any written record of things that had been accomplished.

古文：且无怀氏，伏羲后第十六主，云何得在伏羲前封泰山禅云云？
现代文：而且无怀氏，是伏羲之后第十六位君主，他怎能在伏羲前封泰山禅云云呢?
English: Moreover, since Muhuai was the sixteenth monarch after Fuxi, how could he seal Mount Tai before Fuxi?

古文：夷吾又曰： 惟受命之君然后得封禅。 
现代文：台至又说： 祇有受天命开创天下的君主才能封禅。 
English: Taizhi also said: Only a monarch who is destined to create the world can seal Zen.

古文：周成王非受命君，云何而得封泰山禅社首？
现代文：周成王不是受命的君主，怎能够封泰山禅社首?
English: If Zhou Cheng Wang is not an appointed monarch, how can he be named the head of Mount Tai Zen Community?

古文：神农与炎帝是一主，而云神农封泰山禅云云，炎帝封泰山禅云云，分为二人，妄亦甚矣！
现代文：神农与炎帝是一人，而说云神农封泰山禅云云，炎帝封叁山禅五云，分成二人，荒诞过分了。
English: Shennong and Yan Di are one person, but to say that Shennong was given Mount Tai, Zen, and Yan Di was given Mount Lushan, Zen, and divided into two people is too absurd.

古文：若是圣主，不须封禅；若是凡主，不应封禅。
现代文：如果是圣主，不须封禅；如果是凡主，不应封惮。
English: If it is the Lord, there is no need to seal Zen; if it is the Lord, it should not be sealed.

古文：当是齐桓欲行此事，管仲知其不可，故举怪物以屈之也。
现代文：当时变担想举行此事，知其不可行，便举出怪异的事情制止他。
English: At that time, he wanted to hold the event, but when he realized that it was not feasible, he cited strange things to stop him.

古文：秦始皇登泰山中坂，风雨暴至，休松树下，封为五大夫，而事不遂。
现代文：秦始皇登泰山，在山坡中，来了暴风雨，在松树下休息，封松树为五大夫，没有登上山顶。
English: Qin Shihuang ascended Mount Tai, in the mountainside, the storm came, rested under the pine trees, sealed the pine trees as the five great men, did not climb to the top of the mountain.

古文：汉武帝宗信方士，广召儒生，皮弁搢绅，射牛行事，独与霍嬗俱上，既而子侯暴卒，厥足用伤。
现代文：汉武帝宗信方士，广召儒生，加冠士大夫，射牛祭天地，独与霍嬗上泰尘，不久霍擅暴死，足使他伤心。
English: Hanwu Emperor Zong believed in fortune-tellers, widely called for Confucianism students, crowned doctors, bull-shooting festival heaven and earth, alone with Huo Zong on the Thai dust, soon Huo Zong died violently, which made him sad.

古文：至魏明，使高堂隆撰其礼仪，闻隆没，叹息曰： 天不欲成吾事，高生舍我亡也。 
现代文：至魏明童使高堂隆撰拟封惮礼仪，听到直盘死了，叹息说： 天不想成就吾事，高生舍我而亡。 
English: When Wei Ming Tong asked Gao Tonglong to draft the seal-making etiquette, upon hearing that Zhitan had died, he sighed and said, "The heavens didn't want to accomplish my task, and Gao Sheng passed away without me."

古文：晋武泰始中欲封禅，乃至太康议犹不定，意不果行。
现代文：年间想封禅，年间议论还不能定，最终未能实行。
English: During the year they wanted to seal Zen, but during the year the discussion could not be settled, and in the end it could not be implemented.

古文：孙皓遣兼司空董朝、兼太常周处至阳羡封禅国山。此朝君子，有何功德？
现代文：孙皓遣兼司空、兼太常且尘到区董封挥玺山。这些国君，有什么功德?
English: Sun Yat-sen dispatched concurrently the Empress Dowager Kuo and Empress Dowager Jian to Dongfeng and Shaoshan. What were the merits of these sovereigns?

古文：不思古道而欲封禅，皆是主好名于上，臣阿旨于下也。
现代文：不想想古道而想封挥，皆是在上的君主好名，在下的臣子迎旨。
English: They don't want to think about the ancient way, but want to wave the flag. All of them are the good name of the monarch on the top, and the courtiers on the bottom welcome the order.

古文：夫封禅者，不出正经，惟《左传》说 禹会诸侯于涂山，执玉帛者万国 ，亦不谓为封禅。
现代文：封惮一事，正经中无记载，衹有《左传》说 区在涂山舆诸侯会盟，执玉帛的有万国 ，也不称作封禅。
English: There is no record of the sealing in the Zhengxing, but "Zhuan" says that the district is in the Tuishan Princes Association, and there are countries holding the Jade Scepter, nor is it called the sealing of Zen.

古文：郑玄有参、柴之风，不能推寻正经，专信纬候之书，斯为谬矣。
现代文：郑玄有曾参、高基愚钝之风，不能研究正经，专相信纬候之书，这是很荒谬的。
English: It is absurd that Zheng Xuan has the style of Zeng Zang and Gao Ji Dumb, unable to study the sutras, and only believes in the Book of Decrees.

古文：盖《礼》云 因天事天，因地事地，因名山升中于天，因吉土享帝于郊 。
现代文：《礼记》： 因天体之高在高处祭天，地体卑下，在卑下之处以祭地，在名山祭天上告成功，因所卜吉土祭五方之帝于郊外。 
English: "Rites and Rituals": Due to the height of the celestial bodies, the heavens were sacrificed in high places, the earth was humbled, and the lowly places were sacrificed, the famous mountains were successfully sacrificed to the heavens, and the gods of the five directions were sacrificed in the suburbs due to the Sobukichi earth festival.

古文：燔柴岱宗，即因山之谓矣。故《曲礼》云 天子祭天地 是也。
现代文：在岱宗将祭品用柴烧焚以祭天，就是所说的因山祭祀天地。因此《曲礼》说： 天子祭天地 。
English: In the Qizong sect, the sacrificial offerings were burned with firewood to offer sacrifices to heaven, which is called offering sacrifices to heaven and earth because of the mountain. Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says: It is better to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth because of the mountain.

古文：又祈谷一，报谷一，礼乃不显祈报地，推文则有。
现代文：又向天祈求谷物丰熟的祭祀一次，报告谷物丰熟的祭祀一次，礼不明显说向地祈报谷的祭祀。推求文意还是有的。
English: There is also a ritual of praying to the heavens for a plentiful supply of grain, a ritual of reporting a plentiful supply of grain, and a ritual of praying to the earth for a plentiful supply of grain.

古文：《乐记》云： 大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节；和故百物不失，节故祀天祭地。 
现代文：《乐记》说： 大乐与天地同和，大礼与天地同节；同和所以百物不失，同节所以祭祀天地。 
English: "Lecture on Music" says: Great music is in harmony with heaven and earth, and great ritual is in harmony with heaven and earth; harmony is the reason why a hundred things are not lost, and harmony is the reason why heaven and earth are worshipped.

古文：百物不失者，天生之，地养之。故知地亦有祈报，是则一年三郊天，三祭地。
现代文：百物不失去的原因，是天生它，地养它，所以知道对地也有祈报谷的祭祀，这样就是一年三次祭天，三次祭地。
English: The reason why the hundred things are not lost is that they are born and nurtured by the earth, so we know that the earth also has the ritual of praying for the valley, so there are three times a year to sacrifice heaven and three times to sacrifice the earth.

古文：《周官》有员丘方泽者，总为三事，郊祭天地。
现代文：《周官》有员丘方泽祭祀，总为三事，郊祭天地，所以《小宗伯》说： 在四郊设坛祭祀五方天帝。 
English: "Zhou Guan" had a member who said that there were three parts to the Fangze ritual, and that the suburb ritual was the most important. Therefore, "Little Zongbo" said: Set up an altar to worship the Five Heavenly Emperors in the four suburbs.

古文：《大宗伯》 国有大故则旅上帝 ，《月令》云 仲春玄鸟至，祀于高禖 ，亦非常祭。故《诗》云 克禋克祀，以弗无子 。
现代文：此为九祭，也都是正经上的意义。至于在南郊举行大旅祭，不是常祭，《大宗伯》 国家有大事情举行大旅祭上帝 。《月令》说 春二月，燕子至，祭祀梅神 ，也不是常祭，因此《诗》说 在郊外祭天，在梅神前行礼，想要除去没有儿子的不祥 。
English: As for the Great Pilgrimage Festival held in the southern suburbs, it is not a regular festival. "Great Uncle" The country has a big event to hold a great pilgrimage festival to God. "Lunar Calendar" says that in spring and February, when swallows arrive, they will worship the plum god, and it is not a regular festival. Therefore, "Poem" says that in the suburbs, they will worship the sky and bow before the plum god, in order to remove the bad luck of not having a son.

古文：并有雩祷，亦非常祭。《礼》云 雩，頠水旱也 。
现代文：还有求雨的雩祭，也不是常祭，《礼》说 雩，禳除水旱灾 。
English: There is also a burnt offering for rain, but it is not a regular offering. "Rite" says, "Let it rain, let it rain to end the drought."

古文：是为合郊天地有三，特郊天有九，非常祀又有三。
现代文：是为合祭天地有三，特祭天有九，非常祀又有三。
English: There are three days for the closing ceremony, nine days for the special ceremony, and three days for the memorial service.

古文：《孝经》云： 宗祀文王于明堂，以配上帝。 
现代文：《孝经》说： 在明堂庙祭文王，是以他配享上帝。 
English: "The Book of Filial Piety" says: "In Myeongdong Temple, the king of literature is worshipped, and it is he who is worthy of God.

古文：雩祭与明堂虽是祭天，而不在郊，是为天祀有十六，地祭有三，惟大禘祀不在此数。
现代文：雩祭舆明堂庙祭虽是祭天，但不在郊外，是为天祀有十六，地祭有三。惟有大樯祀不在此敷。
English: Although the Umeido temple festival is a festival of the heavens, it is not held in the suburbs. There are sixteen shrines for the heavens and three for the earth. Only the main shrine is not located here.

古文：《大传》云： 王者禘其祖之所自出，以其祖配之。 
现代文：《大传》说： 王者宗庙大祭其始祖，以他的祖先配享天。 
English: "Great Biography" says: The grand festival of the king's ancestral temple is the ancestor, and he shares the heaven with his ancestors.

古文：异于常祭，以故云大于时祭。
现代文：这又异于常祭，因此说它大于时祭。
English: This is different from the regular festival, so it is said to be greater than the seasonal festival.

古文：案《系辞》云： 《易》之为书也，广大悉备。
现代文：查考系辞》说： 《易》逭部书，内容博深完备。
English: "College Entrance Examination" said: "Yi" is a short book, the content is profound and complete.

古文：有天道焉，有地道焉，有人道焉，兼三才而两之，故六。
现代文：有天道，有地道，有人道，兼有这三才再加重复，所以成为六爻。
English: There is the heavenly way, the earthly way, and the human way, and these three can only be repeated, so they become six.

古文：六者非佗，三才之道也。 
现代文：六爻不是别的，是三才之道。 
English: Six times is nothing else but the way of three talents.

古文：《乾·彖》云： 大哉乾元，万物资始，乃统天。
现代文：《干彖》说： 盛大呀天的元气，万物凭藉它而生，是属于天。
English: "Kanzhao" said: "The grand energy of heaven, through which all things are born, belongs to heaven.

古文：云行雨施，品物流形，大明终始，六位时成。 
现代文：干能用天地之德使云气流行，雨泽施布，事物的种类变动成形，日月始终照耀，上下四方的方位于是形成。 
English: The virtue of heaven and earth is used to make clouds popular, rain and sleet spread, the types of things change and form, the sun and the moon always shine, and the square is formed.

古文：此则应六年一祭，坤元亦尔。
现代文：造就应该是六年一祭天，地德也是这样。
English: Cultivation should be six years and one sacrifice a day, and the same applies to virtue.

古文：诚敬之道，尽此而备。
现代文：真诚恭敬的道理，在逭全部具备。
English: The principles of sincerity and respect are all present in our company.

古文：至于封禅，非所敢闻。
现代文：至于封禅的事情，不是敢听闻的。
English: As for the matter of the seal of Zen, it is not something one dares to hear.

古文：高祖嘉纳之，因推演懋议，称制旨以答，请者由是遂停。十年，转太子家令。
现代文：赞许采纳了他的意见，因此推演许懋的意思，代称皇帝下旨回答求封挥的人，这些人便不再请求了。十年，转任太子家令。
English: Zhan Xie accepted his opinion, so he deduced Xu Xuan's meaning and said that the person who answered the emperor's order and asked for a seal was no longer requested. Ten years later, he was transferred to the prince's household.

古文：宋、齐旧仪，郊天祀帝，皆用衮冕，至天监七年，懋始请造大裘。
现代文：宋、齐朝的旧礼仪，祭天祀帝皆穿绣龙的礼服戴着礼帽，到了天监七年，董銮第一个提出应穿黑羊羔皮衣祭天。
English: In the Song and Qi dynasties, the old etiquette of sacrificing to the heavens and worshiping the emperor was to wear a dragon-embroidered gown and a ceremonial hat. When he was seven years old, Dong Xi was the first to suggest that he should wear a black lambskin garment to sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：至是，有事于明堂，仪注犹云 服衮冕 。
现代文：但到现在，在明堂有祭祀时，仪注还是说 服衮冕 。
English: But to this day, when there is a religious service in the Ming Hall, the etiquette still says to wear a crown.

古文：懋駮云： 《礼》云 大裘而冕，祀昊天上帝亦如之。 良由天神尊远，须贵诚质。
现代文：许懋驳斥说： 《礼记》 大裘而冕，祀天与上帝也是这样，的确是天神尊贵高速，必须对他忠诚质朴。
English: Xu Xi refuted: "The Book of Rites" is a big joke, and so is the worship of heaven and God. It is true that God is honorable, and we must be loyal and simple to him.

古文：今泛祭五帝，理不容文。 
现代文：今泛祭五帝，道理上不应是文字记载的这样。 
English: Now the Pan Festival of the Five Emperors, in principle, should not be written in such a way.

古文：改服大裘，自此始也。
现代文：祭祀改穿大裘，是从这开始的。
English: This was the beginning of the change of attire for religious services.

古文：又降敕问： 凡求阴阳，应各从其类，今雩祭燔柴，以火祈水，意以为疑。 
现代文：皇帝又下旨问： 凡是用阴阳解释万物化生，应该各自跟从它的类别，现在雩祭时燔柴，用火祈求水，我对这样做有疑问。 
English: The emperor further asked, "Whenever yin and yang are used to explain the transformation of all things into life, each should follow its category. Now, I have doubts about chopping wood at the time of offering sacrifices and using fire to pray for water.

古文：懋答曰： 雩祭燔柴，经无其文，良由先儒不思故也。
现代文：许懋回答说： 雩祭燔柴逭件事，经书上没有记载，的确是儒生没有思考就这样说。
English: Xu Yao replied: "There is no record in the scriptures about the matter of the burnt offering and the burning of the wood. It is true that Confucius said this without thinking.

古文：按周宣《云汉》之诗曰： 上下奠瘗，靡神不宗。 毛注云： 上祭天，下祭地，奠其币，瘗其物。 以此而言，为旱而祭天地，并有瘗埋之文，不见有燔柴之说。
现代文：查考周宣王《云汉诗》说： 上下祭天地，设置酒食在地下，把玉块埋入土中，没有一个神道不尊敬的，毛公注解说： 上祭天，下祭地，地上设置货币，埋葬祭品，按照这个说法，为天旱而祭天地，并且有埋葬祭品的文字，但不见有燔柴的说法。
English: An examination of Zhou Xuan Wang's "Yun Han Shi" says: There is no one in Shintoism who does not respect the offering of heaven and earth, the placing of food and wine underground, and the burying of jade blocks in the ground. Mao Gong's commentary explains: The offering of heaven and earth, the offering of land, the placing of money on the ground, and the burying of offerings. According to this theory, heaven and earth are sacrificed for the sake of drought, and there is a description of the burial of offerings, but there is no mention of the burning of wood.

古文：若以祭五帝必应燔柴者，今明常之礼，又无其事。
现代文：如果说祭五帝必应燔柴的事情，但今明堂祭祀的礼仪，又没有燔柴这事。
English: If it is said that the Five Emperors' Festival should be accompanied by the offering of firewood, but the ritual of this year's Myeongdong Festival does not include the offering of firewood.

古文：且《礼》又云 埋少牢以祭时 ，时之功是五帝，此又是不用柴之证矣。
现代文：而且《礼记》又说 埋葬羊猪祭时 ，四时的功德是五帝，这又是祭祀不用燔柴的证据。
English: Moreover, "Li Ji" also says that when burying the sheep and pig sacrifice, the four-hour merit is the Five Emperors, which is evidence that the sacrificial rites do not use firewood.

古文：昔雩坛在南方正阳位，有乖求神；而已移于东，实柴之礼犹未革。
现代文：昔雩祭设坛在南方正阳位，对求神的事情有不妥；而现在已移至东方，但燔柴的礼仪没有改正。
English: In the past, the altar for the firecracker festival was set up in the south at the zhengyang position, which was not suitable for praying to the gods; but now it has been moved to the east, but the etiquette for lighting the firecracker has not been corrected.

古文：请停用柴，其牲牢等物，悉从坎瘗，以符周宣《云汉》之说。 
现代文：请雩祭时停止燔柴，祭祀用的牲牢等物，全部埋葬在坑裹，这样做才符合周宣王《云汉诗》的说法。 
English: It is only in accordance with Zhou Xuan Wang's "Wan Han Shi" that the burning of firewood should be stopped at the time of offering the sacrificial offering, and the animal dungeons and other objects used for the sacrifice should all be buried in a pit.

古文：诏并从之。
现代文：下韶全听从他的意见。
English: The lower jaws obeyed his every command.

古文：凡诸礼仪，多所刊正。
现代文：凡是各种礼仪，他都校正了许多错误。
English: He corrected many mistakes in all kinds of etiquette.

古文：以足疾出为始平太守，政有能名。
现代文：因脚病出任始平太守，施政有能干的声誉。
English: Due to a foot ailment, he assumed the position of Shihira Taishou, and gained a reputation for competent governance.

古文：加散骑常侍，转天门太守。
现代文：加任散骑常侍，转任玉门太守。
English: He was also appointed as a samurai on horseback, and was later appointed as the governor of Taman.

古文：中大通三年，皇太子召诸儒参录《长春义记》。
现代文：中大通三年，皇太子召诸儒士参录《长春义记》。
English: In the third year of the junior high school, the crown prince called all the Confucian scholars to participate in the recording of "Changchun Yi Ji."

古文：四年，拜中庶子。
现代文：四年，授任中庶子。
English: Four years later, he was given the position of middle child.

古文：是岁卒，时年六十九。
现代文：当年去世，时年六十九岁。
English: He died that year, aged 69.

古文：撰《述行记》四卷，有集十五卷。
现代文：撰写《述行记》四卷，有文集十五卷。
English: He wrote four volumes of "Records of His Travels" and fifteen volumes of anthologies.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：司马褧儒术博通，到溉文义优敏，显、懋、之遴强学浃洽，并职经便繁，应对左右，斯盖严、硃之任焉。
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察说：司马褧博通儒术，到溉文章的内容博洽通达，刘显、许懋、之遴勤勉学习，能融会贯通，并且职位虽低但熟悉繁多的事情，在皇帝左右酬应对答，这都是严助、朱博这类人的职任。
English: Yao Zha, an official of the Chen Dynasty, said: Sima Yan was well versed in Confucianism, the content of his articles was well-versed, Liu Xian and Xu Yao were diligent in their studies, and they were able to integrate and penetrate, and although their positions were low, they were familiar with a wide range of things, and they were paid according to the emperor's salary. These were all the duties of people like Yan Su and Zhu Bo.

古文：而溉、之遴遂至显贵，亟拾青紫；然非遇时，焉能致此仕也。
现代文：而且到溉、之遴很快显贵，立即穿上官服；但他们遇不到时机，哪能得到遣样的官职呀。
English: Moreover, when they arrive, they are quickly distinguished and immediately put on official uniforms; but if they don't have the opportunity, how can they get an official position?

