古文：李习之《答朱载言书》论文最为明白周尽，云： 《六经》创意造言，皆不相师。
现代文：李习之所写的《答朱载言书》，论述写文章最为明白、周到详尽。他在这篇文章中说： 《诗经》、《书经》、《礼记》、《乐经》、《易》、《春秋》六经，立意用语，各有特点，富于创造，不相互仿效引用。
English: Li Xizhi's "Answer to Zhu Cangyongshu" is the clearest and most detailed exposition of writing. In this article, he said: "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Rites," "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Changes," "The Book of Changes" and "The Book of Spring and Autumn" are six scriptures, each with its own characteristics, rich in creativity, and do not follow each other.

古文：故其读《春秋》也，如未尝有《诗》也；其读《诗》也，如未尝有《易》也；其读《易》也，如未尝有《书》也；其读屈原、庄周也，如未尝有《六经》也。
现代文：所以在读《春秋》的时候，就见不到其中有引用《诗经》的。在读《诗经》的时候，就见不到其中有引用《易经》的，在读《易经》的时候，就见不到其中有引用《书经》的。甚至，在读月屈原、庄周的著作的时候，也见不到其中有引用《六经》的。
English: Therefore, when reading "Spring and Autumn," you will not see any references to the "Book of Songs." When reading the "Book of Songs," you will not see any references to the "Book of Changes." When reading the "Book of Changes," you will not see any references to the "Book of Books." Even when reading the works of Yue Qu Yuan and Zhuang Zhou, you will not see any references to the "Six Classics."

古文：如山有岱、华、嵩、衡焉，其同者高也，其草木之荣，不必均也。如渎有济、淮、河、江焉，其同者出源到海也，其曲直浅深，不必均也。
现代文：譬如高山，有泰山、华山、嵩山、衡山，它们共同的一点是高大，至于说山上草木的茂盛如何，则是不完全相同的，又如河川，有济水、淮河、黄河、长江，它们共同的一点是从发源地流出，一归于大海，至于说河道的曲直，河水是深是浅，则是不完全相同的。
English: For example, there are high mountains, such as Mount Tai, Mount Hua, Mount Song and Mount Heng. What they have in common is that they are tall. As for how lush the plants and trees on the mountains are, they are not exactly the same. Also, there are rivers, such as Jishui, Huaihe, Yellow River and Yangtze River. What they have in common is that they flow out from the source and return to the sea. As for the straightness of the river, whether the river is deep or shallow, it is not exactly the same.

古文：天下之语文章有六说焉：其尚异者曰，文章词句，奇险而已；其好理者曰，文章叙意，苟通而已；溺于时者曰，文章必当对；病于时者曰，文章不当对；爱难者曰，宜深，不当易；爱易者曰，宜通，不当难。
现代文：现在评论文章，有六种说法有崇尚奇特的人说，文章语言词句，要奇特惊险；有喜好辨论的人说，文章叙事论理，要通顺流畅；有拘泥时尚的人说，文章必须讲求对仗；有厌恶时尚的人说，文章不应当讲求对仗；喜爱难的人说，主张文章应当难，而不应当浅显；喜爱容易的人则说，文童应当通顺不应当难。
English: Now, commenting on the article, there are six kinds of opinions: Some people who advocate peculiarity say that the article's language and sentences should be peculiar and thrilling; people who like to argue say that the article's narrative and reasoning should be smooth and fluent; people with rigid fashion say that the article must be about confrontation; people with aversion to fashion say that the article should not be about confrontation; people who like difficult say that the article should be difficult, but should not be obvious; people who like easy say that the literary children should be smooth and should not be difficult.

古文：此皆情有所偏滞，未识文章之所主也。义不深不至于理，而辞句怪丽者，有之矣，《剧秦美新》、王褒《僮约》是也。
现代文：这六种情形，都是由于人的情感喜怒爱好不同，未曾涉及文章的主题总旨，有的文章义理说得浮浅不透彻，但是词句离奇华美，像《剧秦美新》、王褒的《僮约》，便是如此。
English: These six cases are all due to the differences in people's emotions, likes and dislikes, and have not been related to the overall theme of the article. Some articles are shallow and imprecise, but the words are surprisingly beautiful, such as "Drama Qin Meixin" and Wang Bo's "Covenant."

古文：其理往往有是者，而词章不能工者有之矣，王氏《中说》、俗传《太公家教》是也。
现代文：有的文章讲道理讲得好，但是不注意修辞，语句粗劣，如王通的《中说》、俗传《太公家教》，便是如此。
English: Some articles are well reasoned, but do not pay attention to rhetoric, and the sentences are shoddy, such as Wang Tong's "Saying" and the folk tale "Taikong Jiaojiao."

古文：古之人能极于工而已，不知其辞之对与否、易与难也。 忧心悄悄，愠于群小 ，非对也； 遘闵既多，受侮不少 ，非不对也； 朕堲谗说殄行，震惊朕师 ， 菀彼桑柔，其下候旬，捋采其刘 ，非易也； 光被四表，格于上下 ， 十亩之间兮，桑者闲闲兮 ，非难也。
现代文：古时候的人，能够在语言文字上狠下一番工夫，但不大明白其词是对仗还是不对仗，是易还是难。 忧心悄悄，愠于群小 ，是不对仗。 遘闵既多，受侮不少 ，是对仗。 朕堲谗说殄行，震惊朕师 ， 菀彼桑柔，其下候旬，捋采其刘 ，是容易。而 光被四表，格于上下   十亩之间兮，桑者闲闲兮 ,是不容易。
English: In ancient times, people were able to put a lot of effort into language and writing, but they did not quite understand whether the words were for war or not for war, whether it was easy or difficult. Quietly worried, huddled in a small group, was not for war. There were a lot of complaints, a lot of insults, was for war. I said I was walking, shocked my teacher, it was easy to see the mulberry, its next season, and to pick up its Liu. But it was not easy to see the light by four tables, placed between the upper and lower ten mu, and the mulberry was idle.

古文：《六经》之后，百家之言兴，老聃、列、庄至于刘向、扬雄、皆自成一家之文，学者之所师归也。
现代文：自从《六经》出现之后，百家之言纷纷兴起，老耽、列子、庄子，以至于刘向、扬雄，在文坛上都自成一家，学习写文章的人，纷纷以他们为师。
English: Since the appearance of the "Six Classics," hundreds of writers have emerged, including Lao Tan, Lian Zi and Zhuang Zi, so that Liu Xiang and Yang Xiong have become a family of their own in the literary world. People who learn to write articles have taken them as their teachers.

古文：故义虽深，理虽当，词不工者不成文，宜不能传也。 
现代文：由此可见，有的文章虽然道理讲得很深，说理亦恰当，但是语言文字不好，不能成为好文章，亦不能传之于世。 
English: From this, it can be seen that some articles, although the reason is very deep and the reason is appropriate, but the language and characters are not good, can not become a good article, and can not be passed on to the world.

古文：其论于文者如此，后学宜志之。
现代文：李习之关于文章的论述，大致是这样，作为后学，应当注意他的这些论述。
English: Li Xi's exposition of the article is roughly as follows. As an afterthought, you should pay attention to his exposition.

