古文：孙吴奄有江左，亢衡中州，固本于策、权之雄略，然一时英杰，如周瑜、鲁肃、吕蒙、陆逊四人者，真所谓社稷心膂，与国为存亡之臣也。
现代文：孙氏的吴国包括江西一带，和中原抗衡，固然主要依靠孙策、孙权的雄图大略，然而当时的英雄豪杰，像周瑜、鲁肃、吕蒙、陆逊四个人，真是所谓的国家的心腹臂膀，和国家同存共亡的臣子。
English: Although Sun's Wu State, including the Jiangxi region and the Central Plains, was mainly dependent on Sun Ce and Sun Quan, the four heroes at that time, such as Zhou Yu, Rusu, Liumeng and Lu Xun, were truly the so-called "arm of the state" and the "vassals" who coexisted with the state.

古文：自古将帅，未尝不矜能自贤，疾胜己者，此诸贤则不然。
现代文：自古以来，将帅们没有不自以为贤能，妒忌比自己强的。这几位贤者却不然。
English: Since ancient times, generals have always considered themselves to be wise and capable, and jealousy has always been stronger than themselves. However, this is not the case with these wise men.

古文：孙权初掌事，肃欲北还，瑜止之，而荐之于权曰： 肃才宜佐时，当广求其比，以成功业。 
现代文：孙权刚执掌政务时，鲁肃打算返回北方，周瑜把他劝住，推荐给孙权说： 鲁肃的才能可以为时世的辅佐，应该广泛寻求像他这样的人，以成就功业。 
English: When Sun Quan was just taking over the government, Lu Su was planning to return to the north. Zhou Yu persuaded him to stay and recommended him to Sun Quan, saying, "Lu Su's talent can serve as a helper for the times, and people like him should be widely sought after to accomplish their feats.

古文：后瑜临终与权笺曰： 鲁肃忠烈，临事不苟，若以代瑜，死不朽矣！ 
现代文：后来，周瑜临终给孙权的信上说： 鲁肃忠诚刚正，遇到事情从不随便马虎，如果能代替我周瑜，我就死而不朽了！ 
English: Later, Zhou Yu said in his last letter to Sun Quan: "Luzhou is loyal and upright, and is never careless when it comes to things. If you can replace me, Zhou Yu, I will be immortal!

古文：肃遂代瑜典兵。
现代文：鲁肃就代替周瑜统帅军队。
English: Lu Su replaced Zhou Yu as the commander of the army.

古文：吕蒙为寻阳令，肃见之曰： 卿今者才略非复吴下阿蒙。 
现代文：吕蒙任寻阳令，鲁肃见到他说： 您今天的才能谋略不再是吴地时候的那个阿蒙了。 
English: When Lu Su saw him, he said, "Your talent and strategy today is no longer the same as when you were in Wu.

古文：遂拜蒙母，结友而别。
现代文：于是就去拜见吕蒙的母亲，和吕蒙结成朋友然后分别。
English: So he went to see Lymon's mother, became friends with Lymon and then separated.

古文：蒙遂亦代肃。
现代文：吕蒙后来也就代替了鲁肃。
English: Later, Liumeng also replaced Rusu.

古文：蒙在陆口，称疾还，权问： 谁可代者？ 
现代文：吕蒙在陆口，说是有病要回去，孙权问他： 谁是可以替代你的人？ 
English: When Lv Meng was in Lukou and said that he was ill and wanted to go back, Sun Quan asked him: Who is the person who can replace you?

古文：蒙曰： 陆逊意思深长，才堪负重，观其规虑，终可大任，无复是过也。 
现代文：吕蒙说： 陆逊的思想深刻高远，才能足以负起重责，看他的规划考虑，终究可以托付重任，别的人没有超过他的了。
English: Lv Meng said: Lu Xun's thoughts are profound and far-reaching, and his ability is sufficient to shoulder heavy responsibilities. According to his planning and consideration, he can ultimately be entrusted with heavy responsibilities. Other people have not surpassed him.

古文：逊遂代蒙。
现代文：陆逊就代替了吕蒙。
English: Lu Xun replaced Lv Meng.

古文：四人相继，居西边三四十年，为威名将，曹操、刘备、关羽皆为所挫，虽更相汲引，而孙权委心听之，吴之所以为吴，非偶然也。
现代文：四人一个接替一个，镇守吴国西方三、四十年，成为威名远扬的大将，曹操、刘备、关羽都被他们所打败，虽然他们是互相举荐的，但孙权能够放心地听从他们，吴国之所以成为吴国，这不是偶然的。
English: The four of them took over one after another, and guarded the western part of Wu for thirty or forty years, becoming renowned generals. Cao Cao, Liu Bei, and Guan Yu were all defeated by them. Although they recommended each other, Sun Quan was able to listen to them with confidence. It was no accident that Wu became Wu.

