古文：周公作《无逸》。
现代文：周公作《无逸》。
English: Zhou Gong's "No Escape."

古文：周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周公说： 啊！
English: Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：君子所，其无逸。
现代文：君子在位，切不可贪图享乐。
English: When a gentleman is on the throne, he must not be greedy for pleasure.

古文：先知稼穑之艰难，乃逸，则知小人之依。
现代文：要先了解耕种收获的艰难，如此处在逸乐的境地，就会知道老百姓的艰辛了。
English: If you first understand the hardships of farming and harvesting, you will know the hardships of the common people.

古文：相小人，厥父母勤劳稼穑，厥子乃不知稼穑之艰难，乃逸乃谚。
现代文：看那些百姓，他们的父母勤劳地耕种收获，他们的儿子却不知道耕种收获的艰难，便安逸的享受起来。
English: Look at those people, their parents diligently cultivate and harvest, but their sons do not know the hardships of cultivation and harvest, and they enjoy it comfortably.

古文：既诞，否则侮厥父母曰： 昔之人无闻知。  周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：时间久了，行为就会十分放肆，于是就轻视侮慢他们的父母说： 年纪大的人什么都不懂。  周公说： 啊！
English: After a long time, their behavior will be very reckless, so they despise and scorn their parents and say, "Older people don't know anything." Zhou Gong said, "Ah!

古文：我闻曰：昔在殷王中宗，严恭寅畏天命，自度治民，治民祗惧，弗敢荒宁。
现代文：我听说：过去殷王中宗，庆正敬畏，以天命作为自己的准则，治理百姓都是敬慎恐惧，从不敢懈怠，贪图享乐。
English: I heard: In the past, Yin Wang Zhongzong, Qing Zheng and fear, took the fate of heaven as his own standard, governed the people with caution and fear, never dared to slack off, and craved enjoyment.

古文：肆中宗之享国七十有五年。
现代文：所以中宗在位七十五年。
English: Therefore, Chujong reigned for seventy-five years.

古文：其在高宗，时旧劳于外，爰暨小人。
现代文：在高宗，这个人长期在外服役，惠爱老百姓。
English: In Gaozong, this person served abroad for a long time, benefiting the people.

古文：作其即位，乃或亮阴，三年不言。
现代文：等到他即位，便又听信冢宰沉默不言，三年不轻易说话。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he listened to the silence of the emperor and did not speak for three years.

古文：其惟不言，言乃雍。
现代文：因为他不轻易说话，有时说出来就能使人和悦。
English: Because he does not speak easily, sometimes speaking out can make people happy.

古文：不敢荒宁，嘉靖殷邦。
现代文：他不敢荒废、安逸，善于安定殷国。
English: He does not dare to be wasteful and comfortable, and is good at stabilizing the country.

古文：至于小大，无时或怨。
现代文：从老百姓到群臣，没有怨恨他的。
English: From the common people to the courtiers, no one resented him.

古文：肆高宗之享国五十年有九年。
现代文：所以高宗在位五十九年。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozong reigned for 59 years.

古文：其在祖甲，不义惟王，旧为小人。
现代文：在祖甲，他以为代兄称王不合情理，逃亡民间，做过很久的平民百姓。
English: In ZuJia, he thought it was unreasonable for his brother-in-law to call himself a king, fled the people, and had been a commoner for a long time.

古文：作其即位，爰知小人之依，能保惠于庶民，不敢侮鳏寡。
现代文：等到他即位后，就知道老百姓的痛苦，能够安定和爱护众民，对于鳏寡无依的人也不敢轻慢。
English: When he ascends to the throne, he will know the suffering of the common people, be able to stabilize and love all the people, and will not dare to despise the widows and the destitute.

古文：肆祖甲之享国三十有三年。
现代文：所以祖甲在位三十三年。
English: Therefore, Zu Jia reigned for 33 years.

古文：自时厥后，立王生则逸。生则逸，不知稼穑之艰难，不闻小人之劳，惟耽乐之从。
现代文：从这以后，在位的殷王生来就安闲逸乐，生来就安闲逸乐，不知耕种收获的艰难，不知老百姓的劳苦，只是追求过度的逸乐。
English: From then on, the reigning Yin Wang was born to leisure and pleasure. He was born to leisure and pleasure. He did not know the hardships of farming and harvesting, did not know the hardships of the common people, but only pursued excessive pleasure.

古文：自时厥后，亦罔或克寿。
现代文：从这以后，在位的殷王也没有能够长寿的。
English: From then on, the reigning Yin Wang did not live long.

古文：或十年，或七八年，或五六年，或四三年。 
现代文：有的十年，有的七、八年，有的五、六年，有的三、四年。 
English: Some ten years, some seven or eight years, some five or six years, some three or four years.

古文：周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周公说： 啊！
English: Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：厥亦惟我周太王、王季，克自抑畏。
现代文：只有我们周的太王、王季做事的时候谨慎小心。
English: Only our Zhou's great king, Wang Ji, was cautious and careful when doing things.

古文：文王卑服，即康功田功。
现代文：文王安于卑贱的工作，从事过开通道路、耕种田地的劳役。
English: Wen Wang'an worked in menial jobs, such as opening roads and cultivating fields.

古文：徽柔懿恭，怀保小民，惠鲜鳏寡。
现代文：他和蔼、仁慈、善良、恭敬，在他的治理下，百姓安居乐业。
English: He is kind, benevolent, good, and respectful. Under his rule, the people live in peace and happiness.

古文：自朝至于日中昃，不遑暇食，用咸和万民。
现代文：那是他总是从早晨到中午，到下午，他没有闲暇吃饭，要使万民生活和谐。
English: It was that he always worked from morning to noon, to the afternoon, he had no leisure to eat, to make the life of all people harmonious.

古文：文王不敢盘于游田，以庶邦惟正之共。
现代文：文王不敢乐于嬉游、田猎，不敢使众国只是进献赋税，供他享乐。
English: King Wen did not dare to enjoy pleasure trips and hunting in the fields, and did not dare to make the nations just pay taxes for him to enjoy.

古文：文王受命惟中身，厥享国五十年。 
现代文：文王中年受命为君，在位五十年。 
English: In his middle age, King Wen was appointed to be the monarch, and he reigned for fifty years.

古文：周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周公说： 啊！
English: Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：继自今嗣王，则其无淫于观、于逸、于游、于田，以万民惟正之共。无皇曰： 今日耽乐。 
现代文：从今以后的继位君王，希望你不要沉迷在观赏、安逸、嬉游和田猎之中，不可只是使老百姓进献赋税供他享乐。
English: From now on, future kings, I hope you will not indulge in watching, relaxing, playing and hunting, and not just make the common people pay taxes for him to enjoy.

古文：乃非民攸训，非天攸若，时人丕则有愆。
现代文：不要自我宽解说： 今天先享受享受再说。 
English: Don't excuse yourself by saying, "Let's just enjoy today."

古文：无若殷王受之迷乱，酗于酒德哉！ 
现代文：这样子，就不是老百姓所赞成的，也不是上天所喜爱的，这样的人就有罪过了。不要象商纣王那样迷惑昏乱，把酗酒作为酒德啊！ 
English: Such behavior is not approved by the common people, nor is it favored by heaven, and such a person is guilty. Don't be like the merchant king, confusing and befuddled, and take alcoholism as a virtue!

古文：周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：周公说： 啊！
English: Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：我闻曰： 古之人犹胥训告，胥保惠，胥教诲，民无或胥譸张为幻。 
现代文：我听说： 古时的人还能互相劝导，互相爱护，互相教诲，所以老百姓没有互相欺骗、互相诈惑的。 
English: I heard: In ancient times, people could still advise each other, love each other, and teach each other, so the common people did not lie to each other or deceive each other.

古文：此厥不听，人乃训之，乃变乱先王之正刑，至于小大。
现代文：不依照这样，官员就会顺从自己的意愿，就会变动先王的正法，以至于大大小小的法令。
English: Otherwise, officials will follow their own wishes and change the legitimate laws of the former king, even large and small decrees.

古文：民否则厥心违怨，否则厥口诅祝。 周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：老百姓于是就内心怨恨，就口头诅咒了。 周公说： 啊！
English: As a result, the common people harbored resentment in their hearts and cursed him verbally. Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：自殷王中宗及高宗及祖甲及我周文王，兹四人迪哲。
现代文：从殷王中宗、到高宗、到祖甲、到我们的周文王，这四位君王都是圣明的君主。
English: From King Yin to King Zhongzong, to King Gaozong, to King Zu Jia, to our King Zhouwen, these four kings were all rulers of the Holy Light.

古文：厥或告之曰： 小人怨汝詈汝。 
现代文：有人告诉他们说： 老百姓在怨恨你咒骂你。 
English: Someone told them: "The people are hating you and cursing you."

古文：则皇自敬德。厥愆，曰： 朕之愆。 
现代文：他们就更加敬慎自己的行为；有人举出他们的过错，他们就说： 这件事情确实是我做错了。 
English: They are more circumspect about their actions; when someone points out their wrongdoing, they say, "I really did something wrong.

古文：允若时，不啻不敢含怒。
现代文：不但不发怒，而且非常愿意听到这样的话，不依照这样，人们就会互相欺骗、互相诈惑。
English: Not only do they not get angry, but they are very willing to hear such words. Otherwise, people will deceive and trick each other.

古文：此厥不听，人乃或譸张为幻，曰小人怨汝詈汝，则信之，则若时，不永念厥辟，不宽绰厥心，乱罚无罪，杀无辜。
现代文：有人说老百姓在怨恨你咒骂你，你就会相信，就会象这样：不多考虑国家的法度，不放宽自己的心怀，乱罚没有罪过的人，乱杀没有罪过的人。
English: Some people say that the common people are resenting you and cursing you, and you will believe it, and it will be like this: do not give much consideration to the laws of the country, do not relax your mind, arbitrarily punish people who have not sinned, and randomly kill people who have not sinned.

古文：怨有同，是丛于厥身。 周公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：老百姓的怨恨一旦汇合起来，就会集中到你的身上。 周公说： 啊！
English: Once the people's resentment converges, it will focus on you.Zhou Gong said: Ah!

古文：嗣王其监于兹。 
现代文：成王要鉴戒这些啊！ 
English: A king should beware of these things!

