古文：盛显国元海归彦普灵山伏护○广平公盛阳州公永乐弟长弼襄乐王显国上洛王思宗子元海平秦王归彦武兴王普长乐太守灵山嗣子伏护
现代文：广平公盛阳州公永乐长弼襄乐王显国上洛王思宗元海平秦王归彦长乐太守灵山伏护
English: Guangping Gong ShengYangzhou Gong YongleChangShanXiangLeWang XianGuoShangLuoWang SiZongYuanHaiPingQinWangGuiHanChangLeDaiShuLingShanFuRu

古文：广平公盛，神武从叔祖也。宽厚有长者风。
现代文：武兴王普广平公高盛，是高祖的远房叔祖父，为人宽厚，有长者的风范。
English: Wu Xing Wang, Duke of Pu Guangping and Gao Sheng, Gao Zu's distant great-uncle, was a generous person with the demeanor of an elder.

古文：神武起兵于信都，以盛为中军大都督，封广平郡公。
现代文：高祖在信都起兵时，拜任产盛为中军大都督，封为广平郡公。
English: When Gao Zu raised an army in Xindu, he was appointed as the grand governor of the Chinese army, and was named the Guangping County official.

古文：历位司徒、太尉。
现代文：历任司徒、太尉。
English: Successive officers and lieutenants.

古文：天平三年，薨于位。
现代文：天平三年死在任上。
English: Tianping died in office three years later.

古文：赠假黄钺，太尉、太师、录尚书事。
现代文：赠给他假黄饿，太尉、太师、录尚书事。
English: He was presented with a fake Huang Rong, Taifu, Taishi, and a record book.

古文：无子，以兄子子瑗嗣。
现代文：无子，以其兄之子高子瑗为嗣。
English: He had no children, but was succeeded by his brother's son, Takatsukuni.

古文：天保初，改封平昌王，卒于魏尹。
现代文：型呈初年，王猩改封为里旦王，死于瑟尹任亡。
English: The registrar reported that he had lost his population, was removed from office by the court, and died at home.

古文：阳州公永乐，神武从祖兄子也。
现代文：阳州公高永乐，是高祖的远房侄儿。
English: Gao Yongle, the son of Emperor Gao Huan's paternal uncle.

古文：太昌初，封阳州县伯，进爵为公。
现代文：太昌初年，封为阳州县伯，后进爵为阳州公。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was given the title of Yangzhou County magistrate, and later he was given the title of Yangzhou Grand Duke.

古文：累迁北豫州刺史。
现代文：逐步升至韭盘出刺史。
English: Gradually rising to the top of the list.

古文：河阴之战，司徒高昂失利退。
现代文：蝗之战，司徒产旦失利撤退下来。
English: In the battle of the locusts, Stutthof retreated in defeat on the day of the delivery.

古文：永乐守河阳南城，昂走趣城，西军追者将至，永乐不开门，昂遂为西军所擒。
现代文：当时高永乐把守河阳南城，高昂奔至城下，酉魏追兵将到，丞銮不肯开门，茵垦就被俘了。
English: At that time, Gao Yongle was in charge of guarding the southern city of Heyang, Gao Ao ran to the city, the Wei chasers were about to arrive, Cao Cao refused to open the door, and Yin Cao was captured.

古文：神武大怒，杖之二百。
现代文：直担大怒，杖罚丞銮二百下。
English: Emperor Shenwu was very angry and beat him with 200 truncheons.

古文：后罢豫州，家产不立。
现代文：后撤了他塑出刺史职，家产全无。
English: Later, he was removed from the post of chief historian of Yuzhou, but left office with little family property.

古文：神武问其故，对曰： 裴监为长史，辛公正为别驾，受王委寄，斗酒只鸡不入。 
现代文：高祖问其缘故，回答说； 我以羞监为长史，圭公正为别驾，自己受您大王的委任，斗酒只鸡不敢入私门。 
English: Gao Zu asked the reason for this, and replied: I have a long history of being a shameless overseer, but I am not impartial. I was appointed by your great king, and I would not dare to enter a private door.

古文：神武乃以永乐为济州，仍以监、公正为长史、别驾。
现代文：高祖便用他为济州刺史，仍以裴监、辛公正为长史、别驾。
English: Emperor Jimmu also ordered him to be the governor of Jeju Province, but he still let Pei Guan and Xin Zhengyi be in charge of his long history and other matters.

古文：谓永乐曰： 尔勿大贪，小小义取莫复畏。 
现代文：对高永銮说： 你不要太贪了，按道理稍稍取一点财利也不必担心。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said to him, "Don't be too greedy, and don't be afraid to charge a little.

古文：永乐至州，监、公正谏不见听，以状启神武。
现代文：永乐到州上任后，裴监和辛公正规劝他他不接受，就打丫报告向高祖汇报。
English: After he took office, he was indeed greedy for money and goods. Pei Guan and Xin Justly dissuaded him, but he did not accept, and the two of them reported the situation to Emperor Shenwu.

古文：神武封启以示永乐。
现代文：高祖把报告加封后送给永乐看。
English: Gaozu sealed the report and sent it to Yongle.

古文：然后知二人清直，并擢用之。
现代文：逭才知道二人确实十分清正，一并提拔重用。
English: It was only then that I knew that the two of them were indeed very clean and honest, and they were promoted and reused together.

古文：永乐卒于州。
现代文：永乐死在州任上。
English: Yongle died in office.

古文：赠太师、太尉、录尚书事，谥曰武昭。
现代文：朝廷赠给他太师、太尉、录尚书事，谧号为武昭。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the titles of Taishi, Taifu, and Rokusho, and his nickname was Takeaki.

古文：无子，从兄思宗以第二子孝绪为后，袭爵。
现代文：他无子，以堂兄直墨塞之第二子产耋赣为嗣，袭其爵位。
English: He had no children, but took the second son of his cousin Naomose as his heir, inheriting his peerage.

古文：天保初，改封修城郡王。
现代文：型呈初年，改封为恺越发王。
English: The type was the first year, and the name was changed to 越发王.

古文：永乐弟长弼，小名阿伽。
现代文：高永乐的弟弟高长弼，乳名叫阿伽。
English: Gao Yongle's younger brother Gao Changyu, nicknamed Aga.

古文：性粗武，出入城市，好殴击行路，时人皆呼为阿伽郎君。
现代文：性格粗暴好武，出入城中集市，爱随手鞭打行路之人，人们都称他为阿伽郎君。
English: His character is rough and martial, he goes in and out of the city's bazaar, and he likes to whip people as they walk by. People call him Agalor.

古文：以宗室封广武王。
现代文：因为是皇家宗室，被封为尘武王。
English: Because he was a member of the royal family, he was given the title of Dust King.

古文：时有天恩道人，至凶暴，横行闾肆，后入长弼党，专以斗为事。
现代文：当时有位天恩道人，十分凶暴残忍，横行街坊，后来人了高长弼一党，专以打斗为事。
English: At that time, there was a man of the Way of Heaven, very fierce and cruel, rampant in the neighborhood. Later, he became a member of the Gao Changyi Party, specializing in fighting.

古文：文宣并收掩付狱，天恩党十余人皆弃市，长弼鞭一百。
现代文：文宣帝一并逮捕下狱，天恩道人一伙十余人皆公开行刑砍了脑袋，高长弼被杖责一百下。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was arrested and sent to prison at the same time, a group of more than ten people from Tian En Dao were publicly executed and had their heads chopped off, and Gao Changyu was caned a hundred times.

古文：寻为南营州刺史，在州无故自惊走，叛亡入突厥，竟不知死所。
现代文：不久拜任童萱塑刺史，在州无故自己惊吓，逃跑到空厥去了，背叛了国家，也不知死于何处。
English: Soon after, he became a puppet of the puppet master, scared himself for no reason in the prefecture, ran away to the sky, betrayed the country, and died in an unknown place.

古文：襄乐王显国，神武从祖弟也。
现代文：塞垄逗高显国，产担本家兄弟。
English: Serendipity amuses Gao Xian Guo, and produces brothers of the same family.

古文：无才伎，直以宗室谨厚，天保元年，封襄乐王，位右卫将军。
现代文：此人没一点儿本领，衹因是皇家宗室，人也老实，就在天堡元年封为襄乐王，位至右卫将军。
English: This man had no talent at all, but because he was a member of the royal family and an honest person, he was named the King of Xiangle in Tianbao in the first year of the year, and was promoted to the General of the Right Division.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：上洛王思宗，神武从子也。
现代文：上洛王高思宗，是矗担的侄子。
English: Shangluo King Gao Sizong was the nephew of Xidan.

古文：性宽和，颇有武干。
现代文：为人宽和，也能打仗。
English: If you are peaceful, you can fight.

古文：天保初，封上洛郡王。
现代文：天保初年，封为上洛郡王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was named the king of Shangluo County.

古文：历位司空、太傅。
现代文：历任司空、太傅。
English: Successive Siku, Taifu.

古文：薨于官。
现代文：死在任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：子元海，累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：直思宗的儿子高元海，一步步升迁任为散骑常侍。
English: Gao Yuanhai, the son of Zhoushizong, was promoted step by step to the position of strolling equerry.

古文：愿处山林，修行释典。
现代文：上表朝廷说愿到深山老林中去研习佛教经典。
English: Above, the imperial court said that it was willing to go to the deep mountains and old forests to study Buddhist classics.

古文：文宣许之。
现代文：塞宣童同意了。
English: Xuan Tong agreed.

古文：乃入林虑山，经二年，绝弃人事，志不能固，启求归。
现代文：他便进入挞卢业，在那儿两年，不干预人事，可心志不能固守，又上书请求回京。
English: He then entered Gongluye, where for two years, without interfering with personnel, but unable to adhere to his heart's desire, he sent a letter requesting to return to Beijing.

古文：征复本任，便纵酒肆情，广纳姬侍。
现代文：召回后让其复职，他便纵酒肆情，广纳小妾。
English: After he was recalled and reinstated, he went on a drinking binge and took on numerous concubines.

古文：又除领军，器小志大，颇以智谋自许。
现代文：又拜任领军。他志大才小，还自认为足智多谋。
English: He was also appointed as the leader of the army. He was ambitious but small, and thought of himself as resourceful.

古文：皇建末，孝昭幸晋阳，武成居守，元海以散骑常侍留典机密。
现代文：皇建末年，孝昭帝去了晋阳，留武成帝在京镇守，直五涂以散骑常侍的身份留京执掌机要。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Jian, Emperor Xiaozhao arrived in Jinyang. He asked his younger brother, Changguang Wang Gaotan, to stay in the capital, while Gao Yuanhai stayed behind to participate in confidential discussions.

古文：初孝昭之诛杨愔等，谓武成云： 事成，以尔为皇太弟。 
现代文：当初，耋旦旦壹策划杀死扰值一伙，曾对武旦童许诺 一旦事成，就立你为皇太弟 。
English: At the beginning, he had planned to kill a group of ruffians and had promised Wudang Tong that he would make you the crown prince if he succeeded.

古文：及践祚，乃使武成在邺主兵，立子百年为皇太子，武成甚不平。
现代文：及至登基后，却使茎虚童在邺城主管军务，立儿子产亘年为皇太子，武成帝心裹很是不平。
English: After he ascended to the throne, however, he put Tsuchigakido in charge of military affairs in Lucheng, and made his son the crown prince. Emperor Wucheng's heart was very uneasy.

古文：先是，恒留济南于邺，除领军厍狄伏连为幽州刺史，以斛律丰乐为领军，以分武成之权。
现代文：逭以前，常常是留渣童工在邺镇守，任命领军库狄伏连为幽业刺史，用斛律丰乐为领军，这样来削弱武旦瞳的兵权。
English: In the past, it was often leftover child laborers who guarded the town of Handan, and the leader of the army, Ku Diwulian, was appointed to be the leader of the army, and the leader of the army was Bao Li Fengle, so as to weaken the military power of Wudang Hitomi.

古文：武成留伏连而不听丰乐视事。
现代文：迭盛童留下了迭连，却不许呈眯管事。
English: Gao Zhan left Cudi Furen and did not allow Baolu Fengle to take office.

古文：乃与河南王孝瑜伪猎，谋于野，暗乃归。
现代文：于是又和迥直王高孝瑜伪装打猎，在野外密谋，天黑了才返回。
English: So he disguised himself as a hunter with King Gao Xiaoyu and conspired with him in the field. They only returned after dark.

古文：先是童谣云： 中兴寺内白凫翁，四方侧听声雍雍，道人闻之夜打钟。 
现代文：遣以前就有童谣在传唱： 中兴寺内白凫翁，四方侧听声雍雍，道人闻之夜打钟。 
English: Prior to this, the nursery rhyme spread that: the egrets in the Zhongxing Temple, the four sides listen to the sound of the Yong Yong, and the Taoists hear the bell at night.

古文：时丞相府在北城中，即旧中兴寺也。凫翁，谓雄鸡，盖指武成小字步落稽也。道人，济南王小名。打钟，言将被击也。
现代文：当时丞相府在北城，即原中兴寺内。 白凫翁 ，指雄鸡，就是用谐音法影射武成帝的乳名步落稽， 道人 ，是济南王的乳名。 打钟 ，是说他将被打击。
English: At that time, the prime minister's residence was located in Beicheng, in the former Zhongxing Temple. 白翁 (白翁) refers to a rooster, which is a homophonic allusion to the nickname of Emperor Wu Cheng, 道人 (道人) is the nickname of the King of Jinan, 打鐘 (打鐘) means he will be beaten.

古文：既而太史奏言北城有天子气。昭帝以为济南应之，乃使平秦王归彦之邺，迎济南赴并州。
现代文：不久，太史上奏说北城有天子之气，孝昭帝便怀疑济南王应了这童谣和天子气，便派平秦王高归彦到邺都，把济南王接到并州。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizhou wrote in his history that Beicheng had the spirit of a son of heaven, and Emperor Xiaozhao suspected that the King of Jinan had responded to this nursery rhyme and the spirit of a son of heaven, so he sent King Gao Guihang of Pingqin to Shidu to annex the King of Jinan.

古文：武成先咨元海，并问自安之计。
现代文：武成帝首先就向高元海征求主意，问如何才能保全自己。
English: Emperor Wucheng first asked Gao Yuanhai for advice on how to protect himself.

古文：元海曰： 皇太后万福，至尊孝性非常，殿下不须别虑。 
现代文：高元海说： 皇太后万福，身体健康，当今皇上十分孝顺，不会做出让太后伤心的事来，您尽可以放心，不会出问题。 
English: Motohai said, "The empress dowager is in good health, the emperor is very filial, and Your Imperial Highness should not have any other concerns."

古文：武成曰： 岂我推诚之意耶？ 
现代文：武成帝说： 这些应付人的话，难道合乎我跟你推心置腹征求方略的用心么? 
English: Emperor Wucheng said, "Do these words of dealing with people really match my intention of seeking strategies with you?

古文：元海乞还省一夜思之。
现代文：高元海便请求让他回府想一夜再说。
English: Yuanhai asked him to go back and think about it in the evening. Gao Zhan stayed with Yuanhai in the back hall.

古文：武成即留元海后堂。
现代文：武成帝便把他留在府中后堂。
English: Emperor Wucheng then left him in the back hall of the palace.

古文：元海达旦不眠，唯绕床徐步。
现代文：元海通宵不睡，衹是绕床踱步。
English: By dawn, Gao Yuanhai still hadn't fallen asleep, he was just pacing slowly around the bed.

古文：夜漏未曙，武成遽出，曰： 神算如何？ 
现代文：天还没亮，武成帝突然来到，问： 你的神机妙算想得如何了? 
English: It was not yet dawn when Emperor Wu Chengdi suddenly arrived and asked, "How are you doing with your magic tricks?"

古文：答云： 夜中得三策，恐不堪用耳。 
现代文：回答说： 夜中想得三策，但恐怕不能使用。 
English: He answered, I have thought the night over, and have three stratagems, which I am afraid I cannot adopt.

古文：因说梁孝王惧诛入关事，请乘数骑入晋阳，先见太后求哀，后见主上，请去兵权，以死为限，求不干朝政，必保太山之安。此上策也。
现代文：于是讲了西汉的梁孝王怕朝廷杀他不敢入关进京的故事，建议武成帝带几名亲兵到晋阳去，先见太后请求哀怜保护，再求见皇上，请释去兵权，到死不再干预朝政，这样肯定能保证没事。这是上策。
English: So he told the story of Liang Xiaowang of Western Han Dynasty, who was afraid of being killed by the imperial court and did not dare to go to Beijing, and suggested that Emperor Wu Cheng take several soldiers to Jinyang, first see the empress dowager to ask for protection, and then ask to see the emperor, please release the military power, and do not interfere with the imperial government until death. This will definitely ensure that there is nothing wrong. This is the best strategy.

古文：若不然，当具表，云 威权大盛，恐取谤众口，请青、齐二州刺史。沉静自居，必不招物议。
现代文：若不然的话，就请上书朝廷，就说自己  威权太盛，恐怕要惹众人诽谤猜忌，请求外放任青州、齐州刺史，安静自守，如此必然不会招人议论。
English: Otherwise, please send a letter to the imperial court, saying that your authority is too strong, and I am afraid that you will provoke people's slander and suspicion, and request that you be allowed to write the history of Qingzhou and Qizhou, and keep quiet. This will certainly not invite discussion.

古文：此中策也。 
现代文：这是中策。 
English: This is the middle way.

古文：更问下策曰： 发言即恐族诛。 
现代文：武成帝又间下策是什么，回答说： 这话一出口，恐怕就犯了诛族大罪了。 
English: Emperor Wucheng also asked what the next step would be, and replied, "As soon as I say this, I'm afraid I've committed a great sin against the Yi people."

古文：因逼之，答曰： 济南世嫡，主上假太后令而夺之。
现代文：武成帝逼他讲出来，回答说： 济南王本是先帝亲生，当今皇上假藉皇太后名义夺了位。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng forced him to speak out and replied: The King of Jinan was actually the previous emperor's own son, but the current emperor assumed the throne in the name of the empress dowager.

古文：今集文武，示以此敕，执丰乐，斩归彦，尊济南，号令天下，以顺讨逆，此万世一时也。 
现代文：而今召集文武百官，公布这道文件，囚禁了丰乐王，斩掉高归彦，尊奉济南王为君，号令天下，以顺讨逆，这是万世一时的绝好机会啊。 
English: And now, summoning a hundred civil and military officials, publishing this document, imprisoning King Fengle, beheading Gao Guibiao, honoring King Jinan as king, and calling on the world to follow suit, this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：武成大悦，狐疑，竟未能用。
现代文：武成帝听了十分兴奋，又狐疑不决，终究没有采纳。
English: Gao Zhan was very happy to hear this, but he was hesitant and did not act according to his opinion.

古文：乃使郑道谦卜之，皆曰： 不利举事，静则吉。 
现代文：武成帝就又让郑道谦占一下，都说： 不利于有大行动，保持安静才会大吉大利。 
English: Gao Zhan also asked Zheng Daoqian to predict this matter, and the result was: It is not good to raise an army, but it is good to wait.

古文：又召曹魏祖，问之国事。对曰： 当有大凶。 
现代文：又召来曹魏祖，向他询问国家大计，回答说： 国家不久将发生大凶祸。 
English: He also summoned Cao Wei Zu and asked him about the national plan, to which he replied, "A great calamity will soon occur in the country."

古文：又时有林虑令姓潘，知占候，密谓武成曰： 宫车当晏驾，殿下为天下主。 
现代文：另外，当时有位林虑县县令姓潘，懂占候一套巫术，秘密地对武成帝说： 皇帝不久于人世了，大王将为天下主。 
English: In addition, at that time, a Linxian County magistrate surnamed Pan, who knew a set of magic, secretly said to Emperor Wu Chengdi: The emperor will soon be dead, and the great king will be the ruler of the world.

古文：武成拘之于内以候之。
现代文：武成帝把他软禁在府内以待应验。
English: Gao Zhan waited for him in the Inner Court.

古文：又令巫觋卜之，多云不须举兵，自有大庆。
现代文：又令好几位巫师占卜，都说不须动武，自有大吉。
English: He also asked the sorcerers and fortune-tellers to tell fortunes, and they all said that there was no need to raise an army, and that things of great joy and celebration would naturally come.

古文：武成乃奉诏，令数百骑送济南于晋阳。
现代文：武成帝这才依照孝昭帝的韶书，派数百骑送济南王去晋阳。
English: Gaotan then acted in accordance with the edict of Emperor Xiaozhao and sent hundreds of cavalry to escort the King of Jinan to Jinyang.

古文：及孝昭崩，武成即位，除元海侍中、开府仪同三司、太子詹事。
现代文：及至孝昭帝驾崩，武成帝即位，拜任高元海为侍中、开府仪同三司、太子詹事。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao indeed died, Emperor Gaozhan was proclaimed emperor, that is, Emperor Wucheng, and Gao Yuanhai was appointed as a chamberlain, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Prince Zhanji.

古文：河清二年，元海为和士开所谮，被捶马鞭六十。
现代文：河清二年，高元海遭和士开进谗言，被抽打了六十马鞭。
English: In the second year of Heqing, Gao Yuanhai was beaten with 60 horsewhips.

古文：责云： 尔在邺城，说我以弟反兄，几许不义！
现代文：武盛童责备他说： 你在幽那阵子，竟然叫我以弟反兄，多么不仁不义!
English: Wu Sheng Tong reproached him: "You have been here for such a long time, and you even told me to turn my brother against his brother. How unkind and unjust!

古文：邺城兵马抗并州，几许无智！
现代文：用邺城的兵马来对抗并州的兵马，又多么愚蠢!
English: To use the soldiers and horses of Handan to fight the soldiers and horses of the annexation of the state, how stupid!

古文：不义无智，若为可使？ 
现代文：这种不义无智之徒怎么用得? 
English: How can such an unjust and unintelligent person be of any use?

古文：出为兖州刺史。
现代文：外放任兖州刺史。
English: He was exiled to Bozhou and became a historian.

古文：元海后妻，陆太姬甥也，故寻被追任使。
现代文：元海的后妻是陆太姬的外甥女，所以不久又被召回任职。
English: Gao Yuanhai's second wife was the niece of Lu Taichi, so he soon resumed his original duties.

古文：武平中，与祖珽共执朝政。
现代文：武平年间，与塑玺共掌朝政。
English: At the time of Wu Ping, he and the ancestor Wang Ting jointly presided over the imperial government.

古文：元海多以太姬密语告珽。
现代文：产五连常将坠主蜒的密语告诉祖埏。
English: He often told Lu Taiji's words to the ancestral king.

古文：珽求领军，元海不可，珽乃以其所告报太姬。姬怒，出元海为郑州刺史。
现代文：祖埏希求领军之位，元海不同意，祖埏便将他所告的话汇报给陆太姬，陆太姬大怒，外放亘逛为轻刺史。
English: Zu Wangting asked to be the leader of the army, but Yuanhai did not agree, so he reported to the Empress Dowager those that Yuanhai told him. The Empress Dowager was very angry and transferred Yuanhai out of Beijing and appointed him as the historian of Zhengzhou.

古文：邺城将败，征为尚书令。
现代文：垄困被困危急之时，征召他回京任尚书令。
English: When Rengo was trapped and in a critical situation, he was summoned to return to Beijing to serve as an official.

古文：周建德七年，于邺城谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：到北周建德七年，他在邺城谋反，被杀。
English: Seven years to the north of Zhou Jiande, he plotted a rebellion in Lucheng and was killed.

古文：元海好乱乐祸，然诈仁慈，不饮洒啖肉。
现代文：直五涂为人幸灾乐祸，但表面装着仁慈，不饮酒吃肉。
English: Straight five-painted people gloat, but the surface is benevolent, do not drink and eat meat.

古文：文宣天保末年敬信内法，乃至宗庙不血食，皆元海所谋。
现代文：文宣帝天保末年诚信佛法，以至于宗庙祭祀不用牛羊牲畜，使先祖不血食，都是元擅的主意。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Tenpo, Emperor Wenzong believed in the sincerity of Buddhism, so much so that he did not use cattle, sheep or other livestock in the ancestral temple's rituals, so that the ancestors did not eat blood, all of which were his own ideas.

古文：及为右仆射，又说后主禁屠宰，断酤酒。
现代文：及至做了右仆射，又劝后主禁止屠宰牲畜，禁断酒类买卖。
English: He appointed his right-hand man to shoot, and persuaded his successor to order a ban on slaughtering and the sale of alcohol.

古文：然本心非靖，故终致覆败。
现代文：但他本性并不好静。所以终致倾败。
English: However, his original intention was not pure, so it finally led to failure.

古文：思宗弟思好。
现代文：高思宗有弟名思好。
English: The Gao Si Sect has a younger brother named Si Ho.

古文：思好本浩氏子也，思宗养以为弟，遇之甚薄。
现代文：直墨赶原本是造压的儿子，直墨塞收养他为自己的兄弟，待他很薄。
English: Originally, Naoimochi was the son of a printing press maker. Naoimochi adopted him as his own brother and treated him very poorly.

古文：少以骑射事文襄。及文宣受命，为左卫大将军。
现代文：年轻时以善于骑射事奉塞塞童，及至塞宣童登基，拜任左卫大将军。
English: When he was young, he was good at riding and shooting, and served as the son of the king, and when the son of the king ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the General of the Left Division.

古文：本名思孝，天保五年，讨蠕蠕，文宣悦其骁勇，谓曰： 尔击贼如鹘入鸦群，宜思好事。 
现代文：本名产墨耋，型圣五年，征讨星球，塞皇童赏识他的骁勇，说道： 你攻击敌人就像猛禽入鸦群，该思好事。 
English: His real name was Inkwell, and he was a five-year-old model saint, and he conquered the stars. Cai Wang Tong appreciated his bravery and said, "When you attack the enemy, it's like a bird of prey entering a flock of crows. You should think about the good things."

古文：故改名焉。
现代文：因而改名为思好。
English: So he changed his name to Siho.

古文：累迁尚书令、朔州道行台、朔州刺史、开府、南安王，甚得边朔人心。
现代文：多次升迁任尚书令、塑业道行台、塑丛刺史、开府，封亩塞王，甚得北方边境民心。
English: He was promoted many times to the post of Shang Shuling, the plastic industry road, the history of plastic bushes, Kaifu, the king of sealing, and even won the hearts of the people on the northern border.

古文：后主时，斫骨光弁奉使至州，思好迎之甚谨，光弁倨敖，思好因心衔恨。
现代文：篷圭时，斫胥光弁奉使来到塑丛，尘墨蛏十分恭谨地迎候他，光弁摆架子耍威风，思好怀恨在心。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Gao Guangben's envoy came to the Plastic Cluster, and the Dust and Ink Dragonfly greeted him very respectfully. Gao Guangben put on airs and pretended to be powerful, harboring hatred in his heart.

古文：武平五年，遂举兵反。
现代文：亘迎五年，便举兵造反。
English: After five years, he raised an army to rebel.

古文：与并州诸贵书曰： 主上少长深宫，未辨人之情伪，昵近凶狡，疏远忠良。遂使刀锯刑余，贵溢轩阶，商胡丑类，擅权帷幄，剥削生灵，劫掠朝市。
现代文：他给差诸位权贵一封公开信，说： 当今皇上生长于深宫，不懂得世间真假，亲近一帮奸邪小人，疏远忠良之士，于是使那该受刀锯之刑的小人颢贵于神圣的朝廷；商胡丑类，居然擅权于帷幄深密之间，剥削生灵，劫掠官民。
English: He sent an open letter to all the dignitaries, saying: Today's emperor grew up in a deep palace, does not know what is true and false in the world, is close to a gang of evil villains, alienates loyal and good people, and thus makes the villain who should be punished with a sword and a saw valuable to the sacred court; merchants are ugly, and actually have power between the curtains, exploit the living, and rob the officials and the people.

古文：暗于听受，专行忍害。
现代文：皇上惑于听信，专行残忍，伤天害理。
English: The emperor was bewildered by what he heard, practiced cruelty, and violated the laws of nature.

古文：幽母深宫，无复人子之礼；二弟残戮，顿绝孔怀之义。
现代文：他幽禁母亲于深宫之中，一点儿没有作儿子的礼教孝心；杀死二弟，毫无兄弟手足之情。
English: His second brother was killed by him, severing the feeling of missing each other between the brothers.

古文：仍纵子立夺马于东门，光弁擎鹰于西市，駮龙得仪同之号，逍遥受郡君之名，犬马班位，荣冠轩冕。
现代文：还纵容子立在京城东门夺马，光弁在京城西市擎鹰，壁垄竟得仪同之号，眯更获郡君之位。犬马列于朝臣之列，光彩超过贵族世家。
English: He also allowed his sons to capture horses at the east gate of Beijing, and his sons to capture eagles at the west gate of Beijing. He even gave his son the same name, and his son the title of county magistrate. Dogs and horses were included in the ranks of courtiers, and their glory exceeded that of aristocratic families.

古文：人不堪役，思长乱阶。
现代文：老百姓受不了残酷驱使，正准备着一朝发难。
English: Driven by cruelty, the common people can't stand it and are getting ready to start a riot.

古文：赵郡王睿实曰宗英，社稷惟寄，左丞相斛律明月，世为元辅，威著邻国，无罪无辜，奄见诛殄。
现代文：赵郡王产壑实在是国家英才，社稷栋梁；左丞相斛律明月，世代主政，威名显于邻国。他们都无罪无辜，被活活整死减门了。
English: Zhao County's Wang Zhisheng is truly a national talent, a pillar of the community; Left Jiao Minister Zou Luling Mingyue, the head of the generation, the prestige of the neighboring countries. They are all innocent and innocent, and they were reduced to death.

古文：孤既忝预皇枝，实蒙殊奖，今便拥率义兵，指除君侧之害。
现代文：我既侧身于皇族之中，长期受朝廷厚恩，而今便统领大军，起义兵，清君侧。
English: I am a member of the royal family, I have received many honors from my family, and today I am leading the rebel army in order to purge the vassals next to the Son of Heaven.

古文：幸悉此怀，无致疑惑。 
现代文：希望诸位充分理解我的这番用意，不必致疑。 
English: I hope that people around the world will understand my actions and not have any other doubts.

古文：行台郎王行思之辞也。
现代文：这是行台郎王行思拟成的文字。
English: This was drafted for him by Gyodairo Wang Gyoshu.

古文：思好至阳曲，自号大丞相，置百官，以行台左丞王尚之为长史。
现代文：产墨堑行至旦瞄，自称大丞相，置百官，以行台左丞王尚之为长史。
English: Gao Sihao led the army to Yangqu, called himself the grand chancellor, set up hundreds of officials, and had a long history as the king of the left chancellors.

古文：武卫赵海在晋阳掌兵，时仓卒不暇奏，矫诏发兵拒之。
现代文：武术赵海在晋阳掌兵，当时匆忙之间来不及上奏，便假称天子韶令发兵拒敌。
English: Zhao Hai, a martial artist, was in Jinyang, shaking hands with soldiers. At that time, he was in a hurry and did not have time to play, so he pretended to be the son of heaven and ordered to send troops to repel the enemy.

古文：军士皆曰： 南安王来，我辈唯须唱万岁奉迎耳。 
现代文：军士们都说： 南安王一来，我辈祇需高呼万岁欢迎他。 
English: But his subordinates said, "If the King of Nan'an, Gao Si, comes, we only need to shout "long live" to welcome him."

古文：帝闻变，使唐邕、莫多娄敬显、刘桃枝、中领军厍狄士文驰之晋阳，帝勒兵续进。
现代文：后主闻变，派唐邕、莫多娄敬题、刘塑啦、中领军库狄士文驰奔置盐，皇上亲自带兵后续跟进。
English: After the lord heard of the incident, he sent Tang Xuan, Modo Xuan Jingxian, Liu Tao Zhi, and the middle leader of the army, Zou Di Shwen, to Jinyang.

古文：思好军败，与行思投水而死。
现代文：高思好兵败，跟行思一起投水而死。
English: Later, the lord led his soldiers one after another, and the good army failed, and he and Wang Xingsi were drowned.

古文：其麾下二千人，桃枝围之，且杀且招，终不降以至尽。
现代文：其部下二千人，刘桃枝包围起来且杀且招，终无一人投降，都杀光了。
English: Two thousand of his subordinates were surrounded and killed by Liu Tao Zhi, but in the end no one surrendered and they were all killed.

古文：时帝在道，叱奴世安自晋阳送露布于平都，遇斛斯孝卿。孝卿诱使食，因驰诣行宫，叫已了。
现代文：这时后主在道，叱奴世安从置盐送文告到垩邓，遇上斛斯孝卿，垄翅诱使：吐宣就餐，乘机脱身奔赴行宫，大叫事情已办完。
English: At this time, the master was on the road, scolded the slave Shian from Jishan to send a message to Zhaotang, met with Zhaosu Xiaoqing, and enticed by the fins: spit out the meal, took the opportunity to escape and rushed to the palace, shouting that the matter had been completed.

古文：帝大欢，左右呼万岁。
现代文：皇上大喜，左右呼万岁。
English: The Emperor is overjoyed. Long live the Emperor.

古文：良久，世安乃以状自陈。帝曰： 告示何物事，乃得坐食。 
现代文：好久，世安才自陈始末，厘王说： 你拿的什么告示，竟能坐食一餐? 
English: It was a long time before the world was safe again. Li Wang said, "What kind of notice did you take that you can sit down to a meal?

古文：于是赏孝卿而免世安罪。
现代文：于是赏斛斯孝卿而赦免了叱奴世安之罪。
English: Therefore, he rewarded Shishi Takahiro and pardoned the crime of reprimanding Shiori.

古文：暴思好尸七日，然后屠剥焚之，烹尚之于邺市，令内参射其妃于宫内，仍火焚杀之。
现代文：将产墨妊尸体在大街上暴露七天，然后将尸屠剥焚烧，将王尚之烹于邺城商市，令宫中内参射其妃于宫内，然后火焚杀死。
English: The ink-producing pregnant corpse was exposed on the street for seven days, and then the corpse was butchered and burned, and Wang Shangzhi was cooked in the Lucheng Commercial Market, and his wife was shot in the palace, and then burned to death.

古文：思好反前五旬，有人告其谋反。
现代文：高思好反叛前五十天，有人密报他将谋反。
English: Fifty days before Gao planned to rebel, someone tipped him off that he was going to rebel.

古文：韩长鸾女适思好子，故奏有人诬告诸贵，事相扰动，不杀无以息后，乃斩之。
现代文：韩长鸾的女儿是思赶的儿媳，韩长鸾上奏有人诬告贵族，扰乱朝廷，不杀不能禁止后来者，便杀了那人。
English: Han Changtao's daughter was a daughter-in-law who was in a hurry. Han Changtao killed the person who falsely accused the nobles, disturbed the court, and could not forbid the successors without killing.

古文：思好既诛，死者弟伏阙下诉求赠兄，长鸾不为通也。
现代文：高思好既伏法之后，前次被杀之人的弟弟伏于皇宫前祈求追赠其亡兄，韩长鸾不给通报。
English: After Gao thought about the method of prostration, the brother of the person who was killed last time prostrated himself in front of the imperial palace to pray for the posthumous gift of his deceased brother. Han Changtao did not give notice.

古文：平秦王归彦，字仁英，神武族弟也。
现代文：平秦王高归彦，字仁茎，是直担的族弟。
English: Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang, also known as Ren Zhu, was the younger brother of Zhishang.

古文：父徽，魏末坐事当徙凉州，行至河、渭间，遇贼，以军功得免流。因于河州积年。
现代文：其父直銮，韭魏末年因犯事应该远徙凉州，行至周、漫一带，遇上土匪，因立军功，得免于流放，就滞留迥好几年。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, his father, Naosuke, was forced to emigrate to Liangzhou due to criminal activities. He traveled to the Zhou and Man regions, where he encountered bandits. Due to his military service, he was exempted from exile, and he stayed there for several years.

古文：以解胡言，为西域大使，得胡师子来献，以功得河东守。
现代文：因为懂得西域胡人语言，任西域大使，得胡人狮子来献于朝廷，有功，任命为周塞郡守。
English: Because he understood the language of the Western Hu people, he was appointed as the ambassador of the Western Hu people, and he had the lion of the Western Hu people dedicated to the imperial court. He was appointed as the governor of Zhousai County.

古文：寻遂死焉。
现代文：不久他就死了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：徽于神武旧恩甚笃。及神武平京洛，迎徽丧与穆同营葬。赠司徒，谥曰文宣。
现代文：高徽对高祖早年恩情很深，及至高祖平定洛阳，迎回高徽丧柩，以昭穆班序营葬，赠司徒，并谧为文宣。
English: Gao Hui was very grateful to Gao Zu in his early years, and Gao Zu conquered Luoyang, welcomed back Gao Hui's funeral, buried him with the order of Shomu, gave him a disciple, and made him a proclamation.

古文：初，徽尝过长安市，与妇人王氏私通而生归彦，至是年已九岁。
现代文：原先，高徽曾到长安商市去，与那儿的妇人王氏私通生下了高归彦，到造时已经九岁了。
English: Originally, Gao Hui had gone to the Chang'an Commercial Market and had an illicit affair with a woman there, Wang Shi, and gave birth to Gao Gui Yan, who was nine years old at the time of conception.

古文：神武追见之，抚对悲喜。
现代文：高祖找到了他，见面时执手相对又悲又喜。
English: Gaozu found him, and when they met, he was both sad and happy.

古文：稍迁徐州刺史。
现代文：不久改任徐州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：归彦少质朴，后更改节，放纵好声色，朝夕酣歌。
现代文：高归彦年少时为人质朴，后来便变了志节，放纵好声色，朝夕酣歌醉舞。
English: When he was a boy, Gui Yan was sincere and simple, but his personality changed when he grew up. He was self-indulgent, liked dogs and horses, and drank alcohol in the morning and evening.

古文：妻魏上党王元天穆女也，貌不美而甚骄妒，数忿争，密启文宣求离，事寝不报。
现代文：其妻是魏上党王元天穆之女，貌不美却生性嫉妒骄横，常和他争吵，高归彦偷偷地跟文宣帝讲要求离婚，逭事被搁下来没有回音。
English: His wife was the daughter of the Wei Shang Dynasty king Yuan Tianmu. Although she was not beautiful, she was jealous and arrogant, and often quarreled with him. Gao Guihang secretly told Emperor Wenzhong to ask for a divorce. The anecdote was shelved and there was no response.

古文：天保元年，封平秦王。
现代文：天保元年，高归彦被封为平秦王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Takakihiko was enthroned as the King of Pingqin.

古文：嫡妃康及所生母王氏并为太妃。善事二母，以孝闻。
现代文：当时嫡妃康氏及其生母王氏都尊为太妃，他事奉二母，以孝顺知名一时。
English: At that time, the legitimate consort Kang and his birth mother Wang were both revered as empresses. He served his second mother and was known for his filial piety.

古文：征为兼侍郎，稍被亲宠。
现代文：征召为兼侍郎，渐渐受到宠信。
English: He was conscripted as a concubine, and gradually became a favorite.

古文：以讨侯景功，别封长乐郡公，除领军大将军。
现代文：因攻讨侯景立了功。另封为长乐郡公，拜任领军大将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Changle County official and became a leading general for his military exploits in the suppression of Houjing.

古文：领军加大，自归彦始也。
现代文：领军加上大将军名号，便是从归彦受封开始的。
English: Put a capital letter in front of General and start with him.

古文：文宣诛高德正，金宝财货悉以赐之。
现代文：文宣帝诛杀高德正，其金银财宝全都赐给了归彦。
English: Emperor Wenxuan tried to kill Gao Dezheng, and all his gold and silver treasures were given to Guihang.

古文：乾明初，拜司徒，仍总知禁卫。
现代文：干明初年，拜任司徒，继续主持禁卫事宜。
English: In the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, he was appointed as a magistrate, and was still the head of the imperial guards.

古文：初，济南自晋阳之邺，杨愔宣敕，留从驾五千兵于西中，阴备非常。
现代文：当初，济南王从晋阳到邺都，是杨情宣布的敕令，他留下了随驾之兵五千人在西中，暗地裹防备异常情况。
English: At first, the king of Jinan from Jinyang to Shidu was a royal order announced by Yang Jie. He left behind an escort of five thousand soldiers in Xizhong, secretly preparing for abnormal situations.

古文：至邺数日，归彦乃知之，由是阴怨杨、燕。
现代文：到邺都数天后，高归彦知道了逭情况，从此内心怨恨杨、燕二人。
English: A few days after arriving in Handan, Gao Guihong learned about the situation in Handan, and from then on, he hated Yang and Yan.

古文：杨、燕等欲去二王，问计于归彦。
现代文：杨、燕二人谋划去掉二王，却向归彦问计。
English: Yang and Yan plotted to get rid of the two kings, but asked Guihang for advice.

古文：归彦诈喜，请共元海量之。
现代文：归彦装出很高兴的样子，请二人再和高元海合计一下。
English: Kunihiko pretends to be happy, and asks the two of them to add it up with Takamoto-kai.

古文：元海亦口许心违，驰告长广。
现代文：元海也是口头答应心中反对，迅速地向长广王报了信。
English: Yuanhai also verbally promised to oppose in his heart, and quickly reported the letter to Changguang Wang.

古文：长广于是诛杨、燕等。
现代文：长广王于是杀了彊、夔等人。
English: Changguang Wang then killed Zou, Zou and others.

古文：孝昭将入云龙门，都督成休宁列仗拒而不内，归彦谕之，然后得入，进向柏阁、永巷亦如之。
现代文：茎坚童欲进入云直迎，都督盛健宁摆开禁卫队拒不接纳，直堡产前来晓谕他，这才放行。进向宫内柏合、永巷时，也是这样。
English: Tsukuda Jianzhong wanted to enter Yunzhuang, but the governor Sheng Jianning refused to accept him, so the palace guards came to tell him, and he was allowed to go. This was also the case when he went to the palace park and Yongxiang.

古文：孝昭践祚，以此弥见优重，每入常在平原王段韶上。
现代文：孝昭帝登基后，因上述缘故对高归彦更加优礼更加信赖了。每次入朝，位常在平原王段韶之前。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhao ascended to the throne, for the above reasons, he trusted Gao Guihang more and more. Every time he entered the court, he was often in front of the king of the plain.

古文：以为司空，兼尚书令。
现代文：用他为司空，兼尚书令。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Siku, and he also held the title of Shurei.

古文：齐制，宫内唯天子纱帽，臣下皆戎帽，特赐归彦纱帽以宠之。
现代文：北齐定制：宫内衹有天子戴纱帽，群臣都戴戎帽。特赐归彦纱帽，表示对他的分外宠信。
English: Beiqi custom: There was a prince in the imperial court who wore a yakitori hat, and the courtiers all wore yakitori hats. He was given a yakitori hat as a special gift, indicating that he was extremely favored.

古文：孝昭崩，归彦从晋阳迎武成于邺。
现代文：孝昭帝去世，高归彦从晋阳赴邺都迎接武成帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozhao, Gao Guihang traveled from Jinyang to Shandong to meet Emperor Wu Chengdu.

古文：及武成即位，进位太傅，领司徒，常听将私部曲三人带刀入仗。
现代文：武成帝即位，他升任太傅，兼司徒，常听任他带贴身家丁三人佩刀入仪仗。
English: When Emperor Wucheng ascended the throne, he was promoted to taifu, concurrently to sessho, and he was often allowed to take three close family members with him into the ceremonial battle.

古文：从武成还都，诸贵戚等竞要之，其所往处，一坐尽倾。
现代文：随武成帝还都后，诸贵戚都争着邀约他，他的住处，也总是高朋满座。
English: After Emperor Wu Chengdu returned to the capital, all the noble relatives fought to invite him, and his residence was always full of high-ranking officials.

古文：归彦既地居将相，志意盈满，发言陵侮，旁若无人。
现代文：高归彦既已位居将相，志意骄傲起来，开伤人，目中无人。
English: Now that Gao Guibin has been promoted to the rank of general, his ambition has become proud, he has offended people, and there is no one in his eyes.

古文：议者以威权震主，必为祸乱。
现代文：人们都议论他威权震主，迟早会成为祸害的。
English: It was said that his authority was a threat to the emperor and would surely bring disaster to the country.

古文：上亦寻其前翻覆之迹，渐忌之。
现代文：皇上也追索到他过去翻覆动摇的情况，渐渐地也忌恨起他来。
English: Emperor Wucheng also found that he had been capricious in the past, and gradually distanced himself from him.

古文：高元海、毕义云、高乾和等咸数言其短。
现代文：高元海、毕义云、高干和等人也都多次揭他的短。
English: Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun, Gao Qianhe and others have repeatedly exposed his shortcomings.

古文：上幸归彦家，召魏收对御作诏草，欲加右丞相。
现代文：一次，皇上到高归彦家中，便召魏收在御前作韶书底稿，准备给归彦加上个右丞相的名义。
English: Emperor Wucheng went to Guihang's house and summoned Wei Hui to draft an edict in person, wanting to add him as chancellor.

古文：收谓元海曰： 至尊以右丞相登位，今为归彦威名太盛，故出之，岂可复加此号。 
现代文：魏收对高元海说： 皇上就是从右丞相位上登基的，而今因归彦权威太重，才准备外放他，怎么可以再加逭个名号呢? 
English: Wei Hui said to Gao Yuanhai: The emperor ascended to the throne from the position of the right-hand man, and now, because Gui Yan's authority is too heavy, they are preparing to exile him. How can they add another name?

古文：乃拜太宰、冀州刺史，即乾和缮写。
现代文：于是拜归彦为太宰、冀州刺史，就由高干和当场缮写好任命韶书。
English: As a result, Baiguihan was appointed as Dazai and Jizhou history, and Gao Ganhe wrote the appointment letter on the spot.

古文：昼日，仍敕门司不听辄入内。
现代文：天亮后，又下令官门守卫不得让归彦自己进宫。
English: After dawn, he also ordered the official gate guards not to allow Guihang to enter the palace.

古文：时归彦在家纵酒，经宿不知，至明欲参，至门知之，大惊而退。
现代文：那时归彦正在家尽情喝酒，整夜情况毫无所知，到天亮后准备上朝，走到宫门前才知发生了变故，大吃一惊，回到家中。
English: At that time, Kunihiko was drinking to his heart's content at home. He did not know anything about the situation all night. After dawn, he prepared for the morning. He walked to the front of the palace gate only to find out that something had changed. He was taken aback and returned home.

古文：及通名谢，敕令早发，别赐钱帛、鼓吹、医药，事事周备。
现代文：及至上表谢恩，皇帝则下令及早动身赴任，另外赐给他钱帛、鼓吹、医药等，样样齐备。
English: By the time he confessed his sins, Emperor Wu Chengdu's edict had already been issued, and he was also given coins, cloth, ceremonial weapons, and medicine, all of which were very detailed and complete.

古文：又敕武职督将悉送至青阳宫，拜而退，莫敢共语。
现代文：又下令全部武职官员都去青阳宫为他送别。参拜后就退回了，谁也不敢跟他打招呼。
English: He also ordered all military officials to go to the Qingyang Palace to see him off. After the visit, they returned, and no one dared to greet him.

古文：唯与赵郡王睿久语，时无闻者。
现代文：他衹是跟趟郡王高叙说了很长时间话，当时没人听到他俩讲了些什么。
English: They had been talking for a long time at the County King's High School, and no one had heard what they had said.

古文：至州，不自安，谋逆，欲待受调讫，班赐军士，望车驾如晋阳，乘虚入邺。
现代文：到了冀州刺史任上，高归彦心不自安，起了造反叛乱的念头，打算等到受调完毕，皇上为有功将士颁赏时，希望车驾去晋阳，乘虚攻入邺都。
English: When Gao Guihang was appointed to the post of Jizhou Provincial Historian, Gao Guihang felt uneasy and had the idea of rebelling. He planned to wait until he had been transferred and the emperor had given awards to meritorious soldiers. He hoped to drive to Jinyang and take advantage of the opportunity to invade Shandong.

古文：为其郎中令吕思礼所告，诏平原王段韶袭之。
现代文：逭阴谋被他的郎中令吕思礼所告发，朝廷下韶令平原王段韶去剿袭他。
English: When he was denounced by his subordinate, the middle-ranking general Lü Sili, Emperor Wucheng ordered Pingyuan Wang Duanzhang to attack him.

古文：归彦旧于南境置私驿，闻军将逼，报之，便婴城拒守。
现代文：高归彦早先在州境南部安排了为私人传递信息的驿站，听到朝廷大军将逼近冀州，向他报告了，他便发兵闭城固守，抵御朝廷大军。
English: In the past, Kunihiko had set up a private post on the southern border, and when he heard the news of the impending attack, he reported to him. He then sent soldiers to defend the castle.

古文：先是，冀州长史宇文仲鸾、司马李祖挹、别驾陈季璩、中从事房子弼、长乐郡守尉普兴等疑归彦有异，使连名密启，归彦追而获之，遂收禁仲鸾等五人，仍并不从，皆杀之。
现代文：遣以前，冀州长史宇文仲鸾、司马李祖挹、别驾陈季璩、中从事房子弼、长乐郡守尉普兴等怀疑归彦怀二心有异谋，曾联名派人向朝廷密报，被归彦追获了，便搜捕囚禁仲鸾等五人，五人都不屈服，全被杀害了。
English: Prior to the deportation, the governor of Hebei Province, Shi Yuwen Zhongyao, Sima Li Zuyao, the deputy governor, Chen Jiyao, the middle-ranking official engaged in housekeeping, and the Changle County guard lieutenant, Pu Xing, suspected that Gui Yan harbored a double-minded plot. They had jointly sent a person to inform the imperial court. When Gui Yan caught up with them, he searched for and imprisoned five people, including Zhongyao. All five people did not give in and were all killed.

古文：军已逼城，归彦登城大叫云： 孝昭皇帝初崩，六军百万众悉由臣手，投身向邺迎陛下，当时不反，今日岂有异心？
现代文：大军已到城下，归彦登城大叫说： 孝昭皇帝驾崩之初，全国六军百万之众都在我的手上，我自己到邺城专程迎接陛下，当时不反，今怎么倒有异心呢!
English: The large army had arrived at the foot of the city. Gui Yan went up to the city and shouted: "At the beginning of the death of Emperor Xiao Zhao, the millions of people of the six armies across the country were in my hands. I made a special trip to Lucheng to greet Your Majesty. I did not oppose it at the time, but how can I have a different heart now!

古文：正恨高元海、毕义云、高乾和诳惑圣上，疾忌忠良。
现代文：我就是恨高元海、毕义云、高干和诳骗皇上，嫉妒忠良。
English: I just hate Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun, Gao Gan and the Emperor of Liars, and I envy Zhong Liang.

古文：但为杀此三人，即临城自刎。 
现代文：衹要杀了这三个人，我就自杀在遣个城头上! 
English: If I had to kill these three people, I would kill myself in a heartbeat!

古文：其后城破，单骑北走，至交津见获，锁送邺。
现代文：其后城被攻破，他一人单骑向北方逃跑，逃到交津被迫获，锁送京师。
English: After that, the city was breached, and he fled to the north on a single horse. He was forced to flee to Kaizu, where he was captured and sent to the capital.

古文：帝令赵郡王睿私问其故。
现代文：皇上派赵郡王高数以私人名义去问他造反的缘故。
English: The emperor sent Zhao Guan Wang Gao Zhi in his private capacity to inquire about the cause of the rebellion.

古文：归彦曰： 使黄领小儿牵挽我，何可不反！ 
现代文：归彦说： 竟让一帮黄毛小子来挟制我，我怎么能不反! 问： 谁? 
English: Kunihiko said, "How can I not rebel against letting a bunch of yellow-haired boys pin me down?" Q: Who?

古文：曰： 谁耶？ 归彦曰： 元海、乾和岂是朝廷老宿？如赵家老公时，又讵怀怨。 
现代文：归彦说： 高元海、高干和能算朝廷长者么?如果是您赵家老公时，我又怎么会内心不平呢! 
English: Gui Yan said, "Can Gao Yuanhai and Gao Ganhe be counted as the elders of the imperial court? If they were your Zhao family husbands, how could I not feel happy inside!

古文：于是帝又使让焉。
现代文：于是皇帝又派人去谴责他。
English: So the emperor sent someone to reprimand him.

古文：对曰： 高元海受毕义云宅，用作本州刺史，给后部鼓吹。
现代文：他说： 高元海收受了毕义云的宅子，就用他为本州刺史，还给后部鼓吹。
English: He said: Gao Yuanhai received Bi Yiyun's mansion and used him to write the history of Honshu and to preach to the rear.

古文：臣为藩王、太宰，仍不得鼓吹。
现代文：我是藩王、太宰，却并没有给鼓吹。
English: I was the lord of the domain, the dazai, but I didn't preach.

古文：正杀元海、义云而已。 
现代文：就该杀了元海、义云! 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to kill Gao Yuanhai and Bi Yiyun in order to get rid of hatred.

古文：上令都督刘桃枝牵入，归彦犹作前语望活。
现代文：皇上便令都督刘桃枝将其牵入宫来，归彦这时还说那些话希圆活命。
English: The emperor then ordered the governor, Liu Taoji, to bring him into the palace. At this time, Gui Yan still said those words, hoping that Yuan would live.

古文：帝命议其罪，皆云不可赦。
现代文：皇帝命群臣公议他的罪过，都说罪不容赦。
English: Emperor Wucheng ordered his courtiers to discuss his crimes, and they all said that he could not be pardoned.

古文：乃载以露车，衔枚面缚，刘桃枝临之以刃，击鼓随之，并子孙十五人皆弃市。
现代文：便用囚车装上他，嘴中衔枚噤声，双臂反缚于后，刘桃枝把刀搁在他脖子上，敲着鼓随于其后，连子孙十五人都杀死在刑场上。
English: He was then loaded onto a prison truck, his mouth was gagged, his arms were tied behind his back, Liu Taozhi put a knife to his neck, followed him with a drum, and even killed fifteen of his children and grandchildren on the execution site.

古文：赠仁州刺史。
现代文：赠给他仁州刺史的名分下葬。
English: He was given the honorary title of "Renzhou's best-known poet" and was buried.

古文：魏时山崩，得石角二，藏在武库。
现代文：早在束魏时发生了山崩，得到两片石角，藏在武库裹。
English: As early as the Wei Dynasty, a landslide occurred, resulting in two stone corners, which were hidden in the arsenal.

古文：文宣入库，赐从臣兵器，特以二石角与归彦。谓曰： 尔事常山不得反，事长广得反，反时，将此角吓汉。 
现代文：文宣帝入库，赐从臣兵器，特地把这两片石角给了归彦，对他说： 你以后事奉常山王不得谋反，事奉长广王要谋反。谋反时，就用遣两片石角去吓唬人。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan went into the storehouse, gave his subordinate weapons, and specially gave the two stone horns to Gui Yan. He said to him, "After you serve the King of Changshan, you must not plot a rebellion. If you serve the King of Changguan, you must plot a rebellion. When you plot a rebellion, you must use the two stone horns to scare people."

古文：归彦额骨三道，着帻不安。文宣尝见之，怒，使以马鞭击其额，血被面，曰： 尔反时当以此骨吓汉。 
现代文：高归彦有三道额骨，戴头冠也戴不稳，文宣帝曾见到过，生了气，让人用马鞭抽打他的额头，血流满脸，说： 你造反时就用这片骨头去吓人吧! 
English: Gao Guibin has three frontal bones, and it is not stable to wear a crown. Emperor Wenzhong once saw this, and got angry. He had someone beat his forehead with a horse whip, and blood flowed all over his face. He said, "When you rebel, use this bone to scare people."

古文：其言反竟验云。
现代文：这些说他反叛之言竟然应验了。
English: His words of rebellion have come to pass.

古文：武兴王普，字德广，归彦兄归义之子也。
现代文：武兴王高普，字德广，是归彦之兄归义的儿子。
English: Wuxing King Gaopu, also known as Deguang, was the son of Gui Yan's brother Gui Yi.

古文：性宽和有度量。
现代文：为人宽和有度量。
English: Be person-wide and measured.

古文：九岁，归彦自河州俱入洛，神武使与诸子同游处。
现代文：九岁时，归彦从河州跟他一起到了洛阳，高祖使其与诸子一同游玩相处。
English: At the age of nine, Kuihiko came with him from Hezhou to Luoyang, and Gaozu let him play with his sons.

古文：天保初，封武兴郡王。
现代文：天保初年，封为武兴郡王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was named the king of Wuxing County.

古文：武平二年，累迁司空。
现代文：武平二年，升迁到司空。
English: In the second year of Wu Ping, he was promoted to Sikuo.

古文：六年，为豫州道行台、尚书令。
现代文：六年，拜任豫州道行台、尚书令。
English: In the sixth year, he was appointed as the leader of the Yuzhou Daogongdae and Shang Shuling.

古文：后主奔邺，就加太宰。
现代文：后主奔入邺城，就在那儿给他加任太宰。
English: Later, the lord rushed to Shicheng, where he was appointed Dazai.

古文：周师逼，乃降。
现代文：北周大军逼近，他便投降了。
English: When the Northern Zhou army approached, he surrendered.

古文：卒于长安。
现代文：死在长安。
English: He died in Chang'an.

古文：赠上开府、豫州刺史。
现代文：赠给他上开府、豫州刺史。
English: He was presented with the Shangkaifu and Yuzhou inscriptions.

古文：长乐太守灵山，字景嵩，神武族弟也。
现代文：垦銮太守茵驰，字星崖，是直担族弟。
English: Grand Empress Dowager Yinqi, also known as Xingyao, is the younger brother of Zhidang.

古文：从神武起兵信都，终于长乐太守。
现代文：跟随产担起兵于值都，死于昼乐太守任上。
English: He followed the production supervisor to raise an army in the capital, and died in the afternoon when he was in charge.

古文：赠大将军、司空，谥曰文宣。
现代文：赠给他大将军、司空，又谧为塞宣。
English: He was given the grand generalship and the title of Siku, and was also given the title of Seisen.

古文：子懿，卒于武平镇将，无子，文宣帝以灵山从父兄齐州刺史建国子伏护为灵山后。
现代文：其子直懿，死于武垩镇将任上，无后，文宣帝便以灵山的堂兄壹丛刺史产建国的儿子伏护为灵山后嗣。
English: His son, Naosuke, died in Buyeo Town and was appointed to the position, but there was no heir, so Emperor Wenzhong took Lingshan's cousin, Fuguo, the son of the founder of the country, as Lingshan's heir.

古文：伏护，字臣援，粗有刀笔。
现代文：迭护，字旦还，这个人多少懂点写文章。
English: Iterative, verbatim, this person knows how to write an article.

古文：天统初，累迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：丢铲初，一步步升至黄门侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the shovel, he rose step by step to the Yellow Gate waiter.

古文：伏护历事数朝，恒参机要，而性嗜酒，每多醉失，末路逾剧，乃至连日不食，事事酣酒，神识恍惚，遂以卒。
现代文：迈事奉过好几个皇帝，总是参与机要，却性爱酗酒，每每因醉误事，后期更是厉害，以至于连日不进餐，整日专门饮酒，弄得神志恍惚，竟因此而死。
English: He had served several emperors, always taking part in important occasions, but he loved to drink and was often drunk, and in the later period he was even worse, to the extent that he did not eat for days on end, and spent the whole day drinking, which made him delirious, and he actually died as a result.

古文：赠兖州刺史。
现代文：赠给他兖州刺史名号。
English: He was awarded the Bozhou Sashimi Prize.

古文：建国侯孙乂袭。
现代文：由建国侯之孙高义袭位。
English: Takayoshi, the grandson of the founding lord, succeeds to the throne.

古文：乂少谨。
现代文：高义年少而勤勉。
English: Gao Yi is young and diligent.

古文：武平末，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：武平末年，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the last years of Takehira's life, he was appointed to the post of Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：隋开皇中，为太府少卿，坐事卒。
现代文：隋开皇年间，曾任太府少卿，犯了事，死去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he was once the Taifu Shosho, but he committed a crime and died.

