古文：爱臣太亲，必危其身；人臣太贵，必易主位；主妾无等，必危嫡子；兄弟不服，必危社稷；臣闻千乘之君无备，必有百乘之臣在其侧，以徙其民而倾其国；万乘之君无备，必有千乘之家在其侧，以徙其威而倾其国。
现代文：宠臣过于亲近，必定危及君主本身；臣子地位太高，必定取代君位；王后和妃子没有了主次等级，一定会危及正妻所生的嫡子；君主兄弟不服，必定危害国家。我听说千乘小国的国君没有防备，必定有拥有百乘兵车的臣子在他身边窥视，准备夺取他的百姓，颠覆他的国家；万乘大国的国君没有防备，必定有千乘之国的大夫窥视在侧，准备夺取他的权势，颠覆他的国家。
English: If a favorite subject is too close, it will surely endanger the monarch himself; if the position of a subject is too high, it will surely replace the throne; if a queen and her consort do not have a primary and secondary rank, it will surely endanger the legitimate son born of the legal wife; if the brothers of the monarch are not satisfied, it will surely endanger the country. I heard that the prince of a small country with a thousand horsemen is not prepared, and there must be a vassal with a hundred chariots peering around him, ready to seize his people and subvert his country; if the prince of a large country with a thousand horsemen is not prepared, there must be a doctor

古文：是以奸臣蕃息，主道衰亡。
现代文：因此奸臣势力扩张，君主权势就会消亡。
English: Therefore, if the treacherous vassal forces expand, the sovereign power will disappear.

古文：是故诸侯之博大，天子之害也；群臣之太富，君主之败也。将相之管主而隆家，此君人者所外也。
现代文：因此诸侯强大是天子的祸害；群臣太富是君主的失败。将相控制君主使私家兴盛，这是君主应排斥的。
English: Therefore, powerful princes are the scourge of the Son of Heaven; too many rich courtiers are the failure of the monarch. The monarch should control the situation and make the private sector flourish. This is what the monarch should reject.

古文：万物莫如身之至贵也，位之至尊也，主威之重，主势之隆也。
现代文：万事万物中，没有比君身更高贵、比君位更尊崇、比君威更强大、比君权更隆盛的。
English: Among all things, there is nothing more noble than the royal body, more respected than the royal title, more powerful than the royal authority, and more prosperous than the royal power.

古文：此四美者，不求诸外，不请于人，议之而得之矣。
现代文：这四种美好的东西，不借助于外界，不求助于别人，处理恰当就都得到了。
English: These four kinds of beautiful things are obtained without the help of the outside world, without resorting to others, and with proper handling.

古文：故曰：人主不能用其富，则终于外也。
现代文：所以说：君主不能使用他的财富，最终会被奸臣窃取，这是天下的君主要牢记的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the monarch cannot use his wealth, and it will eventually be stolen by treacherous vassals. This is something that the monarchs of the world must bear in mind.

古文：此君人者之所识也。昔者纣之亡，周之卑，皆从诸侯之博大也；晋也分也，齐之夺也，皆以群臣之太富也。
现代文：过去商纣的灭亡，周朝的衰微，都是因为诸侯的强大；晋国一分为三，齐国被篡权，都因群臣太过富有。
English: In the past, the demise of the Shang Dynasty and the decline of the Zhou Dynasty were all due to the power of the princes; Jin Province was divided into three, and Qi Province was usurped, all because the ministers were too rich.

古文：夫燕、宋之所以弑其君者，皆此类也。
现代文：燕、宋的君主之所以被杀，都是因为这种缘故。
English: It was for this reason that the monarchs of the Yan and Song dynasties were killed.

古文：故上比之殷周，中比之燕、宋，莫不从此术也。
现代文：所以在上对照商、周，中间对照燕、宋，都是走的这条道路。
English: Therefore, in the upper control, Shang and Zhou, and in the middle control, Yan and Song, are all taking this path.

古文：是故明君之蓄其臣也，尽之以法，质之以备。故不赦死，不宥刑；赦死宥刑，是谓威淫。
现代文：因此英明的君主蓄养他的臣下，让他们完全依法办事，立足于防备，所以君主不赦免死囚，不宽有罪犯，赦免死囚。宽宥罪犯，这叫做威势散失。
English: That is why a wise ruler trains his subjects to act in accordance with the law and based on precaution. That is why the ruler does not pardon prisoners sentenced to death, does not pardon criminals, but pardons prisoners sentenced to death. Pardoning criminals is called dissipation of power.

古文：社稷将危，国家偏威。
现代文：国家将要倾覆，君权先旁落于大臣之手。
English: The country will be overthrown, and the power of the monarchy will first fall into the hands of the ministers.

古文：是故大臣之禄虽大，不得藉威城市；党羽虽众，不得臣士卒。
现代文：因此大臣的俸禄即使很多，也不能凭借威势在城中炫耀；大臣党羽即使很多，也不能拥有私人兵力。
English: Therefore, even if the minister's salary is a lot, he cannot show off in the city by virtue of his power; even if the minister's party is a lot, he cannot have a private army.

古文：故人臣处国无私朝，居军无私交，其府库不得私贷于家。
现代文：所以臣子在国内不准有私人朝会，在军中任职的时候不能与他国私下交往，个人的财物不能私自借给私家。
English: Therefore, courtiers are not allowed to have private imperial court meetings in the country. When serving in the military, they cannot interact privately with other countries. Personal belongings cannot be privately lent to private individuals.

古文：此明君之所以禁其邪。
现代文：这是明君用来禁止大臣奸邪的办法。
English: This was the method used by Emperor Ming to prohibit ministers from committing treason.

古文：是故不得四从，不载奇兵，非传非遽，载奇兵革，罪死不赦。
现代文：因此大臣出外不准有许多人马随从，不准在车上携带任何的兵器；如果不是传递紧急文件，车上带有一件兵器的，也要判处死刑，决不赦免。
English: Therefore, the minister is not allowed to be accompanied by a large number of horses, and is not allowed to carry any weapons in the car; if he does not pass emergency documents, if he carries a weapon in the car, he will be sentenced to death and will never be pardoned.

古文：此明君之所以备不虞者也。
现代文：这是明君用来防备意外的办法。
English: This is a method used by Ming Jun to prevent accidents.

