古文：五年春，王三月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：五年春季，周历三月辛亥初一这天，发生了日食。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the solar eclipse occurred on the first day of Xinhai in March of the lunar calendar.

古文：夏，归粟于蔡。
现代文：夏季，鲁国把粮食送到蔡国。
English: In the summer, Lu Province sent grain to Cai Province.

古文：於越入吴。
现代文：越国人进入吴国。
English: The Yue people entered the State of Wu.

古文：六月丙申，季孙意如卒。
现代文：六月丙申日，季孙意如去世。
English: On June 6th, Ji Sun Yiru passed away.

古文：秋七月壬子，叔孙不敢卒。
现代文：秋季七月壬子日，叔孙不敢去世。
English: On Minshi Day in the autumn of July, my great-uncle did not dare to die.

古文：冬，晋士鞅帅师围鲜虞。
现代文：冬季，晋国的士鞅率领军队包围了鲜虞。
English: In the winter, the Shih Tzu of Jin led an army to encircle Xiang Yu.

古文：五年春，王人杀子朝于楚。
现代文：五年春季，成周人在楚国杀死了王子朝。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Zeng Zhou killed the Prince Dynasty in Chu.

古文：夏，归粟于蔡，以周亟，矜无资。
现代文：夏季，鲁国把粮食送到蔡国，用来救济急难，怜悯他们没有粮食。
English: In the summer, Lu Province sent grain to Cai Province, which was used to relieve the emergency and pity them for having no grain.

古文：越入吴，吴在楚也。
现代文：越国人进入吴国，这是由于吴国人正侵入楚国。
English: The Yue people entered the State of Wu because the Wu people were invading the State of Chu.

古文：六月，季平子行东野，还，未至，丙申，卒于房。
现代文：六月，季平子巡视东野，回来，没有到达，十七日，死在房地。
English: In June, Ji Heishi inspected Higashino, came back, did not arrive, and died on the premises on the 17th.

古文：阳虎将以玙璠敛，仲梁怀弗与，曰： 改步改玉。 
现代文：阳虎准备用美玉随葬，仲梁怀不给，说： 步子改变了，美玉也要跟着改变。 
English: Yanghu is ready to use Meidam to accompany the funeral, but Zhong Lianghuai refuses, saying: "The steps have changed, Meidam must also change."

古文：阳虎欲逐之，告公山不狃。
现代文：阳虎想要赶走他，告诉公山不狃。
English: Yanghu wants to drive him away and tells Gongshan not to go.

古文：不狃曰： 彼为君也，子何怨焉？ 
现代文：不狃说： 他是为着国君，您有什么怨恨的呢？ 
English: He did not hesitate to say, "It is for the sake of the sovereign. What do you have to be angry about?"

古文：既葬，桓子行东野，及费。
现代文：安葬以后，桓子巡视东野，到达费地。
English: After the burial, Kaneko went on a tour of Higashino and arrived in Feidi.

古文：子洩为费宰，逆劳于郊，桓子敬之。
现代文：子泄做费地宰，在郊外迎接慰劳，桓子对他表示尊敬。
English: As the son of a poor farmer, he had to go to the countryside to earn a living. Kaneko expressed her respect for him.

古文：劳仲梁怀，仲梁怀弗敬。
现代文：慰劳仲梁怀，仲梁怀对他却不表示恭敬。
English: He consoled Zhong Liang Huai, but Zhong Liang Huai did not show respect to him.

古文：子洩怒，谓阳虎： 子行之乎？ 
现代文：子泄发怒，对阳虎说： 您要把他赶走吗？ 
English: The son, venting his anger, said to the male tiger, "Do you want to drive him away?

古文：申包胥以秦师至，秦子蒲、子虎帅车五百乘以救楚。
现代文：申包胥带着秦军到达，秦国的子蒲、子虎率领战车五百辆以救援楚国。
English: Shen Baojun arrived with the Qin army, and Zibo and Zihu of Qin led five hundred chariots to rescue Chu.

古文：子蒲曰： 吾未知吴道。 
现代文：子蒲说： 我不知道吴军的战术。 
English: Zibo said: I don't know the tactics of the Wu army.

古文：使楚人先与吴人战，而自稷会之，大败夫槩王于沂。
现代文：让楚军先和吴军作战，秦军在稷地和吴军会合，在沂地大败夫概王。
English: Let the Chu army fight the Wu army first, and the Qin army meet the Wu army in Shunde, and defeat the king in Shunde.

古文：吴人获薳射于柏举。其子帅奔徒以从子西，败吴师于军祥。秋七月，子期、子蒲灭唐。
现代文：吴国人在柏举俘虏了薳射，薳射的儿子率领溃逃的士兵跟随子西，在军祥地方打败了吴军。秋季，七月，子期、子蒲灭亡唐国。
English: The people of Wu captured Zibo at Baijiu, and Zibo's son led the routed soldiers to follow Zixi and defeated the Wu army at Junxiang. In the autumn, in July, Zibo and Zibo perished in Tang.

古文：九月，夫槩王归，自立也，以与王战而败，奔楚，为堂谿氏。
现代文：九月，夫槩王回国，自立为王，因为和吴王阖庐作战，被打败，逃亡到楚国，就是后来的棠溪氏。
English: In September, King Fuxi returned to China and established himself as king. Because he fought against King Wu, he was defeated and fled to Chu. This was the beginning of the Tangxi clan.

古文：吴师败楚师于雍澨，秦师又败吴师。
现代文：吴军在雍澨打败楚军，秦军又打败了吴军。
English: The Wu army defeated the Chu army in Yongle, and the Qin army defeated the Wu army.

古文：吴师居麇。子期将焚之，子西曰： 父兄亲暴骨焉，不能收，又焚之，不可。 
现代文：吴军驻扎在麇地，子期准备用火攻打吴军，子西说： 父兄亲戚的尸骨暴露在那里，不能收敛又要烧掉，不行。 
English: The Wu army was stationed in Handan, and Zixi was preparing to attack the Wu army with fire. Zixi said, "The bones of my father's brothers and relatives are exposed there. I can't restrain myself and want to burn them, I can't.

古文：子期曰： 国亡矣！
现代文：子期说： 国家将要灭亡了！
English: The son said, "The country is going to be destroyed!"

古文：死者若有知也，可以歆旧祀，岂惮焚之？ 
现代文：死去的人如果有知觉，国家复兴他们就可以享有以往的祭祀了，哪里还怕烧掉尸骨？ 
English: If the dead are conscious and the country is revived, they will be able to enjoy the sacrifices of the past. Who is afraid of burning the bones?

古文：焚之而又战，吴师败。又战于公壻之谿，吴师大败，吴子乃归。
现代文：楚军放火焚烧吴军，又接着进攻，吴军败退，又在公婿之溪作战，吴军大败，吴王就回国去了。
English: The Chu army set fire to the Wu army, and then attacked. The Wu army was defeated and retreated. They also fought in Son-in-law's Creek. The Wu army was heavily defeated, and the King of Wu went back to his country.

古文：囚舆罢。
现代文：吴军俘虏了闉舆罢。
English: The Wu army has captured Zou Miao.

古文：舆罢请先，遂逃归。
现代文：闉舆罢请求先行到吴国，就乘机逃回了楚国。
English: He fled back to Chu by taking advantage of the opportunity to go to Wuzhong first.

古文：叶公诸梁之弟后臧从其母于吴，不待而归。
现代文：叶公诸梁的弟弟后臧与他母亲在吴国，后来后臧抛弃了他的母亲回到楚国。
English: Ye Gongzhu Liang's younger brother Hou Yi was with his mother in Wu. Later, Hou Yi abandoned his mother and returned to Chu.

古文：叶公终不正视。
现代文：叶公见后臧不仁不孝，就一直不用正眼看他。
English: After seeing Ye Gong, he did not have to look at him with his right eye.

古文：乙亥，阳虎囚季桓子及公父文伯，而逐仲梁怀。
现代文：九月二十八日，阳虎囚禁了季桓子和公父文伯，并驱逐了仲梁怀。
English: On September 28, Yang Hu imprisoned Ji Huan Zi and his father-in-law, Wen Bo, and expelled Zhong Liang Huai.

古文：冬十月丁亥，杀公何藐。
现代文：冬季，十月初十日，杀了公何藐。
English: In the winter, on the 10th day of the 10th month, he killed Gong He Ming.

古文：己丑，盟桓子于稷门之内。
现代文：十二日，与桓子在稷门里边盟誓。
English: On the twelfth day, he swore an oath with Kaneko at the gate.

古文：庚寅，大诅，逐公父歜及秦遄，皆奔齐。
现代文：十三日，举行大的诅咒，驱逐了公父文伯和秦遄，两个人都逃亡到齐国。
English: On the thirteenth day, a great curse was carried out, banishing father-in-law Wenbo and Qin Yu, both of whom fled to Qi.

古文：楚子入于郢。
现代文：楚昭王进入郢都。
English: King Chu Zhao entered the capital.

古文：初，鬥辛闻吴人之争宫也，曰： 吾闻之，不让则不和，不和不可以远征。
现代文：当初，鬬辛听说吴军将帅争住楚国宫室，说： 我听说： 不谦让就会不和睦，不和睦就不能远征。 
English: At first, Yu Xin heard that the general of the Wu Army was vying for the palace of the State of Chu, and said: I heard: If you don't concede, you won't get along, and if you don't get along, you can't go on an expedition.

古文：吴争于楚，必有乱。有乱则必归，焉能定楚？ 
现代文：吴国人在楚国争夺，必定会发生动乱，发生动乱，就必定会撤军回国，哪里能平定楚国呢？ 
English: If the Wu people fight for Chu, there will surely be turmoil. If there is turmoil, they will surely withdraw and return home. How can Chu be pacified?

古文：王之奔随也，将涉于成臼，蓝尹亹涉其帑，不与王舟。及宁，王欲杀之。
现代文：楚昭王逃亡到随国的时候，要在成臼渡河，蓝尹亹用船把他妻子儿子先渡过河，不把船给楚昭王用，等到楚国安定以后，楚昭王要杀他。
English: When King Chu Zhao fled to Sui Province, he wanted to cross the river in Chengwushu. Lan Yunyang used a boat to cross the river with his wife and son first, but did not give the boat to King Chu Zhao. After Chu Province was stable, King Chu Zhao wanted to kill him.

古文：子西曰： 子常唯思旧怨以败，君何效焉？ 
现代文：子西说： 当初子常就因为记挂着过去的怨恨而失败，君王为什么学他呢？ 
English: Zixi said, "In the beginning, Zizang often failed because he was holding onto past grudges. Why did the king learn from him?"

古文：王曰： 善。使复其所，吾以志前恶。 
现代文：楚昭王说： 好，让蓝尹亹官复原职，我用这件事来记住以往的过失。 
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: Good, let Lan Yin Ying restore the post, I will use this matter to remember the past mistakes.

古文：王赏鬥辛、王孙由于、王孙圉、钟建、鬥巢、申包胥、王孙贾、宋木、鬥怀。
现代文：楚昭王赏赐鬬辛、王孙由于、王孙圉、钟建、鬬巢、申包胥、王孙贾、宋木、鬬怀。
English: King Chu Zhao gave rewards to Juxin, Wang Sun Zhen, Wang Sun Rong, Zhong Jian, Juxu, Shen Bao Rong, Wang Sun Jia, Song Mu, and Zhou Huai.

古文：子西曰： 请舍怀也。 
现代文：子西说： 请您不要赏赐鬬怀！ 
English: Zixi said, "Please don't reward him!

古文：王曰： 大德灭小怨，道也。 
现代文：楚昭王说： 大德消除了小怨，这是合于正道的。 
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: Great virtue has eliminated petty grudges, which is in line with the righteous path.

古文：申包胥曰： 吾为君也，非为身也。
现代文：申包胥说： 我是为了国君，不是为了自己。
English: Shen Baozhen said: I am for the king, not for myself.

古文：君既定矣，又何求？
现代文：国君已经安定了，我还追求什么？
English: The sovereign has been stabilized, what else should I pursue?

古文：且吾尤子旗，其又为诸？ 
现代文：而且我也恨子旗，难道又要去学子旗贪得无厌吗？ 
English: And I also hate the ziqi, do I really want to learn the ziqi and become insatiably greedy?

古文：遂逃赏。
现代文：于是申包胥就逃避了楚王的赏赐。
English: As a result, Shen Baojun evaded the rewards of King Chu.

古文：王将嫁季芈，季芈辞曰： 所以为女子，远丈夫也。
现代文：楚昭王准备把季羋出嫁，季羋辞谢说： 作为女人，就是要远离男人。
English: Chu Zhao Wang is preparing to marry off Ji Lu. Ji Lu said: As a woman, you should stay away from men.

古文：钟建负我矣。 
现代文：可是钟建已经背过我了。 
English: But Zhong Jian has turned his back on me.

古文：以妻钟建，以为乐尹。
现代文：楚昭王把她嫁给钟建，封钟建担任乐尹。
English: Chu Zhao Wang married her to Zhong Jian, and Feng Zhong Jian served as Le Yin.

古文：王之在随也，子西为王舆服以保路，国于脾洩。
现代文：楚昭王在随国的时候，子西仿制了楚昭王的车子和服饰来收集和保护溃散的人，在脾泄建立了国都以此安定人心。
English: When Chu Zhao Wang was accompanying the country, Zixi imitated the chariot and clothing of Chu Zhao Wang to collect and protect the scattered people, and established a national capital to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：闻王所在，而后从王。
现代文：听到了楚昭王的下落，然后赶去。
English: He heard of Chu Zhao Wang's whereabouts and rushed to the scene.

古文：王使由于城麇，复命，子西问高厚焉，弗知。
现代文：楚昭王派王孙由于在麇地筑城，王孙由于回来复命。子西问起城墙的高度厚度，王孙由于不知道。
English: King Chu Zhao sent Wang Sun to build a city in the ploughed land, and Wang Sun returned with orders. Zixi asked about the height and thickness of the city wall, but Wang Sun did not know.

古文：子西曰： 不能，如辞。城不知高厚小大，何知？ 
现代文：子西说： 你如果干不了，就应当推辞，不知道城墙的高度、厚度和城的大小，那还知道什么？ 
English: Zixi said, "If you can't do it, you should refuse. You don't know the height of the city wall, the thickness and the size of the city. What else do you know?"

古文：对曰： 固辞不能，子使余也。
现代文：王孙由于回答说： 我坚决推辞，说干不了，是您让我去做了。
English: Wang Sun replied, "I firmly refuse and say I can't do it. You asked me to do it."

古文：人各有能有不能。
现代文：人人都有干得了的事，也有干不了的事。
English: Everyone has things they can do and things they can't.

古文：王遇盗于云中，余受其戈，其所犹在。 
现代文：君王在云梦泽碰上强盗，我挡住强盗的戈，伤处还在这里！ 
English: The king met a robber in Yunmenze, I blocked the robber's attack, the wound is still here!

古文：袒而视之背，曰： 此余所能也。
现代文：王孙由于脱去衣服把背部给子西看，说： 这是我干得了的。
English: Wangsun took off his clothes and showed his back to Zixi, saying, "I can do this."

古文：脾洩之事，余亦弗能也。 
现代文：像在脾泄建立楚王行都的事情，我是干不了的。 
English: I can't do something like building the capital of Chu Wang Xingdu in a fit of temper.

古文：晋士鞅围鲜虞，报观虎之役也。
现代文：晋国的士鞅包围鲜虞，是为了报复观虎被俘的那次战役。
English: The reason why the Shih Tzu of Jin was in danger of being encircled was to avenge the battle in which Guan Hu was captured.

