古文：攸哈剌拔都，渤海人，初名兴哥。世农家，善射，以武断乡井。
现代文：攸哈剌拔都，勃海人。初名兴哥，世代务农，善于射箭，以其英武裁决乡中之事。
English: You Hao Ba Du, a Bo Hai man. His first name is Xing Ge, he has been farming for generations, is good at archery, and uses his military prowess to adjudicate on matters in the village.

古文：金末，避地大宁。
现代文：金末避居于大宁。
English: At the end of his life, Kinmatsu took refuge in Dainin.

古文：国兵至，出保高州富庶寨，射猎以食。
现代文：蒙古兵到来之后，挺身而出保卫高州的富庶寨，靠射猎野兽为生。
English: After the arrival of Mongolian soldiers, he stood up to defend the rich village of Gaozhou, and made a living by shooting wild beasts.

古文：屡夺大营孳畜，又射死其追者。
现代文：多次抢夺蒙古兵大营的牲畜，又射死那些前来追捕的兵卒。
English: They repeatedly robbed the livestock of the Mongolian battalion, and shot those soldiers who came to chase them.

古文：国王木华黎率兵攻寨，寨破，奔高州。国兵围城，下令曰： 能斩攸兴哥首以降，则城中居民皆获生。 
现代文：国王木华黎率兵攻打富庶寨，寨被攻破，攸哈剌拔都奔到高州，蒙古兵围城，下令说： 若能斩攸兴哥的头颅投降，城中的居民都可活命。 
English: King Mu Huali led the troops to attack the rich village, the village was broken, You Hao Ba ran to Gaozhou, the Mongolian soldiers besieged the city and ordered: If you can cut off the head of You Xing brother and surrender, the residents of the city can live.

古文：守者召谓曰： 汝奇男子，吾宁忍断汝首以献，汝其往降乎！
现代文：城里的军兵召来攸兴哥对他说 ：你是奇男子，我们怎忍心杀你的头献给围城蒙古兵。你能去投降么？
English: The soldiers in the city summoned Youxing's brother and said to him: "You are a strange man, how can we bear to kill your head and offer it to the besieging Mongols. Can you go and surrender?"

古文：不然，吾一城生灵，无噍类矣。 
现代文：否则，我们一城的生命，没有能活的了。 
English: Otherwise, none of us will be able to live a normal life.

古文：兴哥乃折矢出降。
现代文：兴哥于是折矢出城投降。
English: Therefore, Heungge stepped out of the city and surrendered.

古文：诸将怒，欲杀之，木华黎曰： 壮士也，留之为吾用。 
现代文：蒙古军的将领都很愤怒，要杀他，木华黎说： 他是个壮士，留下我要用他。 
English: The Mongol generals were furious and wanted to kill him. Mu Huali said, "He is a strong man. I will use him if he stays."

古文：俾隶麾下。
现代文：就将兴哥置于他的直接指挥下。
English: He placed Xingge under his direct command.

古文：从木华黎攻通州，献计，一夕造炮三十、云梯数十，附城，州将惧，出宝货以降。
现代文：兴哥随从木华黎攻打通州，献计，一日造炮三十尊，云梯数十架，将接近城时，州中守将恐惧，献出宝物投降。
English: Xingge followed Mu Huali to attack Tongzhou, devising a plan to make 30 cannons and dozens of cloud ladders in one day. When he approached the city, the middle guard of the state would be afraid and surrender their treasure.

古文：木华黎命兴哥恣取之，兴哥独取良马三，以赏兵士。
现代文：木华黎命兴哥随意选取，兴哥只取了三匹好马赏给士兵。
English: Mu Huarai ordered Xingge to choose at will, and Xingge only took three good horses to reward the soldiers.

古文：木华黎以其功闻太祖，赐名哈剌拔都。
现代文：木华黎将兴哥之功劳报与太祖。太祖给他赐名为哈剌拔都。
English: Mu Huali reported the merits of Xingge to his great-grandfather, who gave him the name of Harbin.

古文：从木华黎略地燕南，为先锋，至大名，金将徒单登城督战，哈剌拔都射之，中左目，其部将开门南奔，追杀将尽。
现代文：木华黎夺燕南，命他为先锋，兵到大名，金将领徒单登城督战，哈剌拔都一箭射中他的左眼，他的部下开南城门逃走，大量逃兵被追兵杀死。
English: Mu Huarai captured Yan Nan, ordered him to be the vanguard, the soldiers went to Daimyo, the gold general led the soldiers to the city to fight, Harun Baidu shot his left eye with an arrow, his subordinates opened the south gate and fled, and a large number of deserters were killed by the pursuing soldiers.

古文：论功，赐金符，充随营监察。
现代文：论功行赏，赐给哈剌拔都金符，充任随营监察。
English: As a reward for his meritorious service, he was given a gold medallion and assigned as an inspector of the battalion.

古文：戊寅，授金虎符、龙虎卫上将军、河东北路兵马都元帅，镇太原。
现代文：太祖十三年，授予他金虎符、龙虎卫上将军、河东北路兵马都元帅，镇守太原。
English: In the thirteenth year of Taizu's reign, he was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge, the Dragon and Tiger Guard, the Northeast Heze Road, the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the town guard of Taiyuan.

古文：时太原新破，哈剌拔都修城池，缮兵甲，招降属邑，市肆不改，远近闻之，皆相率来归。
现代文：那时蒙古军刚刚攻克太原，哈剌拔都修城池，整治兵甲，招降所属各邑，不改变城市的店铺，远近之人听到这些都来归降。
English: At that time, the Mongolian army had just conquered Taiyuan. People from near and far came to surrender when they heard that the Habsburgs were rebuilding the city, repairing the armour, calling for the surrender of the towns they belonged to, and not changing the shops in the city.

古文：尝微服夜出，闻民间语曰： 吾属父母子女相失矣，死者不可复生，生者无以为赎，奈何！ 
现代文：哈剌拔都常常微服夜出，听百姓诉说 ：我们父母子女都丢失了，死了的人不能复生。活着的人无力去赎回，怎么办？ 
English: All of us in Harbin often wake up in the night, listening to the people tell us: Our parents and children are lost, the dead cannot be revived. The living are powerless to redeem, what should we do?

古文：明日，下令军中，凡俘获有亲者听赎，无赀者官为赎之，民得完聚者众。
现代文：第二天下令军中，凡俘虏中有亲人的让自由赎走，没有钱的人官府代赎，因此，民众中得到团聚的很多。
English: On the next day, the government ordered the army to free all prisoners who had relatives, and those who did not have money to be ransomed by the government. As a result, many people were reunited.

古文：庚辰二月，金梁知府立西风寨，夺居民耕牛，民群诉之，哈剌拔都领数骑，追杀梁知府，枭首西门，驱耕牛还。
现代文：十五年二月，金朝的梁知府建立西风寨，掠夺居民耕牛，居民成群结队去控诉，哈剌拔都率领几个骑兵，追杀梁知府，斩首于西门，驱回耕牛还给农民。
English: In February of the 15th year of the Jin Dynasty, Liang Zhi Fu established the West Wind Village, plundered the residents' farm cattle, and the residents went to complain in droves. Harun Ba Du led several cavalrymen to chase Liang Zhi Fu, beheaded him in the West Gate, and drove back the farm cattle to the farmers.

古文：木华黎由葭州渡河西行，哈剌拔都迎之，道破隰州及悬窑、地洞诸寨。
现代文：木华黎由葭州渡河西征，哈剌拔都去迎接，沿途攻破隰州、悬窑及地洞诸寨。
English: Mu Huali crossed the river from Bozhou to the west, and Harbin went to meet him, breaking through Bozhou, hanging kilns and underground caves along the way.

古文：辛巳三月，金兵攻寿阳县王胡庄，垂破，时左右裨将各分兵守险，城中见卒不满百，哈剌拔都夜半引甲骑十余人救之。道三交，见金兵举烽东、西两山，哈剌拔都趋之，大战。
现代文：十六年三月，金马攻寿阳县王胡庄，即将攻破时，左右副将各领兵分别把守险要之地，城中看到兵卒不过百人，哈剌拔都半夜引铁甲骑兵几十人前往营救，行到三交地方时，看到金兵在东、西两山举着火把，哈剌拔都直冲过去交战。
English: In March of the 16th year, when the Golden Horse attacked Wang Huzhuang, Shouyang County, and was about to break through, the left and right vice generals led the soldiers separately to defend the important place. In the city, they saw no more than a hundred soldiers. In the middle of the night, Harbin led dozens of armored cavalry to rescue. When they went to the three junction places, they saw the golden soldiers holding torches on the east and west mountains, and Harbin rushed straight to fight.

古文：天将明，金兵遁去，捣太原之虚，由西门俘获哈剌拔都家属。
现代文：天将明时金兵退走，乘虚攻占太原，由西门俘虏了哈剌拔都的家属。
English: The gold soldiers of the Ming Dynasty retreated, taking advantage of the false attack to occupy Taiyuan, and the family members of Harbin were captured by the Western Gate.

古文：哈剌拔都闻之，径趋西山，复夺以还。
现代文：哈剌拔都听此消息，直奔西山，夺回家属。
English: After hearing this news, all of them went straight to the West Mountain to win back their families.

古文：五月，金赵权府率兵三万围太原，哈剌拔都将骑三十，出西门，令骑曳柴扬尘，声言曰： 国兵三万至矣。 
现代文：五月金朝赵权府领兵三万围攻太原，哈剌拔都令三十名骑兵出西门，拽柴扬起灰尘，扬言说： 三万蒙古兵来了。 
English: In May, the Kim dynasty's Zhao Quanfu led 30,000 soldiers to besiege Taiyuan. Harun Baidu ordered 30 cavalrymen to leave the West Gate, dragged firewood and raised dust, and threatened: "30,000 Mongol soldiers are coming."

古文：金兵惧，溃去。
现代文：金兵恐惧，溃退逃走。
English: The gold soldiers were terrified and fled in panic.

古文：癸未，金马武京来攻太谷县桑梓寨，哈剌拔都设伏于险，将轻骑冲其阵，伏发，大败之。
现代文：十八年，金马武京进攻太谷县桑梓寨，哈剌拔都设兵埋伏于险要之处，用轻骑兵冲击阵地，埋伏之兵一出击，金兵溃败。
English: In the 18th year, Jinma Wujing attacked Taiguan County's Sangzizhai, and Harbin set up troops to ambush in critical places, using light cavalry to attack positions. The ambushed soldiers launched an attack, and the gold soldiers were defeated.

古文：时太原诸邑皆平，唯石家昂及盂州陵井寨、忻州清泉寨为唇齿，皆不下。
现代文：那时太原所属各邑都已平定，只有石家昂及盂州陵井寨、忻州清泉寨因唇齿相依，都未攻下。
English: At that time, all the towns belonging to Taiyuan had been pacified, and only Shijia's Ang and Bozhou's Lingjingzhai and Bozhou's Qingquanzhai were not conquered because they were too close to each other.

古文：甲申十月，将兵至陵井，遣卒叩寨门，诈曰纳粮刍，守者弗悟，门启，径入，蹂践之，众溃，其酋长走石家昂，遂平陵井寨。
现代文：十九年十月，哈剌拔都率兵到陵井，派小卒去叩寨门，伪称是送饲草的来了。守门人未识破，门开，哈剌拔都的军队直接进寨，进行蹂躏践踏，守寨士卒溃散，酋长逃往石家昂寨。
English: In October of the 19th year, Harbin Badu led his troops to Lingjing, and sent his footmen to knock on the gate of the village, falsely claiming that he was bringing fodder. The gatekeeper did not see through, the door opened, and Harbin Badu's troops directly entered the village, trampled and trampled, the guards dispersed, and the chief fled to Shijiaangzhai.

古文：乙酉二月，清泉寨酋长王壳降，石家昂亦降。
现代文：二十年二月，清泉寨酋长王壳投降，石家昂也投降了。
English: In February of the 20th year, Qingquanzhai chief Wang Hul surrendered, and Shijiaang also surrendered.

古文：丁亥五月，奸人夜献太原东门于武仙，仙引兵入，哈剌拔都鏖战。
现代文：二十二年五月，有奸人夜间开太原东门，引金将武仙入城，哈剌拔都与武仙进行激烈战斗。
English: In May 22nd, an impostor opened Taiyuan's east gate at night, pulling the trigger to bring Wuxian into the city. Harbin and Wuxian fought a fierce battle.

古文：仙兵大至，诸将自城外呼曰： 攸哈剌拔都，汝当出！ 
现代文：仙的大队兵马来到，各个将领在城外呼喊说： 哈剌拔都，你出来！ 
English: Sen's large army of soldiers and horses arrived, and the various generals shouted outside the city saying: "Hail, capital city, come out!

古文：哈剌拔都曰： 真定史天倪，平阳李守忠，隰州田雄，皆失守矣，我又弃太原，将何面目见主上及国王乎！家属任公等所俘，哈剌拔都誓与城同存亡。 
现代文：哈剌拔都说： 真定的史天倪，平阳的李守忠，隰州的田雄都已失守，我再放弃太原，有何脸面去见主上及国王，家属任凭你们俘虏，哈剌拔都誓死与城共存亡。 
English: All of them said: True Shi Tianni, Pingyang's Li Shouzhong, and Zhangzhou's Tianxiong have been lost, I will give up Taiyuan again, I have no face to meet the Lord and the king, my family members are at your mercy as captives, all of them swore to die with the city.

古文：任志，潞州人。
现代文：于是阵亡。任志，潞州人。
English: As a result, he was killed in action. Ren Zhi, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：岁戊寅，太师、国王木华黎略地至潞州，志首迎降，国王授以虎符，俾充元帅，收辑山寨。数与金兵战，比有功。
现代文：太祖十三年，太师、国王木华黎远征到潞州，志首先出城迎接投降，国王授与他虎符，让他当元帅，收降山寨，与金兵数次交战，多次立功。
English: In the 13th year of King Taizu, Grand Master and King Mu Huali went on an expedition to Zhangzhou. Zhi was the first to leave the city to welcome the surrender. The king gave him a tiger emblem, made him a marshal, took down the cottage, fought several times with the gold soldiers, and made many contributions.

古文：金尝擒其长子如山以招之，曰： 降则尔子得生，不降则死。 
现代文：金兵曾擒获他的长子如山，并作为人质来招降任志，对任志说： 投降，你的儿子就能活，不降，就死。 
English: Jinbei had captured his eldest son like a mountain, and used him as a hostage to invite Ren Zhi to surrender. He said to Ren Zhi: "Surrender, and your son will live. If you don't surrender, he will die."

古文：志曰： 我为大朝之帅，岂爱一子！ 
现代文：志说 ：我是大朝的元帅，怎能只爱一个儿子！ 
English: Zhi said, "I am the grand marshal of the dynasty, how can I love only one son!"

古文：亲射其子殪之。
现代文：亲自射死了儿子。
English: He shot his son himself.

古文：木华黎尝召诸将议事，志亦预征，道经武安，其县已反为金，志死之。
现代文：木华黎曾召集会议，志也参与谋划，途经武安时，该县已反叛归金，任志也死了。
English: Mu Huali once convened a meeting, and Zhi also participated in the planning. When passing through Wu'an, the county had rebelled and returned to Jin, and Ren Zhi also died.

古文：国王闵之，令其子存袭。
现代文：国王怜悯他，让他的儿子任存继承其父官职。
English: The king took pity on him and allowed his son to continue in his father's service.

