古文：苏秦说齐闵王曰： 臣闻用兵而喜先天下者忧，约结而喜主怨者孤。
现代文：苏秦游说齐闵王说： 臣听说率先挑起战争的人必然后患无穷，而不顾招人忌恨，带头缔结盟约攻打他国的最终要陷于孤立境地。
English: Su Qin lobbied King Qi and said, "My lord, I have heard that those who take the lead in starting a war are bound to suffer immeasurably, and regardless of attracting people's hatred, those who take the lead in making alliances and attacking other countries will eventually be trapped in an isolated situation.

古文：夫后起者藉也，而远怨者时也。是以圣人从事，必藉于权而务兴于时。
现代文：如果后发制人就能有所凭借，顺应时势即可远离仇怨。因此圣贤做事，无不借势而为，顺天而动。
English: If you act late, you can gain some advantage, and if you act in accordance with the current situation, you can stay away from hatred. Therefore, sages do things by taking advantage of the situation and moving in accordance with the sky.

古文：夫权藉者，万物之率也；而时势者，百事之长也。
现代文：借助形势，有利于展开步骤；倚重天时，则是成功的关键。
English: With the help of the situation, it is conducive to the development of steps; relying on the weather, it is the key to success.

古文：故无权藉，倍时势，而能事成者寡矣。
现代文：因此，不懂得借势顺天之理，能成就大事的机会实在微乎其微。
English: Therefore, if you do not know how to take advantage of the situation, the chance of achieving great things is very small.

古文： 今虽干将、莫邪，非得人力，则不能割刿矣。坚箭利金，不得弦机之利，则不能远杀矣。
现代文：譬如说，即使有干将、莫邪一类的宝剑，如果不施以人力，则不能破损毫发；而再坚硬的箭矢，如果不能借助弓弩，也不能杀伤远处的敌人。
English: For example, even if there is a sword such as a sword, if it does not use human power, it cannot be broken without a wound; and even the hardest arrow, if it cannot use a crossbow, cannot kill a distant enemy.

古文：矢非不銛，而剑非不利也，何则？
现代文：箭并不是不锐利，剑并不是钝而无力，那是什么缘故呢？
English: The arrow is not blunted, the sword is not blunt and powerless, so what is the reason?

古文：权藉不在焉。
现代文：只是由于少了借力之物。
English: It's just due to a lack of leverage.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔者赵氏袭卫，车舍人不休传，卫国城割平，卫八门土而二门堕矣，此亡国之形也。
现代文：过去赵人袭卫，车不停歇，人不喘息，一下子包围了卫国都城，在刚平筑土城加以控制。当时卫都八个城门皆被堵塞，两个城门被摧毁，亡国之祸迫在眉捷。
English: In the past, the Zhao people attacked the guards, the cars did not stop, people did not breathe, they suddenly surrounded the capital city of the Great Patriotic War, and controlled it in Gangping Tsukuducheng. At that time, all eight gates of the Great Patriotic War were blocked, two gates were destroyed, and the disaster of national ruin was imminent.

古文：卫君跣行，告迎于魏。
现代文：卫国国君在形势紧急、间不容发的情况下，光着脚丫逃奔魏国求援。
English: When the situation was urgent and urgent, the Emperor fled barefoot to Wei for help.

古文：魏王身被甲底剑，挑赵索战。
现代文：魏武候亲自披甲带剑，为卫国出头，向赵国挑战。
English: Wei Wuhu personally wore armor and carried a sword, and came forward to defend the country and challenge Zhao.

古文：邯郸之中鹜，河、山之间乱。
现代文：邯郸大乱，黄河与太行山之间也不可收拾。
English: The Yellow River and the Taihang Mountains are in turmoil.

古文：卫得是藉也，亦收余甲而北面，残刚平，堕中牟之郭。
现代文：卫国乘机重整旗鼓，北向攻赵，夺取了刚平，攻下了赵邑中牟的外城。
English: He took advantage of the opportunity to regroup and attacked Zhao from the north, capturing Gangping and the outlying city of Zhongmou in Zhao.

古文：卫非强于赵也，譬之卫矢而魏弦机也，藉力魏而有河东之地。
现代文：卫国并非比赵国强大，只是有了魏国的支持。假如把卫比作箭，魏就好比机弩弓弦，从而借助魏国而占有河东之地。
English: The Wei dynasty was not stronger than the Zhao dynasty, but it was supported by the Wei dynasty. If the Wei dynasty is likened to an arrow, the Wei dynasty is likened to a bowstring that is pulled with the help of the Wei dynasty to occupy the land east of the river.

古文：赵氏惧，楚人救赵而伐魏，战于州西，出梁门，军舍林中，马饮于大河。
现代文：这时赵国非常恐惧，楚国就救赵而讨伐魏国，双方在州西这个地方大打一仗，楚国穿越魏都大梁城门，驻军林中而饮马黄河。
English: At this time, the state of Zhao was very afraid. The state of Chu saved Zhao and fought against the state of Wei. The two sides fought a big battle in the west of the state. The state of Chu crossed the city gate of the Wei capital, and the garrison was in the forest while drinking the Yellow River.

古文：赵得是藉也，亦袭魏之河北，烧棘沟，坠黄城。
现代文：赵人得到楚国的援助，也去攻打魏国河北之地，纵火焚烧棘沟而夺取黄城。
English: The Zhao people received aid from the state of Chu and also attacked the land of Hebei in Wei, setting fire to the Thorn Ditch and capturing Huangcheng.

古文：故刚平之残也，中牟之堕也，黄城之坠也，棘沟之烧也，此皆非赵、魏之欲也。然二国劝行之者，何也？
现代文：毁刚平、破中牟、陷黄城、焚棘沟，这并非是赵国、魏国的本意，然而当初他们都那么卖劲的大干，而最后的结果却是这样呢？
English: It was not the intention of Zhao and Wei to destroy Gangping, break Zhongmou, trap Huangcheng, and set fire to Thorn Ditch. However, they all worked so hard at the beginning, but the final result is like this?

古文：卫明于时权之藉也。
现代文：这是因为卫国和赵国善于利用时机，明白攻占决胜，须依时借势。
English: This is because the defense and Zhao states are good at taking advantage of opportunities and understand that to win a decisive victory, it is necessary to take advantage of the current situation.

古文：今世之为国者不然矣。兵弱而好敌强，国罢而好众怨，事败而好鞠之，兵弱而憎下人也，地狭而好敌大，事败而好长诈。
现代文：如今执国施政的却不是这样，自己军队弱小却喜欢挑斗强敌；国家疲惫偏要触犯众怒；败局一定却仍然一意孤行；没有相当实力，却不能屈志以居下位；自己地狭人少，却与大国抗衡为敌；事情失败却不改诈伪之心。
English: However, this is not the case for those who are currently governing the country. Their army is small and weak, but they like to challenge strong enemies; the country is too tired to offend the public's anger; they must have lost the game, but they are still stubborn; they don't have enough strength, but they can't give in to stay in the lower ranks; they have fewer people in their area, but they are competing with big countries; things fail, but they don't change their deceitful hearts.

古文：行此六者而求伯，则远矣。
现代文：犯下六种错误还妄图建立霸业，其实离霸业是越来越远了。
English: Committing six kinds of mistakes and still vainly trying to establish hegemony, in fact, it is getting farther and farther away from hegemony.

古文： 臣闻善为国者，顺民之意，而料兵之能，然后从于天下。
现代文：臣听说善于治理国家的君主，应该顺应民心，切实估计自己的兵力，然后才能联结诸侯实现自己的抱负。
English: The vassal heard that the monarch, who was good at governing the country, should comply with the people's will and effectively estimate his strength, and then he could unite the lords to realize his ambition.

古文：故约不为人主怨，伐不为人挫强。
现代文：所以缔约时不以自己为主承担怨怒，作战时不替他人去抵抗强敌。
English: Therefore, when making a contract, one should not bear grudges for oneself, and when fighting, one should not resist a strong enemy for others.

古文：如此，则兵不费，权不轻，地可广，欲可成也。
现代文：这样就能保全自己的兵力以控制全局，而且可以实现拓展疆土的愿望。
English: In this way, it can maintain its own strength to control the overall situation, and can realize the desire to expand the territory.

古文：昔者，齐之与韩、魏伐秦、楚也，战非甚疾也，分地又非多韩、魏也，然而天下独归咎于齐者，何也？
现代文：以前，齐王联结韩、魏两国讨伐秦、楚作战并非特别卖力，分得土地又不比韩、魏多，可是天下惟独将战争归咎于齐，为什么呢？
English: In the past, King Qi united Korea and Wei to fight against Qin and Chu. The war was not particularly hard, and the land was not more than that of Korea and Wei. However, the world only blamed the war on Qi. Why?

古文：以其为韩、魏主怨也。
现代文：是因为齐国率先倡导讨伐秦、楚，触犯众怒。
English: It was because Qi took the lead in advocating the crusade against Qin and Chu, which aroused public anger.

古文：且天下遍用兵矣，齐、燕战，而赵氏兼中山，秦、楚战韩、魏不休，而宋、越专用其兵。
现代文：再说那时天下正烽烟四起，齐燕争斗，又有赵国图谋中山，秦、楚与韩、魏不断交锋，而宋、越专事攻伐。
English: In addition, at that time, the world was in turmoil, the Qi and Yan were fighting, Zhao was plotting against Zhongshan, Qin and Chu were constantly fighting with Han and Wei, and Song and Yue were fighting.

古文：此十国者，皆以相敌为意，而独举心于齐者，何也？
现代文：这十个国家，勾心斗角，相互竞争，然而天下只埋怨齐国，这又是什么道理呢？
English: These ten countries, intrigue, compete with each other, but the world only complains about Qi. What is the reason for this?

古文：约而好主怨，伐而好挫强也。
现代文：因为在缔约时齐国喜欢站在领袖的位置，两军相交时喜欢攻打强敌的缘故。
English: Because at the time of the treaty, Qi liked to stand in the position of the leader, and when the two armies met, they liked to attack the strong enemy.

古文： 且夫强大之祸，常以王人为意也；夫弱小之殃，常以谋人为利也。
现代文： 再说强国招致祸患，往往是因为一心想凌驾在他国之上；而弱国遭受灾殃，往往是由于它想图谋别的国家来夺取好处。
English: Moreover, the evils of a powerful state are often caused by its single-minded desire to dominate other countries, while the evils of a weak state are often caused by its desire to scheme with other countries to gain advantages.

古文：是以大国危，小国灭也。
现代文：所以强国陷入危险，小国也要覆灭。
English: That is why the mighty are in danger, and the small perished.

古文：大国之计，莫若后起而重伐不义。
现代文：为大国考虑，不如后发制人，派大军来讨伐那些不讲道义的国家。
English: For the sake of the great powers, it is better to take the initiative later and send a large army to fight those countries that do not preach morality.

古文：夫后起之籍与多而兵劲，则事以众强适罢寡也，兵必立也。
现代文：后发制人能有所倚仗，盟国众多，兵力强大，能够形成以人多势强的军队来对付疲弊衰弱军队的有利局面，战争必能取得胜利。
English: The late attack can be relied on, the allies are numerous, the troops are strong, and a favorable situation can be formed with a large and powerful army to deal with the exhausted and weak army, and the war will surely be victorious.

古文：事不塞天下之心，则利必附矣。
现代文：做事情合乎公道，就能取得利益。
English: If you do things fairly, you can make a profit.

古文：大国行此，则名号不攘而至，伯王不为而立矣。
现代文：强国凭借这来做事情，名声不必去争就能得到，霸业也能随之成就。
English: Powerful countries rely on this to do things, reputation can be obtained without having to fight, and hegemony can also be achieved.

古文：小国之情，莫如仅静而寡信诸侯。
现代文：至于小国，最好的策略则莫过于谨慎从事，不轻信诸侯。
English: As for small countries, the best strategy is to be cautious and not trust the princes.

古文：仅静，则四邻不反；寡信诸侯，则天下不卖，外不卖，内不反，则槟祸朽腐而不用，币帛矫蠹而不服矣。
现代文：小心谨慎，四邻之国就没有借口寻仇犯境；不轻信，就不会被诸侯出卖，成为利益的牺牲品。在外不被出卖，在内没有争斗，就可远离祸患，有利于国内实力的积储和增长。
English: Careful and prudent, there is no excuse for the four neighboring countries to seek revenge and violate the border; if you are not gullible, you will not be betrayed by the princes and become a victim of interests. If you are not betrayed outside and there is no struggle inside, you can stay away from the disaster and is conducive to the accumulation and growth of domestic strength.

古文：小国道此，则不祠而福矣，不贷而见足矣。
现代文：小国若能如此，那么不用祈祷就能享福，无须借贷自能富足。
English: If small countries can do this, then they will be able to enjoy happiness without prayer, and become self-sufficient without borrowing.

古文：故曰：祖仁者王，立义者伯，用兵穷者亡。
现代文：所以说，施行仁政可以称王，建树信义可以称霸，而穷兵黩武只会招致灭亡。
English: Therefore, the implementation of benevolent government can be called a king, building a tree of faith and righteousness can be called a hegemony, and poor soldiers and martial arts will only lead to destruction.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔吴王夫差以强大为天下先，强袭郢而栖越，身从诸侯之君，而卒身死国亡，为天下戮者，何也？
现代文：过去吴王夫差倚仗国大兵强，率领诸侯四方征战，攻击楚国，占据越国，并对诸侯们发号施令，俨然君临天下，最后却落得身死国亡的下场，为天下所耻笑。
English: In the past, Wu Wangfu relied on the strength of the national army, led the warlords in four directions, attacked Chu, occupied Yue, and issued orders to the warlords. He suddenly ruled the world, but in the end, he died and the country was destroyed. He was ridiculed by the world.

古文：此夫差平居而谋王，强大而喜先天下之祸也。
现代文：为什么有这样的后果呢？原因在于夫差平时总是想成为天下之主，倚仗国力强盛率先挑起战争。
English: Why is there such a result? The reason is that in normal times, the husband always wants to become the master of the world, relying on the strength of the country to take the lead in provoking a war.

古文：昔者莱、莒好谋，陈、蔡好诈，莒恃越而灭，蔡恃晋而亡，此皆内长诈，外信诸侯之殃也。
现代文：以前莱、莒两国喜欢施用阴谋，而陈、蔡两国则专行诈术，结果，莒国因倚仗越国而灭亡了，蔡国因倚仗晋国而灭亡了。这些都是在内使用诈术，在外轻信诸侯招来的横祸。
English: Formerly, the two countries of Lai and Su liked to use intrigue, while the two countries of Chen and Cai were dedicated to deception. As a result, Su was destroyed by relying on Yue, and Cai was destroyed by relying on Jin. These were all the evils caused by using deception at home and trusting the lords abroad.

古文：由此观之，则强弱大小之祸，可见于前事矣。
现代文：由此看来，国家无论强弱大小，都有各自的祸患，前车之鉴，在历史上都有印证。
English: From this point of view, regardless of the strength or weakness of a country, each country has its own misfortunes, and the lessons learned from the past have been confirmed in history.

古文： 语曰： 麒骥之衰也，驽马先之；孟贲之倦也，女子胜之。 
现代文：常言道：千里马一旦衰老，跑不过劣马；孟贲一旦力乏，打不过女子。
English: As the saying goes: once the pony is old, it can't run like a poor horse; once Meng Xuan is weak, it can't beat a woman.

古文：夫驽马、女子，筋骨力劲，非贤於麒骥、孟贲也。何则？
现代文：劣马、女子的筋骨劲力，远远比不上千里马和勇士孟贲，但为何会出现这样的结果呢？
English: The inferior horse, the woman's sinew and strength, are far less than the champion horse and the warrior Meng Qi, but why is there such a result?

古文：后起之藉也。
现代文：这是因为后发制人，我方就有所凭藉。
English: This is because we have the advantage of being a late starter.

古文：今天下之相与也不并灭，有而案兵而后起，寄怨而诛不直，微用兵而寄于义，则亡天下可跼足而须也。
现代文：如今，天下诸侯相互借重而相互牵制，并且对峙的时日还很长，如果哪个国家能够按兵不动，后发制人，同时善于转嫁仇怨，隐去用兵的真实意图，假正义之名以伐无道，那么兼并诸侯取得天下便能指日可待。
English: Today, the princes of the world rely on each other and hold each other back, and the time of confrontation is still very long. If any country can hold its ground, restrain others, and at the same time be good at passing on grudges, concealing the true intention of using soldiers, and going nowhere in the name of false justice, then the annexation of the princes to gain the world can be expected.

古文：明于诸侯之故，察于地形之理者，不约亲，不相质而固，不趋而疾，众事而不反，交割而不相憎，惧强而加以亲。
现代文：掌握诸侯的国情，明了天下的地理形势，不结盟，不互相扣留人质，关系会更牢固；不急躁冒进，事情会进展的更为顺利。一起共事能坚守承诺，一起受害而不相互埋怨，彼此都强大了就越发亲近。
English: Grasp the national conditions of the princes, understand the geographical situation of the world, do not make alliances, do not hold each other hostage, the relationship will be stronger; do not rush forward, things will go more smoothly. Work together to keep promises, suffer together without complaining about each other, and become stronger and closer together.

古文：何则？
现代文：如何能做到这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：形同忧而兵趋利也。
现代文：在于形势令他们忧患相同、利害一致。
English: It is because the situation has made them share the same worries and interests.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：有什么事实可作佐证呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔者齐、燕战于桓之曲，燕不胜，十万之众尽。
现代文：早先，齐、燕两国在桓曲交战，燕兵败北，十万兵众匹马无归。
English: Earlier, the two countries of Qi and Yan fought in Huanqu. Yan's army was defeated, and 100,000 soldiers did not return.

古文：胡人袭燕楼烦数县，取其牛马。
现代文：胡人乘势袭击燕国楼烦等地，掳掠牛马。
English: Hu people took advantage of the situation to attack Yan Guorou and other places, and captured cattle and horses.

古文：夫胡之与齐非素亲也，而用兵又非约质而谋燕也，然而甚于相趋者，何也？
现代文：那胡人与齐国，非亲非故，又没有订立什么盟约，却竭力配合齐国，什么原因呢？
English: The Nahu people and the Qi people are not related to each other, and they have not signed any treaty, but they are trying their best to cooperate with the Qi people. What is the reason?

古文：何则形同忧而兵趋利也。
现代文：就是因为他们忧患相同、利害相关呀！
English: It's because they share the same concerns and interests!

古文：由此观之，约于同形则利长，后起则诸侯可趋役也。
现代文：以此可见，联合形势相同的国家就可以最大程度地获取利益，后发制人可使诸侯归附并加以役使。
English: Thus, it can be seen that the countries with the same alliance situation can obtain the maximum benefit, and the late starters can make the lords attach and use them.

古文： 故明主察相，诚欲以伯王也为志，则战攻非所先。
现代文： 所以英明的君主和有远见卓识的相国，如果致力于霸业，就不要把使用武力摆在首位。战争既耗损国力，又扰乱百姓。
English: Therefore, a wise ruler and a far-sighted country, if they are committed to hegemony, should not put the use of force in the first place. War both depletes national strength and disturbs the people.

古文：战者，国之残也，而都县之费也。
现代文：国家的实力遭到损耗，便再也无力号令诸侯。
English: The country's strength was depleted, and it was no longer able to command the lords.

古文：残费已先，而能从诸侯者寡矣。
现代文：战争对国家的损耗是显而易见的。
English: The war's toll on the country is clear.

古文：彼战者之为残也，士闻战则输私财而富军市，输饮食而待死士，令折辕而炊之，杀牛而觞士，则是路君之道也。
现代文：士人听说将有战事，就捐献财产，来充当军用物资，而商人就运送酒肉粮食来犒劳战士，长官让人拆下车辕当柴烧，杀牛设宴款待军兵。其实这些都是坑害百姓、危害国家的做法。
English: When the nobles heard that there would be a war, they donated their property to serve as military supplies, while the merchants transported wine, meat and grain to reward the soldiers for their hard work. The officials had people dismantle the carts to use as firewood, kill cows and set up a banquet to entertain the soldiers. In fact, these were all practices that harmed the people and harmed the country.

古文：中人祷视，君翳酿，通都小县置社，有市之邑莫不止事而奉王，则此虚中之计也。
现代文：国人祈祷，君王设祭，大城小县都设有神庙，凡有市场的城邑都要停业为战争服役，其实这是损耗国家的做法。
English: The people of the country pray, the king holds festivals, every large city and small county has a temple, and every town with a market must suspend business to serve in the war. In fact, this is the practice of depleting the country.

古文：夫战之明日，尸死扶伤，虽若有功也，军出费，中哭泣，则伤主心矣。
现代文：决战的沙场，尸横满地，哀鸿遍野，人们扶着受伤的将士，表面看来将士立功，国家取得了战争的胜利，但实际上，损耗大量的资财，国人悲惨的痛哭，足以令国君忧心如焚。
English: On the battlefield of the decisive battle, the ground was covered with dead bodies, and there was a great outpouring of grief. People supported the injured soldiers. On the surface, it appeared that the soldiers had made great contributions, and the country had achieved victory in the war. However, in reality, the loss of a large amount of wealth and the tragic tears of the Chinese people were enough to make the sovereign worry.

古文：死者破家而葬，夷伤者空财而共药，完者内酺而华乐，故其费与死伤者钧。故民之所费也，十年之田而不偿也。
现代文：阵亡将士的家属为安葬父兄而倾尽家财，负伤的将士也耗尽积储来治疗战争中受的伤，那些侥幸全身而回的军人，在家中大摆筵席以示庆贺，花费也很多。所以战争使人民耗费的钱财，十年耕种所得的收获也难以抵偿。
English: The families of the fallen soldiers spent all their money to bury their fathers and brothers, the wounded soldiers also exhausted their reserves to treat the injuries suffered in the war, and those soldiers who were lucky enough to return in one piece held a grand banquet at home to celebrate, which also cost a lot. Therefore, the war has cost the people a lot of money, and the harvest of ten years of farming income is difficult to compensate.

古文：军之所出，矛戟折，鐶弦绝，伤弩，破车，罢马，亡矢之大半。
现代文：军队出战，矛戟弓弩，车马刀矢，损失大半，再加上被人盗窃藏匿所造成的损失，也是十年耕种无法抵偿的。
English: The army went to war, spears, bows and arrows, chariots, horses, swords and arrows, and most of the losses, plus the losses caused by people stealing and hiding, are also irreplaceable after ten years of cultivation.

古文：甲兵之具，官之所私出也，士大夫之所匿，厮养士之所窃，十年之田而不偿也。
现代文：国家负担这两笔费用，已是精疲力竭，哪里还能对诸侯施以号令呢？攻城拔地的时候，百姓作为后方支援，替士兵缝补破烂的战衣，运输攻城的器械，处理家中杂事，挖掘地道，为徭役所累。将军顾不上士兵劳累，日夜督战，数月能攻下城池就算很快了。
English: The state is burdened with these two costs, and is already exhausted. Where else can it give orders to the lords? When the city is attacked and taken, the people act as rear support, sewing torn battle clothes for the soldiers, transporting siege equipment, dealing with household chores, digging tunnels, and are tired of the work. The general can't take care of the soldiers' fatigue, supervising the war day and night, and it would be very fast to capture the city in a few months.

古文：天下有此再费者，而能从诸侯寡矣。
现代文：将士疲弊，连下三城，相信再没有余力战胜敌人。
English: The soldiers were exhausted, having lost three cities in a row, and believed that there was no more energy left to defeat the enemy.

古文：攻城之费，百姓理襜蔽，举冲橹，家杂总，身窟穴，中罢于刀金。
现代文：所以说，明君贤相图谋天下，并不把使用武力放在第一位。这在历史上是有先例的。过去，智伯攻灭范氏、中行氏，接着又麾兵西向，围攻晋阳，吞并两国，杀了国君，又逼得赵襄子走投无路，军威可以说盛极一时。
English: In the past, Zhibo attacked and exterminated the Fan and Zhongxing clans, and then sent troops westward, besieged Jinyang, annexed the two countries, killed the sovereign, and forced Zhao Xiangzi into a corner, and the military power could be said to be at its peak.

古文：而士困于土功，将不释甲，期数而能拔城者为亟耳。
现代文：然而后来智伯却落得身死国亡的下场，为天下人所耻笑，这是什么缘故呢？
English: However, Zhibo later ended up dying for his country, becoming the laughing stock of the world. What was the reason for this?

古文：上倦于教，士断于兵，故三下城而能胜敌者寡矣。
现代文：是因为智伯挑起祸端，威胁到韩、魏两国君主的缘故。
English: It was because Zhibo had stirred up trouble and threatened the monarchs of Korea and Wei.

古文：故曰：彼战攻者，非所先也。何以知其然也？昔智伯瑶攻范、中行氏，杀其君，灭其国，又西围晋阳，吞兼二国，而忧一主，此用兵之盛也。
现代文：过去中山国调动全国的军队，来迎击燕、赵两国的军队，在南方的长子大败赵国的军队，在国境内大败燕国的军队，并杀掉领兵的大将。
English: In the past, Zhongshan mobilized the army of the whole country to meet the army of Yan and Zhao. The eldest son in the south defeated the army of Zhao, defeated the army of Yan in the country, and killed the general who led the army.

古文：然而智伯卒身死国亡，为天下笑者，何谓也？
现代文：中山国只是个千乘小国，与两个万乘大国同时为敌，连续取得两次决定性的胜利，成为用兵的典范。
English: Zhongshan is only a small country of the Thousand Immortals, but it has been an enemy of two great countries of the Thousand Immortals at the same time, and has won two consecutive decisive victories, becoming a model for the use of troops.

古文：兵先战攻，而灭二子患也。
现代文：然而这样的善战之国终究免不了灭亡的命运，导致国君逃往齐国做了臣子，原因是什么呢？
English: However, such a warlike country could not avoid the fate of extinction, leading the sovereign to flee to Qi and become a vassal. What was the reason for this?

古文：日者，中山悉起而迎燕、赵，南战于长子，败赵氏；北战于中山，克燕军，杀其将。夫中山千乘之国也，而敌万乘之国二，再战北胜，此用兵之上节也。然而国遂亡，君臣于齐者，何也？
现代文：是因为它不考虑战争的祸患，接连不断地发动战争。由此看来，战争的弊端在史书上的记载是很多的。 如今称得上善于用兵的人，屡战屡胜，攻则取，守则固，天下人给予高度颂扬，而举国上下莫不倚之若长城，其实这并非是国家的好事。
English: It is because it does not consider the scourge of war and continues to wage war one after another. From this point of view, there are many records of the drawbacks of war in the history books. Nowadays, it is said to be a person who is good at using soldiers, repeatedly wins battles, takes the offensive, adheres to rules, and is highly praised by people around the world. However, if the Great Wall is immovable throughout the country, it is actually not a good thing for the country.

古文：不啬于战攻之患也。由此观之，战攻之败，可见于前事。
现代文：臣听说战争取得大捷，士卒伤亡惨重，百姓因防务而疲惫不堪，城郭也会损毁得面目全非。兵死于战，民疲于内，城郭破败，国君是不会高兴的。
English: The vassal heard that the war was a great success, the soldiers suffered heavy casualties, the people were exhausted due to defense, and the castle would be destroyed beyond recognition. Soldiers died in battle, the people were exhausted, the castle was ruined, and the sovereign would not be happy.

古文： 今世之所谓善用兵者，终战比胜，而守不可拔，天下称为善，一国得而保之，则非国之利也。
现代文：以箭靶为喻，它并没有与人结怨，可是人人都会以强弓硬弩对待它，射中的就高兴，没有射中的则会满面羞惭，不论老少尊卑，皆以一射为快。原因何在？
English: Take the target of an arrow as a metaphor. It does not hold a grudge against anyone, but everyone treats it with a strong bow and a hard hammer. If you hit it, you will be happy, but if you don't hit it, you will be ashamed. Regardless of whether you are young or old, high or low, everyone is quick to shoot. What is the reason?

古文：臣闻战大胜者，其士多死而兵益弱；守而不可拔者，其百姓罢而城郭露。
现代文：是人们厌恶让人看出自己不会射箭。现在有的国家屡战屡胜不可攻拔，这不仅仅是示人以难，同时还妨害到别国的利益，别国的敌视情绪也就更重了。像这样既劳累百姓、损耗国家，又成为众矢之的之事，圣明的国君是不会干的。
English: It is people's aversion to letting people see that they cannot shoot arrows. Nowadays, some countries are invincible in repeated battles. This is not just a show of difficulty, but also interferes with the interests of other countries, and the hostile sentiments of other countries are even heavier. A saintly sovereign would not do such a thing that would exhaust the people, deplete the country, and become a target of arrows.

古文： 臣之所闻，攻战之道非师者，虽有百万之军，比之堂上；虽有阖闾、吴起之将，禽之户内；千丈之城，拔之尊俎之间；百尺之冲，折之衽席之上。故钟鼓竽瑟之音不绝，地可广而欲可成；和乐倡优侏儒之笑不之，诸侯可同日而致也。
现代文：有远见卓识的明君贤相也不会妄动刀兵，以致于损兵折将，大伤元气。明君贤相，总是力求不施攻伐而臣服诸侯，以谦恭辞让获得更多的财货土地。因为明君之于战事，不动刀兵就能战胜敌国，不用武力就可掠夺到土地，别人尚未察觉而王业就可完成。明君之处事，不费财力，而以长期的策划取得永久的利益。所以可以这样说，后发制人可令诸侯归附并加以驱使。据臣所知： 战争之道不在于士兵的多少 ，即使有百万敌军，也能败之于朝堂之上帷幄之中；即使遭遇阖闾、吴起那样的将帅，也能通过室内的策划将其擒获；虽然有千丈深的城池，也可以在酒席之间摧毁它；虽然有百尺高的战车，也可以在坐卧之时摧折它。所以，丝管之声在朝堂不绝于耳、和着优伶和侏儒欢笑歌舞之时，国土已经扩张，诸侯已经前来臣服。
English: The wise and far-sighted Ming Junxian would not use swords and soldiers in a rash manner, which would result in a loss of soldiers and a great loss of vitality. The wise and far-sighted Ming Junxian always strived not to attack but to submit to the lords, and to obtain more wealth and land with a humble speech. Because the Ming Junxian was in the war, the enemy country could be defeated without using swords and soldiers, the land could be plundered without using force, and the king's business could be completed before others noticed. The Ming Junxian did not spend money on things, but obtained permanent benefits with long-term planning. Therefore, it

古文：故名配天地不为尊，利制海内不为厚。
现代文：这样的君王，名号与天地相等不算高贵，政权控制海内也不算巨大。
English: Such a king, whose name is equal to heaven and earth, is not noble, and the regime's control over the sea is not huge.

古文：佚治在我，劳乱在天下，则王之道也。锐兵来则拒之，患至则趋之，使诸侯无成谋，则其国无宿忧矣。
现代文：因此，善于开创基业的君王，在于能使诸侯劳顿而自己闲逸，使天下大乱而本国安宁。安逸与大治在我方，而劳顿与混乱在它国，这就是王霸之道。积蓄国力以待来敌，以消兵祸，那么他的国家没有隔夜之忧。
English: Therefore, a king who is good at creating a foundation lies in being able to make the princes work hard and himself idle, to make the world chaotic and his own country peaceful. Peace and tranquility are on our side, while work and chaos are in other countries, this is the way of the king. Accumulating national strength to wait for the enemy and to eliminate the military disaster, then his country does not have overnight worries.

古文：何以知其然矣？
现代文：有什么事实作佐证呢？
English: What facts are there to support this?

古文：昔者魏王拥土千里，带甲三十六万，其强而拔邯郸，西围定阳，又从十二诸侯朝天子，以西谋秦。
现代文：过去魏惠王拥有领土上千里，甲士三十六万，倚仗自己实力强大，攻取邯郸，西围定阳，又邀集十二家诸侯朝拜周天子，为图谋秦国作种种准备。
English: In the past, King Wei Hui had thousands of miles of territory, 360,000 warriors, and relied on his own strength to conquer Qi, encircle Dingyang in the west, and invite twelve princes to worship Zhou Tianzi, and make various preparations for plotting Qin.

古文：秦王恐之，寝不安席，食不甘昧，令于境内，尽堞中为战具，竟为守备，为死士置将，以待魏氏。
现代文：秦孝公闻报，忧心忡忡，寝食难安，食不甘味，动员全国，修缮战守的器具，境内严加防守，同时招募死士，任命将领，以待来敌。
English: Qin Xiao Gongwen reported that he was worried, sleeping and eating were difficult, and the food was not sweet. He mobilized the whole country, repaired the equipment of the war, strictly defended the territory, and at the same time recruited dead soldiers and appointed generals to wait for the enemy.

古文：卫鞅谋于秦王曰： 夫魏氏其功大，而令行于天下，有十二诸侯而朝天子，其与必众。
现代文：卫鞅向秦孝公献计说： 魏王有匡扶周室之功，号令得以施行天下，既能邀集十二家诸侯朝见天子，从者甚众。
English: Wei Zheng presented a plan to Qin Xiaogong, saying: The Wei king had the merit of supporting the Zhou dynasty, and the order could be carried out all over the world. Since he was able to invite twelve princes to the court to see the heavenly son, there were many followers.

古文：故以一秦而敌大魏，恐不如。王何不使臣见魏王，则臣请必北魏矣。 
现代文：以区区一个秦国，恐怕还不能与之争锋竞胜，大王可否以臣为使去见魏王？臣有把握挫败魏国。 
English: With only one Qin state, I am afraid that we cannot compete with it. Can the great king send his vassal to meet the Wei king? The vassal is sure to defeat the Wei state.

古文：秦王许诺。卫鞅见魏王曰： 大王之功大矣，令行于天下矣。
现代文：秦王答应了他的请求，卫鞅往见惠王，大加称颂： 我听说大王劳苦功高而能号令天下。
English: King Qin agreed to his request. Wei Xuan went to see King Hui and praised him greatly: I heard that the great king worked hard and was able to rule the world.

古文：今大王之所从十二诸侯，非宋、卫也，则邹、鲁、陈、蔡，此固大王之所以鞭箠使也，不足以王天下。
现代文：可如今大王率领的十二家诸侯，不是宋、卫，就是邹、鲁、陈、蔡，大王固然可以随意加以驱使，然而就凭这些力量还不足以称王天下。
English: However, the twelve princes led by the great king now are not Song, Wei, or Jie, Lu, Chen, and Cai. Of course, the great king can drive them at will, but these forces are not enough to claim the kingdom.

古文：大王不若北取燕，东伐齐，则赵必从矣；西取秦，南伐楚，则韩必从矣。
现代文：大王不如向北联结燕人，东伐齐国，赵国自会服从；再联合西方的秦国，南伐楚国，韩国自会望风而服。
English: It would be better for the great king to unite the Yan people in the north, the Qi country in the east, and the Zhao country in the west; and then unite the Qin country in the west, the Chu country in the south, and the Korean country in the south.

古文：大王有伐齐、楚心，而从天下之志，则王业见矣。
现代文：大王有讨伐齐、楚的心愿且行事合于道义，实现王业的日子便不远了。
English: The day is not far off when the great king will realize his royal mission, as he has the desire to fight for peace and justice, and will act in accordance with morality.

古文：大王不如先行王服，然后图齐、楚。 
现代文：大王自可顺从天下之志，加天子衣冠，再图齐、楚。 
English: The great king can obey the will of the world, add the crown of heaven, and then try to be equal and perfect.

古文：魏王说于卫鞅之言也，故身广公宫，制丹衣柱，建九斿，从七星之旟。
现代文：惠王听了，十分高兴，便依天子体制，大建宫室，制作丹衣和九施、七星之旗。
English: Hui Wang listened and was very happy, so he built a large palace room according to the heavenly son system, and made a denim jacket and a flag with nine stars and seven stars.

古文：此天子之位也，而魏王处之。于是齐、楚怒，诸侯奔齐，齐人伐魏，杀其太子，覆其十万之军。
现代文：对惠王的妄自尊大、越礼不轨，齐、楚两国君主大为激愤，而各路诸侯也都投到齐国伐楚的旗帜下面。齐人伐魏，杀掉了魏太子申，歼师十万。
English: The monarchs of Qi and Chu were greatly angered by Hui Wang's arrogant pride and improper etiquette, and all the princes also joined the banner of Qi's invasion of Chu. Qi people invaded Wei, killed Wei Prince Shen, and wiped out 100,000 soldiers.

古文：魏王大恐，跣行按兵于国，而东次于齐，然后天下乃舍之。
现代文：惠王震恐，急忙下令收兵，又向东臣服于齐。诸侯们这才停止武力制裁。
English: King Hui was terrified and hastily ordered a withdrawal of troops and submitted to the Eastern subjects. Only then did the lords stop the military sanctions.

古文：当是时，秦王垂拱受河西之外，而不以德魏王。
现代文：在那个时候，秦孝公乘机取得魏国的河西地区，而且对惠王毫无感激之情。
English: At that time, Qin Xiaogong took advantage of the opportunity to acquire the Hexi region of Wei and showed no gratitude to Hui Wang.

古文：故曰卫鞅之始与秦王计也，谋约不下席，言于尊俎之间，谋成于堂上，而魏将以禽于齐矣；冲橹未施，而西河之外入于秦矣。
现代文：所以卫鞅当初与孝公商议对策的时候，谋约于座席之上，策划于酒席之间，定计于高堂之上，而魏国大将庞涓已为齐所擒，刀兵不动已收西河以外的地方。
English: Therefore, when Wei Kun and Xiao Gong discussed countermeasures at the beginning, they plotted on the seat, planned between the wine tables, and determined on the high hall, while Wei General Pang Jun had already been defeated, and the sword soldiers had not moved beyond the West River.

古文：此臣之所谓比之堂上，禽将户内，拔城于尊俎之间，折冲席上者也。 
现代文：这就是臣所讲的 败敌于厅堂之上，擒获敌将于帷幄之中，在酒宴上攻下敌城，在枕席上折断敌人兵车。  
English: This is what the vassal said: the defeated enemy will be on top of the hall, the captured enemy will be in the curtains, the enemy city will be captured at the wine banquet, and the enemy chariot will be broken on the pillow seat.

