古文：◎安帝恭帝安皇帝讳德宗，字德宗，孝武帝长子也。太元十二年八月辛巳，立为皇太子。二十一年九月庚申，孝武帝崩。
现代文：安皇帝名德宗，字德宗，是孝武帝的长子。太元十二年八月辛巳，被立为皇太子。二十一年九月庚申，孝武帝去世。
English: Emperor An, also known as Emperor Dezong or Emperor Dezong, was the eldest son of Emperor Xiaowu. He was enthroned as crown prince in August 12th, and Emperor Xiaowu died in September 21st, Goshun.

古文：辛酉，太子即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：辛酉，太子即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: Xin Zheng, the prince, that is, the emperor, is the leader of the world.

古文：癸亥，以司徒、会稽王道子为太傅，摄政。
现代文：癸亥，任命司徒、会稽王道子为太傅，代理朝政。
English: Emperor Jianhai appointed Sitoru and Daozi, the King's inspector, as Taifu, acting as regents.

古文：冬十月甲申，葬孝武皇帝于隆平陵。
现代文：冬十月甲申，将孝武皇帝葬在隆平陵。
English: In winter and October of Jiaxing, Emperor Xiaowu was buried in the Longping Mausoleum.

古文：大雪。
现代文：天降大雪。
English: Heavy snow is falling.

古文：隆安元年春正月己亥朔，帝加元服，改元，增文武位一等。
现代文：隆安元年春正月己亥初一，皇帝加冕，改年号，给文武官员增加一等官级。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Longan, the emperor was crowned, the year name was changed, and the first-class official rank was added to the civil and military officials.

古文：太傅、会稽王道子稽首归政。
现代文：太傅、会稽王道子稽首还政。
English: Taifu, the head of the imperial court, returned to power.

古文：以尚书左仆射王珣为尚书令，领军将军王国宝为尚书左仆射。
现代文：任命尚书左仆射王殉为尚书令，领军将军王国宝为尚书左仆射。
English: He appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Wang Jie as Shangshu's second-in-command, and the leading general Wang Guobao as Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha.

古文：二月，吕光将秃发乌孤自称大都督、大单于，国号南凉。
现代文：二月，吕光的部将秃发乌孤自称为大都督、大单于，国号为南凉。
English: In February, the Ministry of Luguang made Bald-faced Wuqiao the self-proclaimed great governor of Luguang, and the country's name was Nanliang.

古文：击光将窦苟于金昌，大破之。
现代文：在金昌攻打吕光的部将窦苟，大败他的军队。
English: In Jinchang, he attacked Luguang's general Dou Guo and defeated his army.

古文：甲寅，尊皇太后李氏为太皇太后。
现代文：三月甲寅，尊奉皇太后李氏为太皇太后。
English: In March of the year of Jia Yin, the Li clan revered the empress dowager as the great empress dowager.

古文：戊午，立皇后王氏。
现代文：戊午，立王氏为皇后。
English: In the afternoon, the Wang clan was crowned as empress.

古文：三月，吕光子纂为乞伏乾归所败。
现代文：吕光的儿子吕纂被乞伏干归打败。
English: Luguang's son, Liusan, was defeated by a beggar.

古文：光建康太守段业自号凉州牧。
现代文：吕光的部下建康太守段业自号为凉州牧。
English: Luguang's subordinate Jiankang Taishu Danren called himself Liangzhou Mu.

古文：慕容宝败魏师于蓟。
现代文：慕容实在蓟打败魏军。
English: Murong really defeated the Wei army.

古文：夏四月甲戌，兖州刺史王恭，豫州刺史庾楷举兵，以讨尚书左仆射王国宝、建威将军王绪为名。
现代文：夏四月甲戌，兖州刺史王恭、豫州刺史庾楷起兵，名义是讨伐尚书左仆射王国宝、建威将军王绪。
English: In the summer of April in Jiaxuan, Zhangzhou Zhangshi Wangqong and Yuzhou Zhangshi Qiankai raised an army in the name of fighting Shangshu Zuoxi Kingdom Treasure and Jianwei General Wangxu.

古文：甲申，杀国宝及绪以悦于恭，恭乃罢兵。
现代文：甲申，杀掉国宝和王绪来取悦于王恭，王恭才罢兵。
English: Jiashen killed the national treasure and Wang Xiu to please Wang Qiong, and only then did Wang Qiong leave the army.

古文：戊子，大赦。
现代文：戊子，大赦天下。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：五月，前司徒长史王廞以吴郡反，王恭讨平之。
现代文：五月，前司徒长史王厂在吴郡谋反，王恭征讨平定了他。
English: In May, the former head of the Sifu, Shi Wang, plotted a rebellion in Wuxi County, which was put down by Wang Qiong.

古文：慕容宝将慕容详僭即皇帝位于中山，宝奔黄龙。
现代文：慕容实的部将慕容详在中山即位为伪皇帝，慕容宝逃奔黄龙。
English: Murong Bao, a subordinate of Murong Jiao, was enthroned as a pseudo-emperor in Zhongshan. Murong Bao fled to Huanglong.

古文：秋八月，吕光为其仆射杨轨、散骑常侍郭黁所攻，光子纂击走之。
现代文：秋八月，吕光受到他的仆射杨轨、散骑常侍郭摩攻打，吕光的儿子吕纂打跑了他们。
English: In the autumn and August, Lü Guang was attacked by his henchmen Yang Rail and Guo Ma, who rode around on horseback. Lü Guang's son Lü Zuo attacked and drove them away.

古文：九月，慕容宝将慕容麟斩慕容详于中山，因僭即皇帝位。
现代文：九月，慕容实的部将慕容麟在中山斩杀了慕容详，随后即位为伪皇帝。
English: In September, Murong Jie's subordinate, Murong Lin, killed Murong Jie in Zhongshan, and then ascended the throne as a pseudo-emperor.

古文：冬十月，慕容麟为魏师所败。
现代文：冬季十月，慕容麟被魏军打败。
English: In the winter of October, Muronglin was defeated by the Wei army.

古文：二年春三月，龙舟二灾。
现代文：二年春三月，龙舟两次失火。
English: In the spring and March of the second year, the dragon boat caught fire twice.

古文：夏五月，兰汗弑慕容宝而自称大将军、昌黎王。
现代文：夏五月，兰汗杀慕容实后自称为大将军、昌黎王。
English: In the summer of May, after Lan Han killed Murong Si, he called himself the great general, the King of Changli.

古文：秋七月，慕容宝子盛斩兰汗，僭称长乐王，摄天子位。
现代文：秋七月，慕容宝的儿子慕容盛斩兰汗，僭称为长乐王，摄天子位。
English: In autumn and July, Murong Bao's son, Murong Sheng, beheaded Lanhan, known as the King of Changle, and became the Son of Heaven.

古文：兖州刺史王恭、豫州刺史庾楷、荆州刺史殷仲堪、广州刺史桓玄、南蛮校尉杨佺期等举兵反。
现代文：兖州刺史王恭、豫州刺史庾楷、荆州刺史殷仲堪、广州刺史桓玄、南蛮校尉杨佺期等人起兵反叛。
English: Bozhou chief Wang Gong, Yuzhou chief Xingkai, Jingzhou chief Yin Zhongkang, Guangzhou chief Xuan Xuan, Nanban captain Yang Jianqi and others rebelled.

古文：八月，江州刺史王愉奔于临川。
现代文：八月，江州刺史王愉逃奔到临。
English: In August, Wang Yu came to Jiangsu Province.

古文：丙子，宁朔将军邓启方及慕容德将慕容法战于管城，王师败绩。
现代文：丙子，宁朔将军邓启方在管城和慕容德的部将慕容法交战，王师被打败。
English: Ningshuo General Deng Qifang and Murongde's subordinate, Murong Fa, fought in Guancheng, and Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：丙戌，慕容盛僭即皇帝位于黄龙。
现代文：丙戌，慕容盛在黄龙僭位称皇帝。
English: In ancient times, Murong Sheng was known as the emperor of Huanglong.

古文：桓玄大败王师于白石。
现代文：桓玄在白石大败王师。
English: Kuan Xuan defeated Wang Shi in Shiroishi.

古文：九月辛卯，加太傅、会稽王道子黄钺。
现代文：九月辛卯，加太傅、会稽王道子黄铁。
English: In September, Xinwu, Jia Taifu, and Hefei King Daozi Huang Tie.

古文：遣征虏将军会稽王世子元显、前将军王珣、右将军谢琰讨桓玄等。
现代文：派遣征虏将军会稽王的世子元显、前将军王殉、右将军谢琰讨伐桓玄等人。
English: The descendants of Genxian, the former general Wang Jie, and the right-wing general Xie Jun, who were sent to fight Kan Xuan, were the conscripted generals.

古文：己亥，破庾楷于牛渚。
现代文：己亥，在牛渚打败庾楷。
English: Ji Hai, in Niu Nagisa, defeated Shao Kai.

古文：丙午，会稽王道子屯中堂，元显守石头。
现代文：丙午，会稽王道子屯兵中堂，元显守石头。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Wang Daozi, the auditor of the meeting, went to the middle hall of the camp, and Yuan Xian guarded the stone.

古文：己酉，前将军王珣守北郊，右将军谢琰备宣阳门。
现代文：己酉，前将军王殉防守北郊，右将军谢琰守备宣阳门。
English: Ji Yao, former General Wang Jie defended the northern suburbs, and Right General Xie Yao guarded Xuanyang Gate.

古文：辅国将军刘牢之次新亭，使子敬宣击败恭，恭奔曲阿长塘湖，湖尉收送京师，斩之。
现代文：辅国将军刘牢之驻在新亭，派儿子敬宣打败王恭，王恭逃奔曲阿长塘湖，湖尉拘捕他送到京城，斩了他。
English: Auxiliary General Liu Diao stationed in Xinting, sent his son Jing Xuan to defeat Wang Gong, Wang Gong fled to Qua Changtang Lake, the lake captain arrested him, sent him to Beijing, and beheaded him.

古文：于是遣太常殷茂喻仲堪及玄，玄等走于寻阳。
现代文：于是派遣太常殷茂晓谕仲堪和桓玄，桓玄等到寻阳。
English: So he dispatched Tai Chang Yin Shao to mediate between Jia Kan and Kuan Xuan, and Kuan Xuan waited until the sun set.

古文：冬十月，新野言驺虞见。
现代文：冬十月，新野报告说有义兽出现。
English: In the winter of October, Niino reported the appearance of a benevolent beast.

古文：丙子，大赦。
现代文：丙子，大赦天下。
English: Bongzi, amnesty to the whole world.

古文：壬午，仲堪等盟于寻阳，推桓玄为盟主。
现代文：壬午，仲堪等人在寻阳结盟，推举桓玄为盟主。
English: In Renwu, Zhong Kan and others allied with Xuan Yang and elected Huan Xuan as the leader.

古文：十一月，以琅邪王德文为卫将军、开府仪同三司，领军将军王雅为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十一月，任命琅邪王德文为卫将军、开府仪同三司，任命领军将军王雅为尚书左仆射。
English: In November, he appointed Wang Dewen as the general of Wei, Kaifu Yi as the general of the Three Departments, and appointed the leading general Wang Ya as the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：十二月己丑，魏王珪即尊位，年号天兴。
现代文：十二月己丑，魏王拓跋珪登皇帝位，年号为天兴。
English: In December, Wei King Tuobao ascended to the throne. The year was Tianxing.

古文：京兆人韦华帅襄阳流人叛，降于姚兴。
现代文：京兆人韦华率襄阳的流民反叛，向姚兴投降。
English: Wei Hua, a man from Jingzhao, led the rebels of the refugees in Yangyang and surrendered to Yao Xing.

古文：己酉，前新安太守杜炯反于京口，会稽王世子元显讨斩之。
现代文：己酉，前新安太守杜炯在京：反叛，会稽王世子元显讨伐斩了他。
English: Du Xi, the former new Antae governor, was in Beijing: he rebelled, and the king's heir, Yuan Xian, fought and killed him.

古文：秃发乌孤自称武威王。
现代文：秃发乌孤自称为武威王。
English: The bald-headed Wu Kuo calls himself the King of Wuwei.

古文：三年春正月辛酉，封宗室蕴为淮陵王。
现代文：三年春正月辛酉，封宗室中的司马蕴为淮陵王。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, Sima Yun, a member of the imperial family, was crowned King of Huairing.

古文：二月甲辰，河间王国镇薨。
现代文：二月甲辰，河间王国镇去世。
English: In February, Jia Chen, the mayor of Kingdom Town, Kawama, passed away.

古文：林邑范胡达陷日南、九真，遂寇交阯，太守杜瑗讨破之。
现代文：林邑的范胡达攻陷日南、九真，接着侵扰交吐，太守杜瑗讨伐打败了他。
English: Lin's Fan Huda conquered Nichinan and Jiu Zhen, and then he was harassed and defeated by Taishu Dujuan's crusade.

古文：段业自称凉王。
现代文：段业自称凉王。
English: Duan Yip calls himself the king of cool.

古文：仇池公杨盛遣使称藩，献方物。
现代文：仇池公杨盛派遣使者来表示愿为藩属，献上土产物品。
English: The feudal lord Yang Sheng sent an envoy to express his willingness to be a member of the clan and to present local products.

古文：三月己卯，追尊所生陈夫人为德皇太后。
现代文：三月己卯，追尊生母陈夫人为德皇太后。
English: In March, she became the German Empress Dowager, following in the footsteps of her biological mother, Mrs. Chen.

古文：夏四月乙未，加尚书令王珣卫将军，以会稽王世子元显为扬州刺史。
现代文：夏四月乙未，加授尚书令王殉为卫将军，任命会稽王世子元显为扬州刺史。
English: In April of the same year, Wang Zhisheng was awarded the title of General of the Guards, and Wang Xizhi's descendant, Yuan Xian, was appointed as Yangzhou prefect.

古文：六月戊子，以琅邪王德文为司徒。
现代文：六月戊子，任命琅邪王德文为司徒。
English: In June, Empress Dowager Cixi appointed the evil king, Dewen, as her disciple.

古文：慕容德陷青州，害龙骧将军辟闾浑，遂僭即皇帝位于广固。
现代文：基窖德攻陷青州，害死龙骧将军辟间浑，于是在广固僭号登皇帝位。
English: Qijiao De attacked and occupied Qingzhou, killed General Longyu Bibi Mianhun, and then ascended to the imperial throne in Guanggu Xi.

古文：秋八月，秃发乌孤死，其弟利鹿孤嗣伪位。
现代文：秋八月，秃发乌孤死，他的弟弟利鹿孤继承伪位。
English: In the autumn and August, Bald Wukong died, and his younger brother Lilu inherited the pseudo-position.

古文：冬十月，姚兴陷洛阳，执河南太守辛恭靖。
现代文：冬十月，姚兴攻陷洛阳，俘虏河南太守辛恭靖。
English: In the winter of October, Yao Xing invaded Luoyang and captured the governor of Henan Province, Xin Jiajing.

古文：十一月甲寅，妖贼孙恩陷会稽，内史王凝之死之，吴国内史桓谦、临海太守新蔡王崇、义兴太守魏隐并委官而遁，吴兴太守谢邈、永嘉太守司马逸皆遇害。
现代文：十一月甲寅，妖贼孙恩攻陷会稽，内史王凝之死难，吴国内史桓谦、临海太守新蔡王司马崇、义兴太守魏隐都弃官逃走，呈璺太守谢邈、丞台太守司马逸都被害。
English: In November of the year of Jia Yin, the demon thief Sun En attacked and captured the imperial court, the imperial historian Wang Neng was killed, the imperial historian of Wuzhong Province Shi Huan Qian, the imperial governor of Linhai Province Xin Cai Wang Simatong, and the imperial governor of Yixing Province Wei Yin all abandoned their posts and fled, and the imperial governor of Yunnan Province Xie Jun and the imperial governor of Yangtze Province Simatong were all killed.

古文：遣卫将军谢琰、辅国将军刘牢之逆击，走之。
现代文：派遣卫将军谢琰、辅国将军刘牢之迎击，打跑了他。
English: He dispatched Guards General Xie Jun and Auxiliary General Liu Diao to meet the attack and beat him away.

古文：十二月，桓玄袭江陵，荆州刺史殷仲堪、南蛮校尉杨佺期并遇害。
现代文：十二月，担室袭击，型业刺史壁垒哩、南蛮校尉杨佺期一起被害。
English: In December, the porter's room was attacked, and the model industry was stabbed at the historical barrier, and the Nanban captain Yang Yujing was killed together.

古文：吕光立其太子绍为天王，自号太上皇。
现代文：吕光立他的太子吕绍为天王，自称太上皇。
English: Lü Guang set up his prince Lü Shao as the heavenly king and claimed to be the supreme emperor.

古文：是日，光死，吕纂弑绍而自立。
现代文：当天，吕光死，吕纂杀吕绍然后自立。
English: On the same day, Lü Guang died, Lü Cao killed Lü Shao and then became independent.

古文：是岁，荆州大水，平地三丈。
现代文：造一年，荆州发大水，平地水深三丈。
English: In the first year of construction, Jingzhou was flooded, and the flat land was flooded to a depth of three meters.

古文：四年春正月乙亥，大赦。
现代文：四年春正月乙亥，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Spring, the Year of the Boar, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：二月己丑，有星孛于奎娄，进至紫微。
现代文：二月己丑，有彗星出现在奎宿和娄宿之间，进到紫微星座。
English: February was ugly, a comet appeared between Kuishuku and Oshuku, entering the violet micro-constellation.

古文：三月，彗星见于太微。
现代文：三月，彗星出现在太微。
English: In March, the comet appeared too faint.

古文：夏四月，地震。
现代文：夏四月，地震。
English: In the summer of April, an earthquake.

古文：孙恩寇浃口。
现代文：孙恩侵扰这旦。
English: Sun En disturbs this day.

古文：五月丙寅，散骑常侍、卫将军、东亭侯王珣卒。
现代文：五月丙寅，散骑常侍、卫将军、束亭侯王曲卒。
English: Gogetsu Hitora, Sanzhijishi, Wei Shogun, Sokutei, Houwang, and others.

古文：己卯，会稽内史谢琰为孙恩所败，死之。
现代文：己卯，盒稽内史邀堕被茎墨打败，战死。
English: He was defeated and died in battle.

古文：恩转寇临海。
现代文：孙恩转而侵扰临海。
English: Sun En turned to invade the coast.

古文：六月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月庚辰初一。有日食。
English: In June, the first day of the Gengchen, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：旱。
现代文：旱。
English: Drought.

古文：辅国司马刘裕破恩于南山。
现代文：辅国司马刘裕在南山打败孙恩。
English: Assistant Secretary of State Ma Liuyu defeated Sun En in Nanshan.

古文：恩将卢循陷广陵，死者三千馀人。
现代文：孙恩部将卢循攻占广陵，死者三千多人。
English: Sun Enbu led Lu Xun to capture Guangling, and more than three thousand people died.

古文：以琅邪王师何澄为尚书左仆射。
现代文：任命琅邪王的师傅坦迢为尚书左仆射。
English: He appointed Tan Xuan, the master of the evil king, as his right-hand man.

古文：秋七月壬子，太皇太后李氏崩。
现代文：秋七月壬子，太皇太后奎压去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the Empress Dowager Kuei passed away.

古文：丁卯，大赦。
现代文：丁卯，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world.

古文：是月，姚兴伐乞伏乾归，降之。
现代文：当月，姚兴讨伐乞丛越匿，使他投降。
English: That month, Yao Xing's plea to cut down the begging bushes faded away, leading him to surrender.

古文：八月丁亥，尚书右仆射王雅卒。
现代文：八月丁亥，尚书右仆射王雅去世。
English: In August of Dinghai, Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaowang Ya, passed away.

古文：壬寅，葬文太后于修平陵。
现代文：壬寅，将文太后安葬在脩平陵。
English: Minshin, the Empress Dowager Mun was laid to rest in the Shuhei Mausoleum.

古文：九月癸丑，地震。
现代文：九月癸丑，地震。
English: September is ugly, with earthquakes.

古文：冬十一月，宁朔将军高雅之及孙恩战于馀姚，王师败绩。
现代文：冬十一月，宁朔将军高雅之在余姚和茎墨交战，王师被打败。
English: In the winter of November, the Ningshuo general Gao Yazhi fought against Zhu Xi Mo in Yuyao, and Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：以扬州刺史元显为后将军、开府仪同三司、都督扬豫徐兖青幽冀并荆江司雍梁益交广十六州诸军事，前将军刘牢之为镇北将军，封元显子彦璋为东海王。
现代文：任命扬州刺史元显为后将军、开府仪同三司、都督扬豫徐兖青幽冀并抱丝司壅銮益奎卢十六州诸军事，任命前将军刘牢之为镇北将军，封豆题的儿子童建为塞捏王。
English: He appointed Yangzhou Zhi Yuanxian as the next general, Kaifu Yidong as the third secretary, Yang Yu Xu Binqing Yu Ji as the governor, and Zhi Shi Yan Yiklu as the military commander of the 16 states. He appointed former general Liu Diao as the general of Zhenbei, and Tong Jian, the son of Fuzuchi, as the king of Saipan.

古文：十二月戊寅，有星孛于天市。
现代文：十二月戊寅，有彗星出现在天市星一带。
English: In December, a comet appeared in the vicinity of Star City.

古文：是岁，河右诸郡奉凉武昭王李玄盛为秦凉二州牧、凉公，年号庚子。
现代文：遣一年，回右各郡把凉武昭王李玄盛奉为台痉二州牧、凉公，年号庚子。
English: One year later, Li Xuan Sheng, the king of Liangwu Zhao, was revered as the herdsman of the two prefectures and the prince of Liang in the counties on the right bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：五年春二月丙子，孙恩复寇浃口。吕超弑吕纂，以其兄隆僭即伪位。
现代文：五年春丙子，孙恩再次侵犯浃。吕超杀吕纂，让他的兄长吕隆即伪天子位。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Heian period, Sun En once again invaded Goryeo. Lü Chao killed Lü Zuo, making his brother Lü Long the pseudo son of heaven.

古文：三月甲寅，众星西流，历太微。
现代文：三月甲寅，很多星星向西坠落，经过太微星垣。
English: In March, many stars fall to the west, passing through the faint star field.

古文：夏五月，孙恩寇沪渎吴国，内史袁山松死之。
现代文：夏五月，孙恩侵扰沪渎，吴国内史袁山松战死。
English: In the summer of May, Sun En invaded Huzhou, and Yuan Shansong, the national historian of Wu, died in battle.

古文：沮渠蒙逊杀段业，自号大都督、北凉州牧。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊杀死段业，自称为大都督、北凉州牧。
English: Despondent, Mengxun killed Duanye, and called himself the great governor and the herdsman of Beiliangzhou.

古文：六月甲戌，孙恩至丹徒。
现代文：六月甲戌，孙恩到丹徒。
English: In June, Sun En went to Dantu.

古文：乙亥，内外戒严，百官入居于省。
现代文：乙亥，内外全部戒严，百官住进台省官署。
English: In the second year of the Chinese lunar calendar, martial law was imposed both at home and abroad, and hundreds of officials moved into the provincial government offices.

古文：冠军将军高素、右卫将军张崇之守石头，辅国将军刘袭栅断淮口，丹杨尹司马恢之戍南岸，冠军将军桓谦、辅国将军司马允之、游击将军毛邃备白石，左卫将军王嘏、领军将军孔安国屯中皇堂。
现代文：冠军将军高素、右卫将军张崇之守卫石头，辅国将军刘袭用木栅阻断淮口，丹杨尹司马恢之驻守南岸，冠军将军桓谦、辅国将军司马允之、游击将军毛邃守备白石，左卫将军王嘏、领军将军孑安国驻屯中皇堂。
English: The champion general Gao Su and the right guard general Zhang Chong guarded the stone, the auxiliary general Liu Wei blocked Huaikou with a wooden gate, Danyang Yin Sima Wei was stationed on the south bank, the champion general Huan Qian, the auxiliary general Sima Yunzhi, the guerrilla general Mao Xuan guarded the white stone, the left guard general Wang Qi and the leading army general Yan'an were stationed in the imperial palace.

古文：征豫州刺史、谯王尚之卫京师。
现代文：征召豫州刺史、谯王尚之来保卫京师。
English: Conscripted Yuzhou Shishi and Shao Wang Shangzhuo to defend the capital.

古文：宁朔将军高雅之击孙恩于广陵之郁洲，为贼所执。
现代文：宁朔将军高雅之在广陵的郁洲攻打孙恩，被俘虏。
English: Ningshuo General Gao Yazhi attacked Sun En at Yuzhou in Guangling and was captured.

古文：秋七月，段玑弑慕容盛，盛叔父熙尽诛段氏，因僭称尊号。
现代文：秋七月，段玑杀慕容盛，慕容盛的叔父慕容熙杀光了段氏家族的人，随后自称皇帝。
English: In the autumn of July, Duan Xuan killed Murong Sheng, and Murong Sheng's uncle Murong Xi killed all the members of Duan's family, and then proclaimed himself emperor.

古文：九月，吕隆降于姚兴。
现代文：九月，吕隆投降姚兴。
English: In September, Lulong surrendered to Yao Xing.

古文：冬十月，姚兴帅师侵魏，大败而旋。
现代文：冬十月，姚兴统率军队侵犯魏，大败而回。
English: In the winter of October, Yao Xingtong led an army to invade Wei, but was soundly defeated.

古文：是岁，饑，禁酒。
现代文：逭一年，有饥荒，禁止造酒。
English: For a whole year, there was famine, and it was forbidden to make wine.

古文：元兴元年春正月庚午朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：五兴元年春正月庚午初一，大赦，改年号。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Wuxing, there was a general amnesty and the year was changed.

古文：以后将军元显为骠骑大将军、征讨大都督，镇北将军刘牢之为元显前锋，前将军、谯王尚之为后部，以讨桓玄。
现代文：任命后将军元显为骠骑大将军、征讨大都督，任命镇北将军刘牢之为元显前锋，前将军、谯王尚之为后部，去讨伐桓玄。
English: After the appointment, General Yuan Xian was appointed as the cavalry general to fight against the grand governor, General Liu Diao of Zhenbei was appointed as the forward of Yuan Xian, and the former general and the king of Qi, Shang Xian, was appointed as the rear to fight against Kuan Xuan.

古文：二月丙午，帝戎服饯元显于西池。
现代文：二月丙午，皇帝身着戎装在西池给元显饯行。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of February, the emperor, dressed in military attire, went to visit Yuan Xian in West Pond.

古文：丁巳，遣兼侍中、齐王柔之以驺虞幡宣告荆、江二州。
现代文：丁巳，派遣兼侍中、齐王柔之用鶸虞幡通告荆、江二州。
English: Ding Si, dispatched and a chambermaid, and Qi Wang Rong used the banner to inform Jing and Jiang of the two states.

古文：丁卯，桓玄败王师于姑孰，谯王尚之、齐王柔之并死之。
现代文：丁卯，桓玄在姑孰打败王师，谯王尚之、齐王柔之一起死难。
English: Ding Wu and Huan Xuan defeated Wang Shi in Gushan, and Wang Shangzhi and Qi Wang Rong both died.

古文：以右将军吴隐之为都督交广二州诸军事、广州刺史。
现代文：任命右将军吴隐之为都督交广二州诸军事、广州刺史。
English: Appointed the Right General Wu Yingcheng as the military governor of the two states of Guangzhou and Guangzhou.

古文：三月己巳，刘牢之叛降于桓玄。
现代文：三月己巳，刘牢之背叛而向桓玄投降。
English: In March, Liu Du's betrayal was complete and he surrendered to Huan Xuan.

古文：辛未，王师败绩于新亭，骠骑大将军、会稽王世子元显，东海王彦璋，冠军将军毛泰，游击将军毛邃并遇害。
现代文：辛未，王师在新亭大败，骠骑大将军、会稽王世子元显，束海王彦璋，冠军将军毛泰，游击将军毛邃一起遇害。
English: Before long, Wang Shih was defeated in Xinting. He was killed together with the general of the cavalry, Wang Shih-hsien, the descendant of the party leader Wang Shih-hsien, the prince of Sokha, the champion general Moutai, and the guerrilla general Moutai.

古文：壬申，桓玄自为侍中、丞相、录尚书事，以桓谦为尚书仆射，迁太傅、会稽王道子于安城。
现代文：壬申，桓玄自任侍中、丞相、录尚书事，任命桓谦为尚书仆射，将太傅、会稽王道子迁居到安城。
English: According to Jinshin, Kuan Xuan appointed himself as a chamberlain, chancellor, and secretary, appointed Kuan Qian as a secretary, and moved Taifu and King Daozi to Ancheng.

古文：玄俄又自称太尉、扬州牧，总百揆，以琅邪王德文为太宰。
现代文：桓玄不久又自称为太尉、扬州牧，总理政事，以琅邪王德文为太宰。
English: Soon after, Kuan Xuan declared himself to be the Tai Lai, Yangzhou Patriarch, Prime Minister and Minister of State, with the evil king Dewen as the Dazai.

古文：临海太守辛景击孙恩，斩之。
现代文：堕擅太守圭量攻打逐墨，杀了他。
English: The rogue squire Guizhou attacked and killed him.

古文：是月，秃发利鹿孤死，弟傉檀嗣伪位。
现代文：当月，秃毖鹿孤死，弟弟僻檀继承伪位。
English: That month, Vulture Deer died alone, and his younger brother, Secluded Dancer, succeeded to the pseudo-position.

古文：秋七月乙亥，新蔡王崇为其奴所害。
现代文：秋七月乙亥，新蔡王司马崇被他的奴仆害死。
English: In the autumn and July of the Year of the Fire Rooster, the new Cai Wang, Sima Chong, was killed by his servant.

古文：八月庚子，尚书下舍灾。
现代文：八月庚子，尚书的私宅发生火灾。
English: In August, a fire broke out in the private home of Kenshi Shosho.

古文：冬十月，冀州刺史刘轨叛奔于慕容德。
现代文：冬十月，冀州刺史刘轨背叛逃奔基查擅。
English: In the winter of October, the Jizhou assassin Liu Rail betrayed and fled to Kichajian.

古文：十二月庚申，会稽王道子为桓玄所害。
现代文：十二月庚申，会稽王道王被但玄杀害。
English: In December of the Year of the Goat, King Daowang was killed by Dang Xuan.

古文：曲赦广陵、彭城大逆以下。
现代文：特赦广陵、彭城犯大逆罪以下的罪人。
English: Guangling and Pengcheng pardoned the criminals who committed less than high treason.

古文：二年春二月辛丑，建威将军刘裕破徐道覆于东阳。
现代文：二年春二月辛丑，建威将军刘裕在束阳打败徐道覆。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the Jianwei general Liu Yu defeated Xu Daohui in Sokyang.

古文：乙卯，桓玄自称大将军。
现代文：乙卯，桓玄自称为大将军。
English: Second, Kangen calls himself a great general.

古文：丁巳，冀州刺史孙无终为桓玄所害。
现代文：丁巳，冀州刺史孙无终被桓玄杀害。
English: Ding Si, Jizhou assassin Sun Wuzhong was killed by Huan Xuan.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月癸巳初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of summer in April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋八月，玄又自号相国、楚王。
现代文：秋八月，桓玄又自称为相国、楚王。
English: In the autumn and August, Kuan Xuan also called himself the King of Chu.

古文：九月，南阳太守庾仄起义兵，为玄所败。
现代文：九月。南阳太守庾仄起兵，被桓玄打败。
English: In September, Nanyang Daju (the governor of Nanyang) Xuanzang raised an army and was defeated by Huan Xuan.

古文：冬十一月壬午，玄迁帝于永安宫。
现代文：冬十一月壬午，桓玄将皇帝迁到永安宫。
English: At noon of November in winter, Emperor Kuan Xuan moved the emperor to Yongan Palace.

古文：癸未，移太庙神主于琅邪国。
现代文：癸未，把太庙裹的祖先牌位移到琅邪国。
English: In the meantime, the ancestor cards wrapped in the Imperial Shrine were moved to the Evil Realm.

古文：十二月壬辰，玄篡位，以帝为平固王。
现代文：十二月壬辰，桓玄篡夺皇帝位，让昼壹作平固王。
English: In December of the same year, Huan Xuan usurped the emperor's throne and made himself the king of Pinggu.

古文：辛亥，帝蒙尘于寻阳。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝被囚禁在寻阳。
English: In Xinhai, the emperor was imprisoned in Xuanyang.

古文：三年春二月，帝在寻阳。
现代文：三年春二月，安帝在寻阳。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, An Di was looking for the sun.

古文：庚寅夜，涛水入石头，漂杀人户。
现代文：庚寅夜，江水涌入互题，冲走财物淹死人。
English: In the evening of the 7th day of the 7th month, river water poured into the streets, washing away property and drowning people.

古文：乙卯，建武将军刘裕帅沛国刘毅、东海何无忌等举义兵。
现代文：乙卯，建武将军刘裕统率沛国人刘毅、束海人何无忌等起兵。
English: Second, the Jianwu general Liu Yutong led by the patriots Liu Yi and Sokhai, and other soldiers started to march.

古文：丙辰，斩桓玄所署徐州刺史桓修于京口，青州刺史桓弘于广陵。丁巳，义师济江。
现代文：丙辰，在塞旦斩担宝委任的鳖蛆刺史但恺，在卢堕斩担宝委任的壹业刺史但丛。丁巳，义军渡过垦逗。
English: In Xingcheng, there was the Danzhi Danzhong, which was appointed as the Danzhi Danzhong in Sedan, and there was the Danzhong Danzhong, which was appointed as the Danzhong Danzhong in Lu'an. At that time, the rebels passed through the Danzhong.

古文：三月戊午，刘裕斩玄将吴甫之于江乘，斩皇甫敷于罗落。
现代文：三月戊午，刘裕在江乘斩桓玄的部将吴甫之，在醚斩皇直苏。
English: On the afternoon of March 3rd, Liu Yu executed Wu Fuzhi, the commander of the imperial army, in Jiangren, and Emperor Zhoshu, the commander of the imperial army, in the Ether.

古文：己未，玄众溃而逃。
现代文：己未，担玄的部众溃乱逃跑。
English: Before long, the enraged followers fled in panic.

古文：庚申，刘裕置留台，具百官。
现代文：庚申，刘裕设留台，置百官。
English: Goshun, Liu Yu set up a platform, set up a hundred officials.

古文：壬戌，桓玄司徒王谧推刘裕行镇军将军、徐州刺史、都督扬徐兖豫青冀幽并八州诸军事、假节。
现代文：壬戌，桓玄的司徒王箠推举塑噬暂为镇军将军、涂业刺史、都督荡涂蛮邀壹冀幽差八州诸军事、假节。
English: Wang Yao, a disciple of Jinyuan and Huan Xuan, was elected as the general of the town army, the general of the painting industry, the governor of the capital, and the general of the military and the festival in eight states.

古文：刘裕以谧领扬州刺史、录尚书事。
现代文：型整任命王赣兼任握蛆刺史、绿尚书事。
English: Type rectification appointed Wang Qi to concurrently hold the posts of the secretary of the history and the secretary of the book.

古文：辛酉，刘裕诛尚书左仆射王愉、愉子荆州刺史绥、司州刺史温详。
现代文：辛酉，塑隘杀尚书左仆射王愉、王愉的儿子荆州刺史王绥、司州刺史退谨。
English: Xin Xuan, Shuxiaqiao killed Shangshu's left-hand man Sha Wangyun, Wangyun's son Jingzhou stabbed Wang Yao, and Shizhou stabbed Tu Jian.

古文：辛未，桓玄逼帝西上。
现代文：辛未，垣室挟持窒童西走。
English: Soon after, Kakimuro walked west with Nitto in his arms.

古文：丙戌，密诏以幽逼于玄，万机虚旷，令武陵王遵依旧典，承制总百官行事，加侍中，余如故。
现代文：丙戌，秘密下韶说因为被桓玄幽禁逼迫，国事无法处理。命令武陵王司马遵依照旧有的典章规定，秉承皇帝旨意总领百官处理政事，加授侍中，其余官职如旧。
English: He ordered Wuling Wang Sima to follow the old rules and regulations, to uphold the emperor's will, to be the leader of a hundred officials to handle government affairs, to be awarded the title of chamberlain, and the rest of the official positions would remain as before.

古文：并大赦谋反大逆已下，惟桓玄一祖之后不宥。
现代文：并且大赦除了谋反大逆罪以下的犯人，仅有鱼室同族人不能宽恕。
English: Moreover, in addition to the amnesty for prisoners who have committed less than the crime of high treason, only people of the same ethnicity as Ryoshitsu cannot be pardoned.

古文：夏四月己丑，大将军、武陵王遵称制，总万机。
现代文：夏四月己丑，大将军、武陵王司马遵行使皇帝权力，总理朝政。
English: The summer and April were ugly, the great general, Wuling Wang Sima Zun exercised the emperor's power, and the prime minister governed the country.

古文：庚寅，帝至江陵。
现代文：庚寅，宝童到达辽庐。
English: Go-in, the treasure boy, arrives in Liaoning.

古文：庚戌，辅国将军何无忌、振武将军刘道规及桓玄将庾稚、何澹之战于湓口，大破之。
现代文：庚戌，辅国将军何无忌、振武将军刘道担在鱼旦和垣宝部将厘整、何适之交战，大败他们的军队。
English: Geng Xuan, Fu Guo's General He Muxi, and Zhenwu's General Liu Daotang made a concerted effort in the Uotan and Waki treasure departments, and defeated their armies.

古文：玄复逼帝东下。
现代文：桓玄挟持安帝束走。
English: Kangen walks away with Andi Saku.

古文：五月癸酉，冠军将军刘毅及桓玄战于峥嵘洲，又破之。
现代文：五月癸酉，冠军将军刘毅与桓玄在峥嵘洲交战，又打败敌军。
English: At the end of May, the champion general Liu Yi and Huan Xuan fought in Luzhou and defeated the enemy.

古文：己卯，帝复幸江陵。
现代文：己卯，帝再一次到江陵。
English: Once again, the emperor came to Gangneung.

古文：辛巳，荆州别驾王康产、南郡太守王腾之奉帝居于南郡。
现代文：辛巳，荆州别驾王康产、卖登太守王剩之侍奉帝住在直璺。
English: It's hard to believe that Jingzhou's self-proclaimed King Kangsang, the last remaining retainer of the deposed Emperor Taizong, is now living in Dajiaocheng.

古文：壬午，督护冯迁斩桓玄于貊盘洲。
现代文：壬午，督护冯迁在貊盘洲斩了桓玄。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Feng Qian, the superintendent of the guard, beheaded Huan Xuan in Xuanpanzhou.

古文：乘舆反正于江陵。
现代文：皇帝从江陵返回京城。
English: The emperor returned to Beijing from Gangneung.

古文：甲申，诏曰 奸凶篡逆，自古有之。
现代文：甲申，下诏说： 奸贼凶人篡位谋逆，自古就有。
English: Jia Shen, the next edict said: "Traitors and villains usurping positions and plotting treason have existed since ancient times.

古文：朕不能式遏杜渐，以致播越。
现代文：朕不能遏制防止他们，以至于流亡在外。
English: I can't stop them from going into exile.

古文：赖镇军将军裕英略奋发，忠勇绝世，冠军将军毅等诚心宿著，协同嘉谋。
现代文：依靠镇军将军刘裕发挥英才大略，有绝代的忠诚和勇武，以及冠军将军刘毅等忠臣名将，共同制定良策。
English: Relying on the general of the township army, Liu Yu, to give full play to his talents, there are generations of loyalty and bravery, as well as the champion general Liu Yi and other loyal famous generals, to jointly formulate good policies.

古文：义声既振，士庶效节，社稷载安，四海齐庆。
现代文：义兵的声威传开后，士人庶民来效忠，江山才得以安定，四海黎民一起欢庆。
English: After the reputation of the volunteer soldiers spread, the nobles and the common people came to be loyal, the country was able to stabilize, and the people from all over the world celebrated together.

古文：其大赦，凡诸畏逼事屈逆命者，一无所问 戊寅，奉神主入于太庙。
现代文：特此大赦，凡是因威逼而事奉屈服于叛逆者的，一概不问罪。 戊寅，将祖先牌位归位太庙。
English: With this special amnesty, all those who were forced to serve and succumbed to the rebels will not be charged with any crime.Wu Yin, return the ancestor card to the temple.

古文：闰月己丑，桓玄故将扬武将军桓振陷江陵，刘毅、何无忌退守寻阳，帝复蒙尘于贼营。
现代文：闰月己丑，盘旧部扬武将军担递攻陷堰，刘堑、包躯；退守到曼堡，窒童再次被劫持到贼营裹。
English: The intercalary month was ugly, and the general Yang Wu of the old division was sent to attack the weir, Liu Wei, wrapped his body; retreated to Manburg, and the child was once again abducted to the thief camp.

古文：六月，益州刺史毛璩讨伪梁州刺史桓希，斩之。
现代文：六月，垫刺史王壁讨伐伪銮业刺史堕画，斩了他。
English: In June, Wang Wei, who was the mastermind behind the attack on the fake painting of Wang Shi, beheaded him.

古文：秋七月戊申，永安皇后何氏崩。
现代文：秋季七月戊申，永安皇后何氏去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the Yongan Empress He passed away.

古文：八月癸酉，祔葬穆帝章皇后于永平陵。
现代文：八月癸酉，将叠童童皇后合葬在丞垩堕。
English: At the end of August, the children and the queen were buried together in the cemetery.

古文：九月，前给事中刁骋、秘书丞王迈之谋反，伏诛。
现代文：九月，前给事中旦壁、秘书丞王艳谋反，被处死。
English: In September, the secretary, Cho Wangyan, who had been involved in the previous incident, plotted a rebellion and was executed.

古文：冬十月，卢循寇广州，刺史吴隐之为循所败。执始兴相阮腆之而还。
现代文：冬十月，卢钟侵扰卢丛，刺史呈庐之被卢钟打败，俘虏了堕兴相医腆主而离去。
English: In the winter of October, Lu Zhong invaded Lu Cong, and was defeated by Lu Zhong. He captured the fallen Xing Healer and departed.

古文：慕容德死，兄子超嗣伪位。
现代文：摹查擅死，兄长的儿子慕容超继承伪位。
English: Gongcha died without permission, and his elder brother's son, Murong Chao, succeeded to the pseudo-position.

古文：义熙元年春正月，帝在江陵。
现代文：盏塑元年春正月，玄童在红尘。
English: In the first month of spring in the first year of the year, the original boy is in the red dust.

古文：南阳太守鲁宗之起义兵，袭破襄阳。
现代文：一太守叠塞之兴义兵，袭击攻破塞屋。
English: A group of volunteer soldiers, who had been guarding the dam, attacked and breached the dam.

古文：己丑，刘毅次于马头。
现代文：己丑，型堑进驻墨垩。
English: Self-loathing, self-loathing, self-loathing.

古文：桓振以帝屯于江津。
现代文：担握带着塞童驻屯在丝达。
English: He settled in Seda with his son.

古文：辛卯，宗之破振将温楷于柞溪，进次纪南，为振所败。
现代文：辛卯，塞主在韭选打败但钟的部将温揩，进兵驻在挺直，被担铲打败。
English: Xinwu, the lord of the fortress, defeated Dan Zhong's subordinate, Wenwu, in the election. The new soldiers were stationed in Tingzhi, and were defeated by the shovel.

古文：振武将军刘道规击桓谦，走之。
现代文：振武将军型道捏攻打担遂，打跑了他。
English: General Zhenwu made a pincer attack on him and ran him away.

古文：乘舆反正，帝与琅邪王幸道规舟。
现代文：塞童回来，与堕巫王回到道捏的船上。
English: When the boy returned, he and the fallen sorcerer went back to the narrow boat.

古文：戊戌，诏曰 朕以寡德，夙纂洪绪。
现代文：戊戌，下诏说： 朕因为缺乏仁德，过早继承洪大的基业。
English: Wuzhen, the next emperor said: Because of my lack of benevolence, I inherited Hongda's inheritance too early.

古文：不能缉熙遐迩，式遏奸宄。
现代文：不能够使远近四方安定和平，制服好人叛逆。
English: It is not able to keep peace and stability in the four directions near and far, and subdue the rebellion of the good people.

古文：逆臣桓玄乘衅肆乱，乃诬罔天人，篡据极位。
现代文：逆臣蛙乘机肆行作乱，竟然欺瞒上天和百姓，篡夺皇帝的位置。
English: The rebellious vassal frog took advantage of the opportunity to make trouble, even deceiving heaven and the people, usurping the position of the emperor.

古文：朕躬播越，沦胥荒裔，宣皇之基，眇焉以坠。
现代文：朕遭流亡，沦落到荒远的地方，宣皇的基业，衰颓败落。
English: I have been exiled, fallen to a desolate place, proclaimed the emperor's inheritance, and fallen into decline.

古文：赖镇军将军裕忠武英断，诚冠终古。
现代文：幸有镇军将军刘裕忠诚勇武英明果断，忠诚冠绝古今。
English: Fortunately, Liu Yu, the general of the town army, is loyal, brave, brave, decisive, and loyal.

古文：运谋机始，贞贤协其契。抆泪誓众，义士感其心。
现代文：运筹谋划定计时，坚贞贤良的人协同他一起费心；含愤挥泪率众誓师时，忠义的战士被他的忠心感动。
English: When planning and scheduling operations, the virtuous and virtuous people worked hard together with him; when swearing oaths with indignation and tears, the loyal soldiers were touched by his loyalty.

古文：故霜戈一挥。巨猾奔迸，三率棱威，大憝授首。
现代文：所以挥戈一击，奸猾奔走逃散，将帅威风势不可挡，大恶之人授首伏罪。
English: Therefore, waving a stroke of the sword, treacherous running away and running away, will be irresistible, and the great evil people will be sentenced to beheading.

古文：而孽振猖狂，嗣凶荆郢。
现代文：可是余孽桓振仍然猖狂，继续逞凶于型竖。
English: However, Yu Jing Kan Zhen is still rampant and continues to behave like a tyrant.

古文：幸天祚社稷，义旗载捷，狡徒沮溃，朕获反正。
现代文：庆幸的是上天保佑社稷，义军接连报捷，凶暴的恶党沮丧溃败，朕得以返回。
English: Fortunately, God bless the company, the rebels successively reported success, the violent evil party was frustrated and defeated, and I was able to return.

古文：斯实宗庙之灵，勤王之勋。
现代文：逭实在是祖宗神灵的庇护，勤王者的功勋。
English: It is really the protection of the ancestral deities, the merit of the royalists.

古文：岂朕一人，独享伊祜，思与亿兆，幸兹更始。
现代文：朕岂能独自一人享受那份福气，想和亿兆百姓，共庆遣国运的新生。
English: I would not be able to enjoy that blessing alone. I want to celebrate the rebirth of the National Movement with hundreds of millions of people.

古文：其大赦，改元，唯玄振一祖及同党不在原例。
现代文：特此大赦，改年号，衹有桓玄桓振的族人和同党不在赦免之列。
English: With this special amnesty, and the change of the year, the ethnic group and the same party with Huan Xuan Zhen are not included in the amnesty.

古文：赐百官爵二级，鳏寡孤独谷人五斛，大酺五日 二月丁巳，留台备乘舆法驾，迎帝于江陵。
现代文：赐百官官秩二级，赐鳏寡孤独每人五斛谷，大会饮宴五天。 二月丁巳，留台备好车马，去江陵迎回皇帝。
English: He bestowed second-level ranks on hundreds of officials, and bestowed a five-day banquet for widows and widowers, and a five-day banquet for the general assembly. In February, he left a table to prepare a carriage and horses to go to Gangneung to welcome the emperor.

古文：弘农太守戴宁之、建威主簿徐惠子等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：弘农太守戴宁之、建威主簿徐惠子等人围谋反叛，被处死。
English: Kononodaiju Dai Ningzhi and Jianwei's chief secretary Xu Huizi and others plotted a rebellion and were executed.

古文：平西参军谯纵害平西将军、益州刺史毛璩，以蜀叛。
现代文：平西参军谯纵害死平西将军、益州刺史毛璩，领蜀地反叛。
English: Pingxi joined the army and plotted the death of General Pingxi, Yizhou assassinated Mao Kun, and Shu rebelled.

古文：三月，桓振复袭江陵，荆州刺史司马休之奔于襄阳。
现代文：三月，桓振再次袭击江陵，荆州刺史司马休之逃奔到襄阳。
English: In March, Kuan Zhen attacked Jiangling again, and Jingzhou assassin Sima Hui fled to Yangyang.

古文：建威将军刘怀肃讨振，斩之。
现代文：建威将军刘怀肃讨伐桓振，斩了他。
English: Jianwei General Liu Huai Su fought against Kan Zhen and killed him.

古文：帝至自江陵。
现代文：帝自江陵到达京城。
English: The emperor arrived in the capital from Gangneung.

古文：乙未，百官诣阙请罪。
现代文：乙未，百官到宫门请罪。
English: B, hundreds of officials went to the palace gate to plead guilty.

古文：诏曰 此非诸卿之过，其还率职 戊戌，举章皇后哀三日，临于西堂。
现代文：下韶说： 这不是各位的过错，还是回去各司其职吧。 戊戌，为章皇后举哀三日，在西堂临吊。
English: He said, "It's not your fault, you should go back and perform your duties." Wu Wei held a three-day mourning for Empress Zhang and hanged her in the West Hall.

古文：刘裕及何无忌等抗表逊位，不许。
现代文：刘裕和何无忌等人上表请求准许让位，没有准许。
English: Liu Yu and He Muxi and others went to the table to request permission to give up their seats, but there was no permission.

古文：庚子，以琅邪王德文为大司马，武陵王遵为太保，加镇军将军刘裕为侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：庚子，任命琅邪王德文为大司马，武陵王司马遵为太保，加授镇军将军刘裕为侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事。
English: Geng Zi appointed Yu Yao Wang Dewen as the grand steward, Wuling Wang Sima Zun as the eunuch, and awarded the general of the town army Liu Yu as the attendant, the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the military governor.

古文：甲辰，诏曰 自顷国难之后，人物凋残，常所供奉，犹不改旧，岂所以视人如伤，禹汤归过之诫哉。
现代文：甲辰，下诏说： 自从不久前国难发生之后，人口物产大量减少，可是日常的供给，还没有改变旧有的规定，岂是古人告诫的对百姓像对待伤口一样爱护，像禹汤那样将过失归于自己的行为!
English: Jia Chen, the next emperor, said: Since the national calamity occurred not long ago, the population and real estate have been greatly reduced, but the daily supply has not changed the old regulations. Is it the ancients who admonished to treat the people like a wound and attribute the fault to their own behavior like Yu Tang!

古文：可筹量减省 夏四月，刘裕旋镇京口。
现代文：可以斟酌减免和俭省。 夏四月，刘裕回去镇守京口。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Yu went back to the garrison of Jingkou.

古文：戊辰，饯于东堂。
现代文：戊辰，在东堂饯行。
English: Boshin, make your way to the East Hall.

古文：五月癸未，禁绢扇及摴蒲。
现代文：五月癸未，禁止制造绢扇和赌博游戏。
English: In May, the manufacture of fans and gambling games were banned.

古文：游击将军、章武王秀，益州刺史司马轨之谋反，伏诛。
现代文：游击将军、章武王司马秀，益州刺史司马轨之谋反，被处死。
English: The guerrilla general, Zhangwu Wang Sima Xiu, plotted a rebellion in Yizhou to assassinate Sima Liao, and was executed.

古文：桓玄故将桓亮、苻宏、刁预寇湘州，守将击走之。
现代文：桓玄的故将桓亮、苻宏、刁预侵犯湘州，守将打跑了他们。
English: Kuan Xuan's former generals Huan Liang, Zou Hong, and Zou Yu invaded Hunan, and the defenders routed them.

古文：秋八月甲子，封临川王子修之为会稽王。
现代文：秋八月甲子，封临王的儿子脩之为会稽王。
English: In the autumn of the 8th year of the 8th month of the 8th year, the son of the crowned king, Xing Xing, became the king of the association.

古文：冬十一月，乞伏乾归伐仇池，仇池公杨盛大破之。
现代文：冬十一月，乞伏干归攻打仇池，仇池公杨盛大破他们。
English: In the winter of November, the mendicants returned to attack the enemy pond, and the enemy pond lord Yang Sheng defeated them.

古文：是岁，凉武昭王玄盛遣使奉表称藩。
现代文：这一年，凉武昭王玄盛派遣使者上表愿称藩国。
English: In the same year, Emperor Yangmu Zhao and King Xuansheng sent an envoy to the table to express their wish to be called a feudal state.

古文：二年春正月，益州刺史司马荣期击谯纵将谯子明于白帝，破之。
现代文：二年春正月，益州刺史司马荣期在白帝攻打谯纵的部将谯子明，打败了他。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, during the reign of Sima Rong, the governor of Yizhou Province, Zou Ziming, who fought against the White Emperor, defeated him.

古文：夏五月，封高密王子法莲为高阳王。
现代文：夏五月，封高密王的儿子法莲为高阳王。
English: In the summer of May, King Gaomi's son, Falien, was crowned King Gaoyang.

古文：秋七月，梁州刺史杨孜敬有罪，伏诛。
现代文：秋七月，梁州刺史杨孜敬犯了罪，被处死。
English: In the autumn of July, Yang Zeking, a constable from Liangzhou, committed a crime and was executed.

古文：冬十月，论匡复之功，封车骑将军刘裕为豫章郡公，抚军将军刘毅南平郡公，右将军何无忌安成郡公，自馀封赏各有差。
现代文：冬十月，根据匡复的功劳，封车骑将军刘裕为豫章郡公，抚军将军刘毅为南垩邮公，右将军何无忌为安成郡公，其余人的封赏各有等次。
English: In the winter of October, according to the merits of Kuangfu, Liu Yu, the general of the blockading cavalry, was the county magistrate of Yuzhang County, Liu Yi, the general of the garrison army, was the county magistrate of Nanshan Post, and the right general was the county magistrate of Ancheng County. The rewards of the others were in the same order.

古文：乙亥，以左将军孔安国为尚书左仆射。
现代文：乙亥，任命左将军孔安国为尚书左仆射。
English: Emperor Yihai appointed the Left General Kong An Guo as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：十二月，盗杀零陵太守阮野。
现代文：十二月，盗贼杀死零陵太守阮野。
English: In December, thieves killed Ruan Ye, the guardian of the tomb.

古文：三年春二月己酉，车骑将军刘裕来朝。
现代文：三年春二月己酉，车骑将军刘裕来朝见。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, General Liu Yulai came to see the emperor.

古文：诛东阳太守殷仲文、南蛮校尉殷叔文、晋陵太守殷道叔、永嘉太守骆球。
现代文：杀东阳太守殷仲文、南峦校尉殷叔文、晋陵太守殷道叔、永嘉太守骆球。
English: He killed Dongyang Governor Yin Zhongwen, Nanlu Lieutenant Yin Shuwen, Jinling Governor Yin Daozu and Yongjia Governor Luoqiu.

古文：己丑，大赦，除酒禁。
现代文：己丑，大赦，解除造酒的禁令。
English: Self-flagellation, amnesty, lifting the ban on making alcohol.

古文：夏五月，大水。
现代文：夏五月，大水灾。
English: In the summer and in May, there was a big flood.

古文：六月，姚兴将赫连勃勃僭称天王于朔方，国号夏。
现代文：六月，姚兴部将赫连勃勃在朔方自称天王，国号夏。
English: In June, Yao Xingbu will lead the Herengong in the self-proclaimed Heavenly King, the summer of the country.

古文：秋七月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月戊戌初一，有日食。
English: In autumn and July, the first day of spring, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：汝南王遵之有罪，伏诛。
现代文：汝南王遵之犯了罪，被处死。
English: King Jun of the South committed a crime and was put to death.

古文：八月，遣冠军将军刘敬宣持节监征蜀诸军事。
现代文：八月，派遣冠军将军刘敬宜持节监督征讨蜀的各种军务事宜。
English: In August, the champion general Liu Jingyi was dispatched to supervise and discuss various military affairs of Shu.

古文：冬十一月，赫连勃勃大败秃发傉檀，傉檀奔于南山。
现代文：冬十一月，赫连勃勃大败秃发僻檀，僻檀逃奔到南山。
English: In the winter of November, Herlian vigorously defeated the bald-headed wanderer, and the wanderer fled to Nanshan.

古文：是岁，高云、冯跋杀慕容熙，云僭即帝位。
现代文：遣一年，高云、冯跋杀死慕容熙，高云僭登皇帝位。
English: One year later, Gao Yun and Feng Baw killed Murong Xi, and Gao Yun ascended to the throne.

古文：四年春正月甲辰，以琅邪王德文领司徒，车骑将军刘裕为扬州刺史、录尚书事。
现代文：四年春正月甲辰，任命琅邪王德文兼任司徒，车骑将军刘裕为扬州刺史、录尚书事。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring and the first month of the Jia Chen, he appointed the evil king Dewen to be the steward, and the cavalry general Liu Yu to write the history of Yangzhou and record the records.

古文：庚申，侍中、太保、武陵王遵薨。
现代文：庚申，侍中、太保、武陵王司马遵去世。
English: Goshun, chamberlain, eunuch, and Wuling King Sima Zun passed away.

古文：夏四月，散骑常侍、尚书左仆射孔安国卒。
现代文：夏四月，散骑常侍、尚书左仆射孑安国去世。
English: In the summer of April, the horseback riding attendant, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Jie An Guo, passed away.

古文：甲午，加吏部尚书孟昶尚书左仆射。
现代文：甲午，加授吏部尚书孟昶为尚书左仆射。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Shangshu Mengyao of the conferment department was the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：冬十一月癸丑，雷。
现代文：冬十一月辛卯，大风拔树。癸丑，有雷。
English: Winter in November is harsh, with high winds uprooting trees, hailstorms and thunder.

古文：梁州刺史杨思平有罪，弃市。
现代文：梁州刺史杨思平犯了罪，处死后陈尸街头。
English: Yang Siping, a Liangzhou stabber, committed a crime and was executed. His body was found in the street.

古文：辛卯，大风拔树。是月，秃发傉檀僭即凉王位。
现代文：当月，秃发雇檀僭登凉王位。
English: In the same month, Bald hired Danzhao to ascend the throne.

古文：十二月，陈留王曹灵诞薨。
现代文：十二月，陈留王曹灵诞去世。
English: In December, Chen Liu Wang Cao Ling passed away.

古文：五年春正月辛卯，大赦。
现代文：五年春正月辛卯，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：庚戌，以抚军将军刘毅为卫将军、开府仪同三司，加辅国将军何无忌镇南将军。
现代文：庚戌，任命抚军将军刘毅为卫将军、开府仪同三司，加授辅国将军何无忌为镇南将军。
English: Geng Bing appointed General Liu Yi of the Fuzhou army as General Wei, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and promoted General Fu Guo to General Zhenan.

古文：戊戌，寻阳地震。
现代文：戊戌，寻阳发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Wuzhen and Huanyang.

古文：二月，慕容超将慕容兴宗寇宿豫，阳平太守刘千载、南阳太守赵元并为贼所执。
现代文：二月，慕容超部将慕容兴宗侵犯宿豫，阳平太守刘千载、南阳太守赵元都被贼人俘虏。
English: In February, Murong Xingzong, the commander of the Murong High Command, invaded Suyuan, and Yangping Empress Dowager Liu Qianzai and Nanyang Empress Dowager Zhao Yuan were both captured by the thieves.

古文：三月己亥，大雪，平地数尺。
现代文：三月己亥，下大雪，平地雪深好几尺。
English: In March, heavy snow fell. The snow on the ground was several feet deep.

古文：车骑将军刘裕帅师伐慕容超。
现代文：车骑将军刘裕率领军队讨伐慕容超。
English: The cavalry general Liu Yu led the army to fight against Murong Chao.

古文：夏六月丙寅，震于太庙。
现代文：夏六月丙寅，太庙遭雷击。
English: In the summer of June, the Great Temple was struck by lightning.

古文：刘裕大破慕容超于临朐。
现代文：刘整在临朐大破慕容超。
English: Liu Zhengyi defeated Murong Chao in Linyi.

古文：秋七月，姚兴将乞伏乾归僭称西秦王于苑川。
现代文：秋七月，姚兴部将乞伏茎鳄在苑川僭称西秦王。
English: In the autumn and July, Yao Xingbu will lead the crocodiles in the Garden River to be called the West Qin King.

古文：九月戊辰，离班弑高云，云将冯跋攻班，杀之。
现代文：九月戊辰，离班杀高云，高云部将冯跋攻打离班，杀了他。
English: In September, when he was off duty, he killed Gao Yun. Gao Yun's department removed Feng Bazao from duty and killed him.

古文：跋僭即王位，仍号燕。
现代文：冯跋僭登王位，仍旧号为燕。
English: When Feng Bawu ascended the throne, his name was still Yan.

古文：冬十月，魏清河王绍弑其主珪。
现代文：冬十月，魏的清河王拓跋绍杀其主拓跋珪。
English: In the winter of October, Wei's Qing King Tuobao killed his master Tuobao.

古文：六年春二月丁亥，刘裕攻慕容超，克之，齐地悉平。
现代文：六年春丁亥，刘裕进攻慕容超，战胜了他，蛮地完全平定。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Dinghai, Liu Yu attacked Murong Chao, defeated him, and completely pacified him.

古文：是月，广州刺史卢循反，寇江州。
现代文：当月，卢业刺史卢循反叛，侵犯丝业。
English: In the same month, Lu Ye stabbed Shulong, and Shulong rebelled and invaded the silk industry.

古文：三月，秃发傉檀及沮渠蒙逊战于穷泉，傉檀败绩。
现代文：三月，秃发侵擅在塞基和沮渠蒙逊交战，俦檀战败。
English: In March, the bald invaders fought in Seji and the depressed channel Monsoon, and the sandalwood was defeated.

古文：壬申，镇南将军、江州刺史何无忌及循战于豫章，王师败绩，无忌死之。
现代文：壬申，镇南将军、江州刺史何无忌在豫章和卢循交战，王师战败，无忌战死。
English: Jinshin, Zhenan General, and Jiangzhou Zhishi all fought in the war between Yu Zhang and Lu Xun. Wang Shi was defeated and died in the battle.

古文：夏四月，青州刺史诸葛长民、兖州刺史刘藩、并州刺史刘道怜乃入卫京师。
现代文：夏四月，青州刺史诸葛长民、兖州刺史刘藩、并州刺史刘道怜来保卫京师。
English: In the summer of April, Zhuge Changmin, the governor of Qingzhou, Liu Han, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Liu Daorei, the governor of Zhangzhou, came to defend the capital.

古文：五月丙子，大风，拔木。
现代文：五月丙子，刮大风，拔倒树木。
English: In May, the wind blows and trees are uprooted.

古文：戊子，卫将刘毅及卢循战于桑落洲，王师败绩。
现代文：戊子，卫将军刘毅在桑落洲和卢循交战，王师战败。
English: Wu Zi, Wei general Liu Yi fought with Lu Xun in Sanluo Zhou, and Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：尚书左仆射孟昶惧，自杀。
现代文：尚书左仆射孟昶害怕，自杀。
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Mengyao, was afraid and committed suicide.

古文：己未，大赦。
现代文：己未，大赦。
English: That's it, amnesty.

古文：乙丑，循至淮口，内外戒严。
现代文：乙丑，卢循到达淮口，京城内外戒严。
English: On the second day, Lu Xun arrived at Huaikou, and martial law was imposed inside and outside the capital.

古文：大司马、琅邪王德文都督宫城诸军事，次中皇堂，太尉刘裕次石头，梁王珍之屯南掖门，冠军将军刘敬宣屯北郊，辅国将军孟怀玉屯南岸，建武将军王仲德屯越城，广武将军刘怀默屯建阳门，淮口筑柤浦、药园、廷尉三垒以距之。
现代文：大司马、琅邪王德文都督宫城诸军事，驻在中皇堂；太尉刘裕驻在石头，梁王珍之屯兵在南掖门，冠军将军刘敬宣屯兵在北郊，辅国将军孟怀玉屯兵在南岸，建武将军王仲德屯兵在越城，广武将军刘怀默屯兵在建阳门；淮口筑起祖浦、药园、廷尉三座营垒来抵挡敌人。
English: The troops of the Grand Master Ma, the governor of the palace city of the evil king Dewen, were stationed in the Middle King's Hall; the lieutenant Liu Yu was stationed in the stone, the troops of the Liang Wang Zhen were stationed in the South Gate, the champion general Liu Jing Xuan was stationed in the northern suburb, the auxiliary general Meng Huaiyu was stationed in the south bank, the Jianwu general Wang Zhongde was stationed in Yuecheng, and the Guangwu general Liu Huimer was stationed in the Jianyang Gate; Huaikou built the three camps of the ancestral pool, the medicinal garden, and the courtier to resist the enemy.

古文：丙寅，震太庙鸱尾。
现代文：丙寅，太庙屋顶的装饰建筑遭雷击。
English: In Hsinchu, the decorative building on the roof of the Grand Temple was struck by lightning.

古文：秋七月庚申，卢循遁走。
现代文：秋七月庚申，卢循逃遁。
English: In autumn and July, Koshin, Lu Xun fled.

古文：甲子，使辅国将军王仲德、广川太守刘钟、河间内史蒯恩等帅众追之。
现代文：甲子，让辅国将军王仲德、广太守刘钟、河间内史蒯恩等率领部众追击。
English: At the same time, let the auxiliary general Wang Zhongde, the Guangda governor Liu Zhong, and the Khamanai Shi Xiong lead the troops in pursuit.

古文：是月，卢循寇荆州，刺史刘道规、雍州刺史鲁宗之等败之。
现代文：当月，卢循侵犯荆州，刺史刘道规、雍州刺史鲁宗之等打败了他。
English: In the same month, Lu Xun invaded Jingzhou, and Liu Daojie and Lu Zong of Yongzhou defeated him.

古文：又破徐道覆于华容，贼复走寻阳。
现代文：又在华容打败徐道覆，贼人再次逃往寻阳。
English: After defeating Xu Daohui in Huarong, the thief fled to the sun again.

古文：八月，姚兴将桓谦寇江陵，刘道规败之。
现代文：八月，姚兴部将桓谦侵犯江陵，刘道规打败了他。
English: In August, Yao Xingbu invaded Jiangling with Huan Qian, and Liu Daojie defeated him.

古文：冬十一月，蜀贼谯纵陷巴东，守将温祚、时延祖死之。
现代文：冬十一月，蜀地的贼人谯纵攻陷巴束，守将温祚、时延祖战死。
English: In the winter of November, the bandits of Shu Province launched an all-out attack and captured Ba Sok. The guards, Wen Xuan and Shi Yan Zu, died in the battle.

古文：十二月壬辰，刘裕破卢循于豫章。
现代文：十二月壬辰，刘裕在豫章打败卢循。
English: In December, Liu Yu defeated Lu Xun in Yuzhang.

古文：七年春二月壬午，右将军刘藩斩徐道覆于始兴，传首京师。
现代文：七年春二月壬午，右将军刘藩在始兴斩了徐道覆，将首级传送到京师。
English: In the spring and February of the seventh year, at noon, Liu Han, the right general, beheaded Xu Daohui in Shixing and sent the head to the Beijing division.

古文：夏四月，卢循走交州，刺史杜慧度斩之。
现代文：夏四月，卢循逃奔交州，刺史杜慧度杀了他。
English: In the summer of April, Lu Xun fled to Jiaozhou and stabbed Du Huidu to death.

古文：秋七月丁卯，以荆州刺史刘道规为征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：秋七月丁卯，任命荆州刺史刘道规为征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the autumn and July of Dingwu, Liu Daojian, the statesman of Jingzhou, was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, and the three departments of Kaifu and Tong were established.

古文：冬十月，沮渠蒙逊伐凉，凉武昭王玄盛与战，败之。
现代文：冬十月，沮渠蒙逊讨伐凉，凉武昭王玄盛和他交战，打败了他。
English: In the winter of October, Despondent Mengxun fought against Liang, Liangwu Zhao Wang Xuansheng fought with him and defeated him.

古文：八年春二月丙子，以吴兴太守孔靖为尚书右仆射。
现代文：八年春二月丙子，任命吴兴太守孔靖为尚书右仆射。
English: In the spring of the eighth year and February of the second year, Wu Xing appointed Wu Xing Taishu Kong Jing as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：三月甲寅，山阴地陷四尺，有声如雷。
现代文：三月甲寅，山阴的地面沉陷四尺，有响声像雷鸣。
English: In March, the ground of the mountain sunk four feet, and there was a sound like thunder.

古文：夏五月，乞伏公府弑乞伏乾归，乾归子炽盘诛公府，僭即伪位。
现代文：夏五月，乞伏公府杀乞伏干归，干归的儿子炽磐杀公府，自登伪皇帝位。
English: In the summer of May, Ganpu killed Ganfu, and Ganfu's son Blazing Rock killed Ganfu, and ascended to the pseudo-emperor's throne.

古文：六月，以平北将军鲁宗之为镇北将军。
现代文：六月，任命平北将军鲁宗之为镇北将军。
English: In June, Pingbei General Lu Zongji was appointed as the new Zhenbei General.

古文：秋七月甲午，武陵王季度薨。
现代文：秋七月甲午，武陵王季度去世。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, King Wuling passed away.

古文：庚子，征西大将军刘道规卒。
现代文：庚子，征西大将军刘道规去世。
English: Geng Zi, General of the Western Expedition Liu Daoyi passed away.

古文：八月，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：八月，皇后王氏去世。
English: In August, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：辛亥，高密王纯之薨。
现代文：辛亥，高密王纯之去世。
English: In Xinhai, Gaomi Wang Chunzhi passed away.

古文：九月癸酉，葬僖皇后于休平陵。
现代文：九月癸酉，将僖皇后葬在休乎陵。
English: In September, the empress was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：己卯，太尉刘裕害右将军兖州刺史刘藩、尚书左仆射谢混。
现代文：己卯，太尉刘裕害死右将军兖州刺史刘藩、尚书左仆射谢混。
English: In addition, Lieutenant Liu Yu caused the death of the right-hand general, Zhangzhou Zishi Liu, and the left-hand servant, Shangshu Sha Xie.

古文：庚辰，裕矫诏曰 刘毅苞藏祸心，构逆南夏，藩、混助乱，志肆奸宄。
现代文：庚辰，刘裕假传诏书说： 刘毅包藏祸心，在南夏阴谋叛逆，刘藩、谢混协助叛乱，一心想犯法作乱。
English: Geng Chen and Liu Yu falsified the imperial edict to say: Liu Yi harbored evil intentions, plotted rebellion in Nansha, Liu Han and Xie Ming assisted the rebellion, and were bent on breaking the law and creating turmoil.

古文：赖宁辅玄鉴，抚机挫锐，凶党即戮，社稷乂安。
现代文：仰仗安邦定国的臣子们能够明察，平息危机而挫折锋锐，凶顽的叛党被铲除，社稷太平无事。
English: The courtiers who relied on An Bang Ding Guo were able to see clearly, the crisis was quelled and the setbacks were sharp, the fierce rebels were eradicated, and the society was peaceful.

古文：夫好生之德，所因者本，肆眚覃仁，实资玄泽。
现代文：爱惜生灵的德行，使承受恩德的人感激归服，赦免有罪的人而广施仁德，有助于天子恩泽的推行。
English: The virtue of loving the living and the dead, making those who have received kindnesses grateful, forgiving the guilty and extending kindness, is conducive to the promotion of the grace of the Son of Heaven.

古文：况事兴大憝，祸自元凶。
现代文：况且事件由大恶人兴起，祸害出自几个元凶。
English: Moreover, the incident arose from the great villain, and the scourge came from several culprits.

古文：其大赦天下，唯刘毅不在其例。
现代文：特此大赦天下，惟有刘毅不在赦免的范围内。
English: This special amnesty applies to the whole world, except for Liu Yi, who is not covered by the amnesty.

古文：普增文武位一等。
现代文：文武官员普遍提升一级。
English: Civil and military officials were generally promoted to the next level.

古文：孝顺忠义，隐滞遗逸，必令闻达 己丑，刘裕帅师讨毅。
现代文：凡是孝顺忠义，隐居埋名的人，一定要向上奏报。 己丑，刘裕统领军队讨伐刘毅。
English: All those who are filial, obedient and loyal, and those who live in seclusion and conceal their names, must report to the higher-ups.

古文：裕参军王镇恶陷江陵城，毅自杀。
现代文：刘裕的参军王镇恶攻陷江陵城，刘毅自杀。
English: Liu Yu's Wang Zhen joined the army and viciously attacked Jiangling City, and Liu Yi committed suicide.

古文：冬十一月，沮渠蒙逊僭号河西王。
现代文：冬十一月，沮渠蒙逊僭号为河西王。
English: In the winter of November, Mengxun's posthumous title became the King of Hexi.

古文：十二月，以西陵太守朱龄石为建威将军、益州刺史，帅师伐蜀。
现代文：十二月，任命西陵太守朱龄石为建威将军、益州刺史，统率军队讨伐蜀。
English: In December, Zhu Lingshi, the governor of Xiling, was appointed as the general of Jianwei and the governor of Yizhou to lead the army to fight against Shu.

古文：分荆州十郡置湘州。
现代文：从荆州分出十个郡设置湘州。
English: Ten counties were separated from Jingzhou to form Hunan.

古文：是岁，庐陵、南康地四震。
现代文：这一年，庐陵、南康四次发生地震。
English: This year, there were four earthquakes in Fuling and Nankang.

古文：九年春三月丙寅，刘裕害前将军诸葛长民及其弟辅国大将军黎民、从弟宁朔将军秀之。
现代文：九年春三月丙寅，刘裕害死前将军诸葛长民和他的弟弟辅国大将军黎民、堂弟宁朔将军秀之。
English: In the spring and March of the ninth year, Liu Yu caused the death of the former general Zhuge Changmin and his brother, the vice-governor general Li Min, and his cousin, the Ningshuo general Xiuzhi.

古文：戊寅，加刘裕镇西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，加授刘裕为镇西将军、豫州刺史。
English: Wu Yin and Liu Yu were awarded the title of Zhenxi General and Yuzhou Provincial Historian respectively.

古文：林邑范胡达寇九真，交州刺史杜慧度斩之。
现代文：林邑人范胡达侵犯九真，交州刺史杜慧度杀了他。
English: Fan Huda from Lin'e violated Jiu Zhen, and Jiaozhou assassin Du Huidu killed him.

古文：夏四月壬戌，罢临沂、湖熟皇后脂泽田四十顷，以赐贫人，弛湖池之禁。
现代文：夏四月壬戌，取消皇后在临沂、湖熟的脂泽田四十顷，用来赐给贫穷的人，放宽湖池管理的禁令。
English: In the summer of April, the Empress lifted the ban on the forty-hectare Jizawada field in Linyi and Hukou, which was used to give to the poor, and relaxed the management of the lake.

古文：封镇北将军鲁宗之为南阳郡公。
现代文：封镇北将军鲁宗之为南阳郡公。
English: Lu Zongwei, the general of the north of the town, became the governor of Nanyang County.

古文：秋七月，朱龄石克成都，斩谯纵，益州平。
现代文：秋七月，朱龄石攻克成都，杀了谯纵，益州平定。
English: In autumn and July, Zhu Lingshi conquered Chengdu, killed Xinglong, and pacified Yizhou.

古文：九月，封刘裕次子义真为桂阳公。
现代文：九月，封刘裕的次子义真为桂阳公。
English: In September, Liu Yu's second son, Yizhen, was given the title of Guiyang.

古文：冬十二月，安平王球之薨。
现代文：冬十二月，安平王球之去世。
English: In the winter of December, King Anping passed away.

古文：是岁，高句丽、倭国及西南夷铜头大师并献方物。
现代文：这一年，高句丽、倭国和西南夷铜头大师都来进献地方特产。
English: This year, masters from Goguryeo, Wa, and Southwest Yi all came to present their local specialties.

古文：十年春三月戊寅，地震。
现代文：十年春三月戊寅，地震。
English: In the spring and March of the 10th year, the earthquake occurred in Wuyin.

古文：夏六月，乞伏炽盘帅师伐秃发傉檀，灭之。
现代文：夏六月，乞伏炽磐率领军队讨伐秃发僻檀，消灭了他。
English: In the summer of June, Beggar Blazing Rock led the army to fight against Bald Haired Wandering Sandalwood and eliminated him.

古文：秋七月，淮北大风，坏庐舍。
现代文：秋七月，淮北大风，毁坏了茅屋房舍。
English: In autumn and July, a strong wind swept across Huaibei, destroying huts and houses.

古文：九月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月丁巳初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of September, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：林邑遣使来献方物。
现代文：林邑国派遣使者来进献地方特产。
English: Lin's country sent an envoy to present local specialties.

古文：是岁，城东府。
现代文：这一年，筑束府的城墙。
English: In this year, the city wall of Tsukisaku-fu was completed.

古文：十一年春正月，荆州刺史司马休之、雍州刺史鲁宗之并举兵贰于刘裕，裕帅师讨之。
现代文：十一年春正月，荆州刺史司马休之、雍州刺史鲁宗之一起举兵背叛塑龌，刘整统率军队讨伐他们。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of the Heian period, Sima Xuzhi of Jingzhou and Shiluzong of Yongzhou led an army to rebel against Shuxuan, and Liu Zheidong led the army to fight them.

古文：三月辛巳，淮陵王蕴薨。
现代文：庚午，大赦。丁丑，任命吏部尚书谢裕为尚书左仆射。三月辛巳，淮陵王司马蕴去世。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, there was a general amnesty. Ding Gou appointed Shangshu Xieyu as Shangshu's right-hand man. In March, King Sima Yun of Huairing passed away.

古文：壬午，刘裕及休之战于江津，休之败，奔襄阳。
现代文：壬午，刘裕在江津和休之交战，休之战败，逃奔襄阳。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Liu Yu was at war with Hui in Jiangjin. Hui was defeated and fled to Xiangyang.

古文：夏四月乙卯，青、冀二州刺史刘敬宣为其参军司马道赐所害。
现代文：夏四月乙卯，青、冀二州刺史刘敬宣被他的参军司马道赐杀害。
English: In the summer of April, Liu Jingxuan, a member of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and a member of the Central Military Commission (CMC) of the People's Republic of China (P.R.C.), was killed by Sima Daoxi, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：五月甲申，彗星二见。
现代文：五月甲申，两次出现彗星。
English: In May in Jiaxing, the comet appeared twice.

古文：甲午，休之、宗之出奔于姚泓。
现代文：甲午，休之、宗之出逃到姚泓那裹。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Huizhi and Zong fled to Yao'an.

古文：论平蜀功，封刘裕子义隆彭城公，朱龄石丰城公。
现代文：根据平定蜀地的功劳，封刘裕的儿子义隆为彭城公，朱龄石为丰城公。
English: According to the merits of pacifying Shu, Liu Yu's son, Yilong, was named the prince of Pengcheng, and Zhu Lingshi, the prince of Fengcheng.

古文：己酉，霍山崩，出铜钟六枚。
现代文：己酉，霍山山崩，出土六只铜钟。
English: Six bronze bells were unearthed from the Jiuzhaigou and Huoshan landslides.

古文：秋七月丙戌，京师大水，坏太庙。
现代文：秋七月丙戌，京师遭大水，淹坏了太庙。
English: In the autumn and July, Beijing was flooded and the Great Temple was inundated.

古文：辛亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：辛亥晦，有日食。
English: On the eve of the Chinese New Year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：八月丁未，尚书左仆射谢裕卒，以尚书右仆射刘穆之为尚书左仆射。
现代文：八月丁未，尚书左仆射谢裕去世，任命尚书右仆射刘穆之为尚书左仆射。
English: In August of the same year, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Xieyu, died, and Liu Mu, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man.

古文：九月己亥，大赦。
现代文：九月己亥大赦
English: September Jihai amnesty

古文：十二年春正月，姚泓使其将鲁轨寇襄阳，雍州刺史赵伦之击走之。
现代文：十二年春正月，姚泓派他的部将鲁轨侵犯襄阳，雍州刺史赵伦之打跑了他。
English: In the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, Yao Zhe sent his general Lu Lu to invade Yangyang. Zhao Lenzhi, the governor of Yongzhou, beat him and ran away.

古文：二月，加刘裕中外大都督。
现代文：二月丁未，姚兴死，儿子姚泓承嗣伪位。这个月，加授刘裕为中外大都督。
English: In February Dingwei, Yao Xing died, and his son Yao Zhe succeeded to the pseudo-throne. This month, Liu Yu was awarded the title of Grand Governor of China and Foreign Countries.

古文：夏六月，赫连勃勃攻姚泓秦州，陷之。
现代文：夏六月，赫连勃勃攻打姚泓的秦州，攻陷了它。
English: In the summer of June, Khelian vigorously attacked Yao's Qinzhou and captured it.

古文：己酉，新除尚书令、都乡亭侯刘柳卒。
现代文：己酉，新任尚书令、都乡亭侯刘柳去世。
English: Ji Yao, the newly appointed Shang Shuling, and Liu Liu, the mayor of the capital township, passed away.

古文：秋八月，刘裕及琅邪王德文帅众伐姚泓。
现代文：秋八月，刘裕和琅邪王德文统率部众讨伐姚泓。
English: In the autumn and August, Liu Yu and the evil king De Wen led the people to fight against Yao Yao.

古文：丙午，大赦。
现代文：丙午，大赦。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the amnesty began.

古文：冬十月丙寅，姚泓将姚光以洛阳降。
现代文：冬十月丙寅，姚泓部将姚光率洛阳城投降。
English: In the winter of October, Cui Yin and Yao Xibe led Yao Guang to surrender Luoyang City.

古文：己丑，遣兼司空、高密王恢之修谒五陵。
现代文：己丑，派遣兼司空、高密王恢之修缮拜谒五陵。
English: He despatched Gao Ku and Gao Mi Wang Wei to repair and pay homage to the Five Mausoleums.

古文：十三年春正月甲戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十三年春正月甲戌初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of spring in the 13th year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：二月，凉武昭王李玄盛薨，世子士业嗣位为凉州牧、凉公。
现代文：二月，凉武昭王李玄盛去世，世子士业继承他的地位为痉州牧、凉公。
English: In February, Li Xuan Sheng, the king of Liangwuzhao, passed away, and his descendants inherited his position as the ruler of Zhangzhou and Lianggu.

古文：三月，龙骧将军王镇恶大破姚泓将姚绍于潼关。
现代文：三月，龙骧将军王镇恶在潼关大破姚泓的部将姚绍。
English: In March, Longyu's general Wang Zhenxiong defeated Yao Yao's general Yao Shao in Shaoguan.

古文：夏，刘裕败魏将鹅青于河曲，斩青裨将阿薄干。
现代文：夏季，刘裕在河曲打败魏的将领鹅青，斩了鹅青的裨将阿薄干。
English: In the summer, Liu Yu defeated the Wei general Geqing in Hequ, and cut off Geqing's benefactor, Ah Bo Gan.

古文：是月，凉公李士业大败沮渠蒙逊于鲜支涧。五月，刘裕克潼关。
现代文：当月，凉公奎塞在鲜支涧大败沮渠蒙逊。五月，塑隧攻克潼关。
English: In the same month, Liangong Kuisei defeated Mengxun in Xianshijie. In May, Shaping Tunnel conquered Shouguan.

古文：丁亥，会稽王修之薨。
现代文：丁亥，会稽王脩之去世。
English: Dinghai, the auditor Wang Shizhu passed away.

古文：六月癸亥，林邑献驯象、白鹦鹉。
现代文：六月癸亥，林邑国进献驯象、白鹦鹉。
English: In June, at the time of the Year of the Boar, Linyi Province presented a tamed elephant and a white parrot.

古文：秋七月，刘裕克长安，执姚泓，收其彝器，归诸京师。
现代文：秋季七月，刘裕攻克长安，俘虏姚泓，没收了他的彝器，送回到京师。
English: In the autumn of July, Liu Yu conquered Chang'an, captured Yao Xuan, confiscated his weapons, and sent him back to Beijing.

古文：南海贼徐道期陷广州，始兴相刘谦之讨平之。
现代文：南海贼人徐道期攻陷广州，始兴相刘谦之讨伐平息了他。
English: The South Sea bandits captured Guangzhou in a short period of time, and the crusade of Liu Qian, the first Xing minister, pacified him.

古文：冬十一月辛未，左仆射、前将军刘穆之卒。
现代文：冬十一月辛未，左仆射、前将军刘穆之去世
English: In the winter, in November of Xinwei, Zuofu shot, and the former general Liu Mu Zong passed away

古文：十四年春正月辛巳，大赦。
现代文：十四年春正月辛巳，大赦。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Heian period, there was an amnesty.

古文：青州刺史沈田子害龙骧将军王镇恶于长安。
现代文：青州刺史沈田子在长安害死龙骧将军王镇恶。
English: The Qingzhou assassin, Shen Tianzi, killed the dragon general Wang Zhenxiong in Chang'an.

古文：夏六月，刘裕为相国，进封宋公。
现代文：夏六月，刘裕任相国，进封为宋公。
English: In the summer of June, Liu Yu was appointed as a minister of state, and was given the title of Song Gong.

古文：冬十月，以凉公士业为镇西将军，封酒泉公。
现代文：冬十月，任命凉公士业为镇西将军，封为酒泉公。
English: In the winter of October, he appointed Liang Gongshiye as the general of Zhenxi and named him Jiuquan.

古文：十一月，赫连勃勃大败王师于青泥北。
现代文：十一月，赫连勃勃在青泥以北大败王师。
English: In November, Herengong defeated Wang Shi in the north of Qingde.

古文：雍州刺史朱龄石焚长安宫殿，奔于潼关。
现代文：雍州刺史朱龄石焚烧长安的宫殿，逃奔到潼关。
English: Zhu Lingshi set fire to the palace in Chang'an and fled to Shaoguan.

古文：寻又大溃，龄石死之。
现代文：不久又大溃败，龄石因此而死。
English: Soon there was another great defeat, and Seishi died as a result.

古文：十二月戊寅，帝崩于东堂，时年三十七。
现代文：十二月戊寅，安帝在束堂去世，时年三十七。
English: In December, Wu Yin, An Di passed away in Sokudo, at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：葬休平陵。
现代文：葬在休平陵。
English: He was buried in Ju Ping Mausoleum.

古文：帝不惠，自少及长，口不能言，虽寒暑之变，无以辩也。
现代文：安帝不聪慧，从小到大，都不会说话，冬夏寒暑，也不知怎么区分。
English: An Di is not intelligent, from small to large, can not speak, winter and summer cold and heat, also do not know how to distinguish.

古文：凡所动止，皆非己出。
现代文：凡是行动起居，都不能自理。
English: If you act, you can't take care of yourself.

古文：故桓玄之篡，因此获全。
现代文：所以桓玄篡位时，没有被杀。
English: Therefore, he was not killed when Kuan Xuan usurped the throne.

古文：初谶云 昌明之后有二帝 ，刘裕将为禅代，故密使王韶之缢帝而立恭帝，以应二帝云。
现代文：当初有谶语说 昌明之后有两位皇帝 ，刘裕想要让司马氏禅让帝位而由自己称帝，所以秘密派遣王韶之缢死安帝而立恭帝，为的是应验谶语中的 两位皇帝 。
English: At first, there was a slang saying that there were two emperors after Changming, Liu Yu wanted to let Sima's Zen abdicate the throne and proclaim himself emperor, so he secretly sent Wang Xizhi to kill Emperor An and establish Emperor Gong, in order to fulfill the slang of the two emperors.

古文：恭帝讳德文，字德文，安帝母弟也。
现代文：恭帝名德文，字德文，是安帝的同母弟弟。
English: Emperor Gong was the younger brother of Emperor An of the same mother.

古文：初封琅邪王，历中军将军、散骑常侍、卫将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，领司徒、录尚书六条事。
现代文：起初封琅邪王，历任中军将军、散骑常侍、卫将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，兼任司徒、录尚书六条事。
English: At the beginning, the evil king was crowned, and the successive Chinese generals, horsemen, guards, and the three officers of the Kaifu ceremony, plus the junior officers, also served as officers, and recorded six things.

古文：元兴初，迁车骑大将军。
现代文：元兴初，升任车骑大将军。
English: At the beginning of the Genko era, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：桓玄执政，进位太宰，加衮冕之服，绿綟绶。
现代文：桓玄执政后，升任太宰，加授衮衣冠冕的礼服，用绿捩绶带。
English: After Kuan Xuan came to power, he was promoted to Dazai and given a ceremonial robe with a crown and a green sash.

古文：玄篡位，以帝为石阳县公，与安帝俱居寻阳。
现代文：桓玄篡位后，任帝为石阳县公，和安帝一起住在寻阳。
English: After Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, Emperor Ren became the governor of Shiyang County and lived with Emperor An in Xuanyang.

古文：及玄败，随至江陵。
现代文：到桓玄失败时，随败军到江陵。
English: When Kuan Xuan was defeated, he went to Gangneung with the defeated army.

古文：玄死，桓振奄至，跃马奋戈，直至阶下，瞋目谓安帝曰 臣门户何负国家，而屠灭若是 帝乃下床谓振曰 此岂我兄弟意邪 振乃下马致拜。
现代文：桓玄死后，桓振突然来到，跃马挥戈，直到台阶前，瞪着眼睛对安帝说： 臣一家有什么对不起国家的地方，竟然屠杀诛灭成这个样子? 帝于是走下坐床对桓振说： 逭难道是我们兄弟的意思吗! 于是桓振下马行礼。
English: After the death of Huan Xuan, Huan Zhen suddenly came, jumped on his horse and rode until he reached the front of the steps, stared into his eyes and said to An Di: What is wrong with the minister's family and the country, that they should slaughter and exterminate like this? The emperor then got down from the bed and said to Huan Zhen: "Don't you mean our brothers!" So Huan Zhen dismounted and saluted.

古文：振平，复为琅邪王，又领徐州刺史，寻拜大司马，领司徒，加殊礼。
现代文：平息桓振后，再次为琅邪王。又兼任徐州刺史，不久任大司马，兼任司徒，加特殊礼遇。
English: After quelling Kuan Zhen, he was once again the king of evil spirits. He also served as the historian of Xuzhou, and later as the grand steward, and also as the steward, with special courtesy.

古文：义熙五年，置左右长史、司马、从事中郎四人，加羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：义熙五年，设置左右长史、司马、从事中郎共四名属官，加授羽葆和鼓吹。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a total of four subordinate officials, including Changshi, Sima, and Zhonglang, were set up on the left and right, and were awarded the title of feathered eunuch and the title of preacher.

古文：十二年，诏曰 大司马明德懋亲，太尉道勋光大，并徽序彝伦，燮和二气，髦俊引领，思佐鼎饪。
现代文：十二年，诏书说： 大司马昭显的德行使皇室宗亲更加盛美，太尉的道德功勋光大，全都使人伦常道美善有序，使阴阳上下谐调融合，有才俊的人引领景仰，想辅佐他料理国政。
English: In the 12th year, the imperial edict said: the virtue of the grand secretary Ma Zhaoxian made the imperial ancestor more prosperous, and the moral merit of the captain was brilliant. All of them made people's morals and manners beautiful and orderly, and made the yin and yang harmoniously integrate. Talented people lead admiration and want to assist others in cooking national politics.

古文：而雅尚冲挹，四门弗辟，诚合大雅谦虚之道，实违急贤赞世之务。
现代文：可是他平素好尚谦虚自抑，四门不开，符合大雅谦虚之道，其实违背急于求贤助世之务。
English: However, he is usually modest and self-restrained, and does not open the four doors, which is in line with the path of elegance and modesty, but actually violates the urgent need to seek virtue and help the world.

古文：昔蒲轮载徵，异人并出，东平开府，奇士向臻，济济之盛，朕有钦焉。
现代文：从前用蒲草裹轮载送征聘来的贤人，非凡的人才就不断出现；束平开府，人才济济，朕心中想望。
English: In the past, sages who were recruited and sent on the wheel wrapped in papyrus kept appearing, and extraordinary talents kept emerging. Now that Sokping is open to the public, there are so many talented people, and I am really looking forward to it.

古文：可敕二府，依旧辟召，必将明敡俊乂，嗣轨前贤矣 于是始辟召掾属。
现代文：可以敕令二府，依照旧例召贤，必将选拔出贤德的人才，效法前辈。 于是开始选拔自己下属的官员。
English: He could order the two prefectures to recruit officials in accordance with the old practice, and he would surely select virtuous people to emulate his predecessors, so he began to select his own subordinate officials.

古文：时太尉裕都督中外诸军，诏曰 大司马地隆任重，亲贤莫贰。
现代文：当时太尉刘裕都督中外诸军，有诏说： 大司马地位尊隆责任重大，亲贤没有二心。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Liu Yu was the governor of all the armies at home and abroad, and there was an edict saying: the position of grand steward and the position of honor and high rank have great responsibilities, and there is no room for ambivalence.

古文：虽府受节度，可身无致敬 刘裕之北征也，帝上疏，请帅所莅，启行戎路，修敬山陵。
现代文：虽然他的官府受朝廷节制，他本人可以不必遵守常规来表达敬意。 刘裕北征的时候，帝向安帝上疏，请求领本部人马，登程出征前，拜谒先祖陵墓。
English: Although his government was restrained by the imperial court, he did not have to follow the rules to show his respect. When Liu Yu was on the Northern Expedition, the emperor sent a message to the Andean emperor, asking him to lead the troops and pay a visit to the ancestral mausoleum before embarking on the expedition.

古文：朝廷从之，乃与裕俱发。
现代文：朝廷听从了他的意见，于是和刘裕一起出发。
English: The imperial court listened to his advice and set out with Liu Yu.

古文：及有司以即戎不得奉辞陵庙，帝复上疏曰 臣推毂阃外，将革寒暑，不获展情埏遂，私心罔极。
现代文：当有关部门提出参与戎事不得拜辞陵庙时，帝再次上疏说： 臣随军离京，将经过很长时间，不能够在祖先陵墓前表达自己的情思，心中有无尽的怅惘。
English: When the relevant departments proposed that no one should bow to the mausoleum when participating in military affairs, the emperor once again said: It will take a long time for the vassals to leave Beijing with the army, and they will not be able to express their feelings in front of the ancestral mausoleum. There are endless regrets in their hearts.

古文：伏愿天慈，特垂听许，使臣微诚粗申，即路无恨 许之。
现代文：希望开恩，特许这一要求，使臣的诚意得以表达出来，上路便没有遗憾了。 
English: Hoping to be granted this request, the envoy's sincerity could be expressed, and he had no regrets about going on the trip.

古文：及姚泓灭，归于京都。
现代文：批准了他。等到姚泓被消灭，才回到了京都。
English: He waited until Yao Yao was eliminated before returning to Kyoto.

古文：十四年十二月戊寅，安帝崩。
现代文：十四年十二月戊寅，安帝去世。
English: On December 14th, Wu Yin, An Di passed away.

古文：刘裕矫称遗诏曰 唯我有晋，诞膺明命，业隆九有，光宅四海。
现代文：刘裕诈称遣诏说： 衹有我们大晋，顺应辉煌的天命，业绩统领九州，光辉庇护四海。
English: Liu Yuraku said that he sent the imperial edict saying: "With our great Jin, conform to the glorious destiny, lead Kyushu in performance, and protect the four seas with brilliance."

古文：朕以不德，属当多难，幸赖宰辅，拯厥颠覆。
现代文：朕因为德行不足，正逢多难之时，幸亏依靠辅政大臣，拯救了国家的颠覆。
English: Due to my lack of virtue, in a time of great difficulty, I fortunately relied on the Vice-Minister of State to save the country from subversion.

古文：仍恃保祐，克黜祸乱，遂冕旒辰极，混一六合。
现代文：仍然凭恃着保卫佑护，战胜消除了祸乱，于是朝廷稳固，一统天下。
English: He still relied on the protection and blessing of the emperor to overcome and eliminate the calamity, so the imperial court was stable and ruled the world.

古文：方凭阿衡，惟新洪业，而遘疾大渐，将遂弗兴。
现代文：正要凭仗辅政大臣，更新发展洪大的事业，却身染重病，看来难以痊愈。
English: The Vice-Minister of State, who was supposed to renew and develop a huge undertaking, is seriously ill and seems to be difficult to recover.

古文：仰惟祖宗灵命，亲贤是荷。
现代文：仰赖祖宗神灵的嘱咐，要将重任交付亲近贤明的人。
English: Relying on the instruction of the ancestral deity, we should entrust the important task to those who are close and wise.

古文：咨尔大司马、琅邪王，体自先皇，明德光懋，属惟储贰，众望攸集。
现代文：大司马、琅邪王，是先皇骨肉，德行昭着光大，由你来当储君，是众望所归。
English: Daishima, King of Evil, you are the flesh and blood of the previous emperor, and your virtue is glorious. You are the heir to the throne, and you are the object of everyone's hopes.

古文：其君临晋邦，奉系宗祀，允执其中，燮和天下。
现代文：希望你君临晋国，继承遣业，谨慎治理国家，融和天下百姓。
English: I hope that you will come to the State of Jin to succeed the retired emperor, prudently govern the country, and reconcile the people of the world.

古文：阐扬末诰，无废我高祖之景命 是日，即帝位，大赦。
现代文：实行我最后的告诫，不要败坏了我们高祖的伟大使命。 遣一天，登皇帝位，大赦。
English: Carry out my last admonition, do not corrupt the great mission of our great ancestors, one day, ascend to the throne, amnesty.

古文：元熙元年春正月壬辰朔，改元。
现代文：元熙元年春正月壬辰初一，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yuanxi Dynasty, the first day of the first month of the Imjin Dynasty, the name of the year was changed.

古文：以山陵未厝，不朝会。
现代文：由于安帝还没有被安葬，不朝会。
English: Since Emperor An has not yet been buried, there will be no imperial meeting.

古文：立皇后褚氏。甲午，征刘裕还朝。
现代文：立褚氏为皇后。甲午，征召刘裕还朝。
English: Lixuan was the empress. In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liu Yu was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：戊戌，有星孛于太微西藩。
现代文：戊戌，有彗星出现在太微星垣的西边。
English: A comet appeared on the west side of the Taimiao Star Wall.

古文：庚申，葬安皇帝于休平陵。
现代文：庚申，将安皇帝葬在休平陵。
English: Emperor An was buried in the tomb of Emperor Xuping.

古文：帝受朝，悬而不乐。
现代文：帝接受朝拜，悬置乐器但不奏乐。
English: The emperor received worship, suspended musical instruments but did not play music.

古文：以骠骑将军刘道怜为司空。
现代文：任命骠骑将军刘道怜为司空。
English: He appointed Liu Daorei, the general of the imperial cavalry, as the leader of the cavalry.

古文：秋八月，刘裕移镇寿阳。
现代文：秋八月，刘裕迁移到寿阳镇守。
English: In autumn and August, Liu Yu moved to Shouyang Town.

古文：以刘怀慎为前将军、北徐州刺史，镇彭城。
现代文：任命刘怀慎为前将军、北徐州刺史，镇守彭城。
English: Liu Huaixin was appointed as the former general, the governor of North Xuzhou and the town guard of Pengcheng.

古文：九月，刘裕自解扬州。
现代文：九月，刘裕自动解除扬州刺史的职务。
English: In September, Liu Yu was automatically relieved of his duties as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：冬十月乙酉，裕以其子桂阳公义真为扬州刺史。
现代文：冬十月乙酉，刘裕任命他的儿子桂阳公义真为扬州刺史。
English: In the winter of October, Liu Yu appointed his son Guiyang Jiuyizhen as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：十一月丁亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月丁亥初一，有日食。
English: In November, on the first day of the Chinese New Year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月辛卯，裕加殊礼。
现代文：十二月辛卯，刘裕被加授特殊礼遇。
English: In December, Liu Yu was given a special courtesy.

古文：己卯，太史奏，黑龙四见于东方。
现代文：己卯，太史上奏，黑龙四次出现在东方。
English: Jiwu, Taixing, and Black Dragon have appeared in the East four times.

古文：二年夏六月壬戌，刘裕至于京师。
现代文：二年夏六月壬戌，刘裕到达京师。
English: In June of the summer of the second year, Liu Yu arrived in Beijing.

古文：傅亮承裕密旨，讽帝禅位，草诏，请帝书之。
现代文：傅亮秉承刘裕秘密授意，劝恭帝禅位，起草了韶书，请恭帝书写它。
English: Fu Liang, adhering to Liu Yu's secret instruction, advised Emperor Gong to meditate and drafted an imperial edict, asking Emperor Gong to write it down.

古文：帝欣然谓左右曰 晋氏久已失之，今复何恨 乃书赤纸为诏。
现代文：恭帝欣然对身边的人说： 晋氏早就失去了天下，现在又有什么遗憾。 
English: Emperor Gong gladly said to the people around him: Jin had already lost the world, so what is there to regret now?

古文：甲子，遂逊于琅邪第。
现代文：于是用红纸书写好诏书。甲子，退位到琅邪王的府第。
English: So he wrote an edict on red paper. "Koshi, abdicate and go to the evil king's palace."

古文：刘裕以帝为零陵王，居于秣陵，行晋正朔，车旗服色一如其旧，有其文而不备其礼。
现代文：刘裕让恭帝当零陵王，居住在秣陵，用晋朝的纪年，车辆旗帜服饰颜色一概和他从前的一样，但实际已是有名无实。
English: Liu Yu let Emperor Gong live in Fuling, using the calendar of the Jin Dynasty, and the colors of the vehicle flags and clothing were all the same as before, but in fact it was already a myth.

古文：帝自是之后，深虑祸机，褚后常在帝侧，饮食所资，皆出褚后，故宋人莫得伺其隙，宋永初二年九月丁丑，裕使后兄叔度请后，有间，兵人逾垣而入，弑帝于内房。
现代文：从此以后，恭帝忧虑着灾祸的降临。褚后经常在他的身边，饮食用的东西物品，都经褚后的手，所以宋人没有能够找到空子下手。宋永初二年九月丁丑，刘裕派皇后的哥哥叔度去请皇后；过了一会见，兵丁越墙进去，在内房杀了恭帝。
English: From then on, Emperor Gong worried about the coming of disaster. Empress Dowager Gao was always by his side, and the things for eating and drinking passed through Empress Gao's hands, so the Song people were not able to find a way out. In September of the second year of the Song Dynasty, Liu Yu sent the empress's brother and uncle to invite the empress; after a meeting, the soldier went over the wall and killed Emperor Gong in the inner room.

古文：时年三十六。
现代文：时年三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old.

古文：谥恭皇帝，葬冲平陵。
现代文：谧号恭皇帝，葬在冲平陵。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Gong, and he was buried in Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：帝幼时性颇忍急，及在藩国，曾令善射者射马为戏。
现代文：帝幼年时性情比较残忍急躁，后来在封国时，曾经让善于射箭的入射马作为游戏。
English: When the emperor was a child, his temperament was cruel and impetuous. Later, when he was enthroned, he used to have a horse that was good at archery as a game.

古文：既而有人云 马者国姓，而自杀之，不祥之甚 帝亦悟，甚悔之。
现代文：不久有人说： 马是国姓，却自己去杀马，太不吉利了。 恭帝也醒悟，非常悔恨做了遣件事。
English: Before long, someone said, "It's very unlucky to kill a horse when the horse is the national animal," and Emperor Gong realized that he had done something he regretted.

古文：其后复深信浮屠道，铸货千万，造丈六金像，亲于瓦官寺迎之，步从十许里。
现代文：从那以后深信佛教，将成千上万的钱币铸在一起，造出一丈六尺高的铜像，亲自到瓦官寺迎接，步行随从了十多里。
English: Since then, he has been a firm believer in Buddhism, minting thousands of coins together to create a six-foot-tall bronze statue. He went to Wakan-ji Temple to meet the statue in person, and followed it on foot for more than ten miles.

古文：安帝既不惠，帝每侍左右，消息温凉寝食之节，以恭谨闻，时人称焉。
现代文：安帝是白痴，恭帝常常侍奉在他身边，关照冷暖起居饮食，因为恭谨而出名，当时的人们都称道这事。
English: An Di was an idiot, Qian Di often served at his side, taking care of cold and warm living and eating, because Qian Di was famous, and people at the time praised this.

古文：始，元帝以丁丑岁称晋王，置宗庙，使郭璞筮之，云 享二百年 。
现代文：当初，元帝在丁丑年称晋王，立宗庙时，让郭璞占筮，说 享二百年 。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Yuan claimed to be the King of Jin in the year of Dingwu, and when he established the Imperial Family Temple, he let Guo Jian occupy the throne, saying that he would enjoy two hundred years.

古文：自丁丑至禅代之岁，年在庚申，为一百四岁。
现代文：从丁丑到禅代的这一年，是庚申年，正是一百零四年。
English: The year from Dingwusi to the Zen Dynasty was the Year of the Goat, precisely one hundred and four years.

古文：然丁丑始系西晋，庚申终入宋年，所馀惟一百有二岁耳。
现代文：但是丁丑开始有西晋，庚申就成了宋的年代，中间余下的衹有一百零二年罢了。
English: However, Dingwu started the Western Jin Dynasty, Goshun became the Song Dynasty, and the remaining years in between were only 102 years.

古文：璞盖以百二之期促，故婉而倒之为二百也。
现代文：郭璞大概因为一百零二年的期限短了，所以倒过来委婉地说成是二百年。
English: Guo Wei probably because the period of one hundred and two years is short, so he euphemistically said that it was two hundred years.

古文：史臣曰：安帝即位之辰，钟无妄之日，道子、元显并倾朝政，主昏臣乱，未有如斯不亡者也。
现代文：史臣曰：安帝即位的时期，正是紧张战乱的时期，道子、元显专权，君主昏庸而臣子乱法，这样怎能不亡国。
English: Shi Zhen said: The period of Emperor An's accession to the throne was a period of intense war and turmoil, the autocracy of Tao Zi and Yuan Xian, the monarch was dull and the courtiers were lawless, so how could the country not be destroyed.

古文：虽有手握戎麾，心存旧国，回首无良，忽焉萧散。
现代文：即使手中掌握兵马，心中存念故国朝廷的人，也因回首四顾不见贤良的人，一下子就四散了。
English: Even those who had soldiers and horses in their hands and were thinking of the imperial court of their home country were suddenly scattered because they could not see the virtuous people when they looked back.

古文：于是桓玄乘衅，势逾飙指，六师咸泯，只马徂迁。
现代文：于是桓玄乘这个机会，势头超过了狂风卷地，六军都被消灭，皇帝流亡。
English: So Huan Xuan took advantage of this opportunity, and the momentum exceeded that of the wind sweeping across the land. All six armies were destroyed, and the emperor went into exile.

古文：是以宋高非典午之臣，孙恩岂金行之寇。
现代文：所以宋直担并不是司马氏的臣子，瑟墨哪裹是置塑的敌寇。
English: Therefore, Song Zhichang was not a vassal of Sima clan, and Shumengnanwrapped was an enemy of Shaping.

古文：若乃世遇颠覆，则恭皇斯甚。
现代文：至于当朝而遇上颠覆，那就敷恭皇帝最不幸了。
English: As for the subversion that befell the dynasty, it was most unfortunate for Emperor Shikyong.

古文：於越之民，讵熏丹穴，会稽之侣，宁叹入臣。
现代文：室迈之地的民众，怎会去烟熏丹穴，会稽山下的人们，难道会感叹作别人的臣民。
English: How can the people of the land of Shurumai go to smoke tobacco, how can they watch the people under the mountain, how can they lament being the subjects of others.

古文：去皇屋而归来，洒丹书而不恨。
现代文：离别了皇宫而返回旧家，写红纸诏书而不遗憾。
English: After leaving the Imperial Palace, he returned to his old home and wrote a red paper imperial edict without regret.

古文：夫五运攸革，三微数尽，犹高秋彫候，理之自然。
现代文：天地间五运的更替变革，三正纪年的命数走到尽头，好比深秋时节万物凋零，是自然之理。
English: It is a natural law that the five movements of the heavens and the earth will change, and the life of the three regular years will come to an end, just like the withering of all things in the late autumn.

古文：观其摇落，人有为之流涟者也。
现代文：看到晋已飘摇零落，也有人会哭泣流泪。
English: Some people will shed tears when they see Jin has drifted away.

古文：赞曰：安承流湎，大盗斯张。
现代文：赞曰：安帝继承了放纵无度的国运，大盗趁势猖狂起来。
English: Zang said: An Di inherited the national fortune of indulgence, and the thief took advantage of the situation to become rampant.

古文：恭乃寓命，他人是纲。
现代文：恭帝暂时受命，事情由别人决定。
English: Emperor Gong was temporarily appointed, and the matter was decided by others.

古文：犹存周赧，始立怀王。
现代文：就如保留周赧王，却是楚怀王取代。
English: It's like retaining King Zhou Enlai, but replacing him with King Chu Huai.

古文：虚尊假号，异术同亡。
现代文：虚假的尊位和称号，不同的方法却同归于灭亡。
English: False dignities and titles, and different methods, will all come to an end.

