古文：竟陵文宣王子良字云英，武帝第二子也。
现代文：竟陵文宣王萧子良字云英，是齐武帝的第二个儿子。
English: In fact, Emperor Qiwu's second son, King Xiao Zi Liangzhi Yunying, was actually a descendant of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：幼聪敏。
现代文：自幼聪敏。
English: Clever and quick-witted at an early age.

古文：武帝爲赣县时，与裴后不谐，遣人船送后还都，已登路，子良时年小，在庭前不悦。
现代文：武帝在赣县任职的时候，与裴后关系不协调，派人用船送裴后回京城，已经上路了，萧子良当时年纪幼小，在厅堂前很不高兴。
English: When Emperor Wu was in charge of Min County, his relationship with Queen Pei was not harmonious. He sent someone to send Queen Pei back to Beijing by boat. She was already on her way. Xiao Ziliang was very young at the time and was very unhappy in front of the hall.

古文：帝谓曰： 汝何不读书？ 
现代文：武帝对他说： 你怎么不读书？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to him, "Why don't you read?"

古文：子良曰： 娘今何处？
现代文：萧子良说： 我娘在哪里？
English: Xiao Ziliang said: Where is my daughter?

古文：何用读书。 
现代文：为什么还要读书！ 
English: Why do you still have to read!

古文：帝异之，即召后还县。
现代文：武帝感到很奇异，便召裴后回到了县里。
English: Emperor Wu felt very strange, and after summoning Pei, he returned to the county.

古文：仕宋爲邵陵王友。
现代文：他在宋朝做官任邵陵王友。
English: He held the post of Shao Ling Wang You in the Song Dynasty.

古文：时宋道衰谢，诸王微弱，故不废此官。
现代文：当时宋朝国运衰落，诸王都很弱小，所以不废除这一官职。
English: At that time, the Song Dynasty was in decline, and the kings were very weak, so they did not abolish this official post.

古文：升明三年，爲会稽太守，都督五郡。
现代文：升明三年，担任会稽太守，都督五郡。
English: After three years of promotion, he served as the auditor-general of the association and the governor of five counties.

古文：封闻喜公。
现代文：封为闻喜公。
English: His posthumous name was Weng Xi Gong.

古文：宋元嘉中，凡事皆责成郡县，孝武后，徵求急速，以郡县迟缓，始遣台使，自此公役劳扰。
现代文：宋朝元嘉年间，凡事都责成县郡去办，孝武帝以后，征求急速，因为郡县迟缓，才开始派遣台使，从此公役经常搅扰。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Jia Dynasty, counties and counties were ordered to do everything. After Emperor Xiaowu, the request for speed, because the counties and counties were slow, began to send envoys. Since then, the civil service has often interfered.

古文：高帝践阼，子良陈之，请息其弊。
现代文：高帝即位，萧子良陈述了这一情况，请求消除它的积弊。
English: When Emperor Gao ascended to the throne, Xiao Ziliang stated this situation and requested to eliminate its accumulated disadvantages.

古文：子良敦义爱古，郡人朱百年有至行，先卒，赐其妻米百斛，蠲一人，给其薪苏。
现代文：萧子良重道义、好古雅，本郡人朱百年有极高的德行，很早就死去，萧子良便赐给他的妻子米一百斛，免去一个人的赋税，供给她柴草。
English: Xiao Ziliang was a man of great moral integrity and quaint elegance. A native of Zhu County, he lived for a hundred years and was extremely virtuous. He died very early. Xiao Ziliang gave his wife one hundred mu of rice, exempting her from personal taxes, and provided her with firewood.

古文：郡合下有虞翻旧床，罢任还，乃致以归。
现代文：郡门下有虞翻的旧床，虞翻罢任回家，便把床给他送了回去。
English: There was an old bed of Yu Qian under the county gate. Yu Qian went home and sent the bed back to him.

古文：后于西邸起古斋，多聚古人器服以充之。
现代文：后来萧子良在西邸建了一座古斋，收集了许多古人的器具衣服布置在里边。
English: Later, Xiao Ziliang built an antique restaurant in the West Mansion, and collected many ancient people's utensils and clothes and arranged them inside.

古文：夏禹庙盛有祷祀，子良曰： 禹泣辜表仁，菲食旌约，服玩果粽，足以致诚。 
现代文：夏禹庙里有很多人在祈祷，萧子良说： 大禹同情罪犯表彰仁人，饮食简单提倡节约，服玩果品，就足以表达诚意了。 
English: There are many people praying in Xia Yu Temple, Xia Ziliang said: Dayu sympathizes with criminals and commends benevolent people, advocates simple diet and frugality, wears and plays with fruits, which is enough to express sincerity.

古文：使岁献扇簟而已。
现代文：让人们每年只献一些竹帘竹席为止。
English: So far, people have only offered a few bamboo curtains and bamboo seats each year.

古文：时有山阴人孔平诣子良讼嫂市米负钱不还。
现代文：当时有个山阴人孔平，到萧子良那里告他嫂子买米欠钱不还。
English: At that time, there was a Shangyin man, Kong Ping, who went to Xiao Ziliang to accuse his sister-in-law of not paying back the money she owed for buying rice.

古文：子良叹曰： 昔高文通与寡嫂讼田，义异于此。 
现代文：萧子良慨叹说： 从前高文通与寡妇嫂子打田地官司，内容和这不同。 
English: Xiao Ziliang sighed and said: In the past, Gao Wentong and his widowed sister-in-law had a lot of lawsuits. The content is different from this.

古文：乃赐米钱以偿平。
现代文：便赐给米钱以偿还孔平。
English: He then gave the rice money to repay Kong Ping.

古文：建元二年，穆妃薨，去官，仍爲丹阳尹，开私仓振属县贫人。
现代文：建元二年，穆妃去世，他辞了官，仍然担任丹阳尹，打开私人粮仓救济所属县中的贫苦人。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, Mufei died. He resigned from his post and still served as Danyang Yin, opening a private granary to help the poor in his county.

古文：先是太妃以七月薨，子良以八月奉凶问。
现代文：在这以前太妃在七月去世，萧子良在八月得到了消息。
English: Before that, Tohei passed away in July, and Xiao Ziliang received the news in August.

古文：及小祥，疑南郡王应相待。
现代文：在举行一周年的祭礼时，怀疑应该等待南郡王。
English: As the first anniversary celebrations take place, suspicion should fall on King Min.

古文：尚书左仆射王俭议以爲 礼有伦序，义无徒设。
现代文：尚书王俭提出建议，认为 礼有伦理次序，义不徒然虚设。
English: Shangshu Wangjian suggested that there should be an ethical order in etiquette, and righteousness should not be set up in vain.

古文：如令远则不待，近必相须，礼例既乖，即心无取。
现代文：如果远处的就不等待，近处的必须等候，这样礼数上既相违背，内心里也无可取。
English: If those who are far away do not wait, those who are near must wait, which is both a breach of etiquette and undesirable in one's heart.

古文：若疑兄弟同居，吉凶舛杂，则远还之子，自应开立别门，以终丧事，灵筵祭奠，随在家之人，再期而毁。
现代文：如果怀疑兄弟居住在一起，吉凶混杂，那么从远处回来的儿子，自然应该另外设立门庭，直到丧事办完，灵宴和祭奠，要依靠在家的人，两次周年时都进行哀悼。
English: If it is suspected that the brothers live together and are a mixture of good and evil, then the son who returns from afar should naturally set up a separate courtyard until the funeral is over, and rely on the people at home for the funeral banquet and memorial service, and mourn on both anniversaries.

古文：庶子在家，亦不待嫡。
现代文：庶子在家，也不等待嫡子。
English: The illegitimate son is at home and does not wait for the legitimate son.

古文：而况储妃正体王室，中军长嫡之重，天朝又行权制，进退弥复非疑。
现代文：何况太子妃是王室的正式体现，中军将军居于嫡长子的重要地位，在天朝又掌握大权，由他处理更加不应再有怀疑。
English: What's more, the crown princess is the official embodiment of the royal family. The general of the Chinese army occupies an important position as the eldest son, and holds great power in the imperial court. There should be no more doubts about his handling.

古文：谓应不相待，中军祥缟之日，闻喜致哀而已，不受吊慰。
现代文：我认为应该不去等待，中军在两周年祭祀后穿上朝服的时候，闻喜公只需要致哀，不接受吊慰。
English: I think we should not wait. When the Chinese troops put on their imperial robes after the second anniversary ceremony, Weng Xi Gong only needs to offer condolences, not accept condolences.

古文：至闻喜变除，昆弟亦宜相就写情，不对客 。
现代文：等到闻喜公改除丧服，兄弟也应该相聚在一起交流感情，不接待宾客 。
English: By the time Wen Xi Gong changes out of his mourning clothes, the brothers should also gather together to exchange feelings and not receive guests.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：武帝即位，封竟陵郡王、南徐州刺史，加都督。
现代文：武帝即位，封他为竟陵郡王、南徐州刺史，加任都督。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was named the King of Xingling County, the Governor of South Xuzhou Province, and the Governor of the Capital.

古文：永明二年，爲护军将军，兼司徒。
现代文：永明二年，担任护军将军，兼司徒。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he served as a military escort general, and also as a scholar.

古文：四年，进号车骑将军。
现代文：四年，晋升为车骑将军。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to General of the Cavalry.

古文：子良少有清尚，礼才好士，居不疑之地，倾意宾客，天下才学皆游集焉。
现代文：萧子良少年就有清雅的好尚，礼遇贤才，喜爱文士，他处于很高的地位，而向往宾客，天下有才学的人都聚集到了他这里。
English: Xiao Ziliang, a young man, has a refined taste, treats the wise with courtesy, and loves the scribes. He is in a high position, and yearns for guests. The world's talented people have gathered here.

古文：善立胜事，夏月客至，爲设瓜饮及甘果，着之文教。
现代文：他善于做一些很出众的事情，夏天客人到了，他就为他们摆出瓜果和饮料，标举文教。
English: He is good at doing some very outstanding things. When guests arrive in the summer, he puts out melons and fruits and drinks for them, praising literature and education.

古文：士子文章及朝贵辞翰，皆发教撰录。
现代文：士子的文章以及朝贵的作品，都找到让他们抄写下来。
English: The scholar's articles and the court noble's works were all found for them to copy down.

古文：是时上新视政，水旱不时，子良密啓请原除逋租。
现代文：当时皇上刚刚开始处理政务，水灾旱灾不断发生，萧子良秘密上奏，请求免除拖欠的租子。
English: At that time, the emperor had just begun to deal with government affairs, floods and droughts continued to occur, and Xiao Ziliang secretly petitioned to exempt the delinquent tenants.

古文：又陈宽刑息役，轻赋省徭。
现代文：又建议放宽刑罚，停息徭役，减轻赋税。
English: It is also proposed to relax the penalty, suspend the interest payment, and reduce the tax.

古文：并陈 泉铸岁远，类多翦凿，江东大钱，十不一在，公家所受，必须轮郭完全，遂买本一千，加子七百，求请无地，捶革相继。
现代文：并且陈述 钱币的铸造年代久远，一般都已经残缺，江东的大钱，连十分之一也不存在了，公家所接受的钱，必须轮廓完整，于是买本一千，要加子七百，无处可以求告，棍打警告相继而来。
English: He also stated, "Coins have been minted for a long time, and they are generally incomplete. Even one-tenth of the big money in Jiangdong no longer exists. The money accepted by the public must have a complete outline. Therefore, it is necessary to buy one thousand books, add seven hundred yuan, and there is nowhere to appeal to. Stick warnings come one after another.

古文：寻完者爲用，既不兼两，回复迁贸，会非委积，徒令小人每婴困苦。
现代文：寻找完整的来使用，也不多算，往复进行贸易，一定不会有积聚，只会让小民们常常遭受困苦。
English: It is not a big deal to find a complete one to use, and there will be no accumulation when trading back and forth, which will only cause the common people to often suffer hardships.

古文：且钱布相半，爲制永久，或闻长宰须令输直，进违旧科，退容奸利 。
现代文：而且钱和布伴随使用，作为制度非常长久，有时听说长官要让缴纳税钱，前进就违背了旧的规定，后退则会有人投机取巧 。
English: Moreover, the use of money and cloth is very long-standing as a system. Sometimes it is heard that the governor wants to pay tax money, moving forward is contrary to the old regulations, and moving back will be opportunistic.

古文：五年，正位司徒，给班剑二十人，侍中如故。
现代文：永明五年，他担任了司徒，配给仪仗二十人，侍中职务依旧。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, he served as an attendant, and was assigned to twenty honor guards, but his position as an attendant was still the same.

古文：移居鸡笼山西邸，集学士抄五经百家，依皇览例爲四部要略千卷。
现代文：移居到鸡笼山的西邸，聚集学士抄录《五经》和百家著作，依照《皇览》的体例编成了《四部要略》一千卷。
English: He moved to the West Mansion on Jiguishan Mountain, gathered scholars to transcribe the Five Classics and hundreds of works, and compiled a thousand volumes of the Four Major Works according to the style of the Imperial Review.

古文：招致名僧，讲论佛法，造经呗新声，道俗之盛，江左未有。
现代文：招请名僧，讲论佛法，创造经呗新声，佛教风气的兴盛，在江东前所未有。
English: Inviting famous monks, lecturing on Buddhism, creating new voices, the prosperity of the Buddhist ethos is unprecedented in Jiangdong.

古文：武帝好射雉，子良啓谏。
现代文：武帝喜欢射野鸡，萧子良上书劝谏。
English: Emperor Wu liked to shoot pheasants, and Xiao Ziliang wrote to Emperor Wu to persuade him.

古文：先是左卫殿中将军邯郸超上书谏射雉，武帝爲止，久之，超竟被诛。
现代文：在这以前左卫殿中将军邯郸超曾经上书劝谏不要射野鸡，武帝因此而停止了，时间久了，邯郸超终于被杀死。
English: Prior to this, General Gong Chao of the Middle Palace of the Left Palace Guards had written to Emperor Wu to advise him not to shoot pheasants, and Emperor Wu stopped shooting pheasants for this reason. After a long time, Gong Chao was finally killed.

古文：永明末，上将复射雉，子良复谏，前后所陈，上虽不尽纳，而深见宠爱。
现代文：永明末年，皇上将要重新去射野鸡，萧子良重又劝谏，前后所提的意见，皇上虽然没有完全采纳，他却深受宠爱。
English: At the end of the Yongming era, the emperor was going to shoot pheasants again, and Xiao Zi again advised him to do so. Although the emperor did not fully adopt the opinions put forward, he was deeply loved.

古文：又与文惠太子同好释氏，甚相友悌。
现代文：他又和文惠太子共同喜欢佛教，非常友爱。
English: He also shares a love of Buddhism with Prince Wen Hui, and they are very friendly.

古文：子良敬信尤笃，数于邸园营斋戒，大集朝臣衆僧，至赋食行水，或躬亲其事，世颇以爲失宰相体。
现代文：萧子良敬信尤其虔诚，多次在家园中营办斋戒，大批会集朝臣和众僧，甚至于送饭倒水，有时亲自去干，世人颇以为有失宰相的体统。
English: Xiao Ziliang Jingxin was particularly pious. He often held fasts in his home garden, gathered a large number of courtiers and monks, and even delivered food and water, sometimes doing it himself. The world thought he lacked the dignity of a prime minister.

古文：劝人爲善，未尝厌倦，以此终致盛名。
现代文：他劝人为善，从不厌倦，由此终于有了很大的名声。
English: He never tired of exhorting people to be good, and this eventually gained him a great reputation.

古文：八年，给三望车。
现代文：永明八年，配给他三望车。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was assigned to Sanwang Car.

古文：九年，都下大水，吴兴偏剧，子良开仓振救贫病不能立者，于第北立廨收养，给衣及药。
现代文：九年，京城发大水，吴兴特别严重，萧子良开仓救济贫苦有病不能维持的人，在府第的北面设立官舍收养他们，供给衣服和药品。
English: In the ninth year, when the capital was flooded and Wuxing was hit particularly hard, Xiao Ziliang opened a warehouse to provide relief to the poor and sick who could not be sustained, and set up an official residence in the north of the capital to take them in and supply them with clothes and medicines.

古文：十年，领尚书令、扬州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：十年，兼尚书令、扬州刺史，本官依旧。
English: Ten years later, I'm still in the same position as I was when I was Shurei and Yangzhou Sashishi.

古文：寻解尚书令，加中书监。
现代文：不久解除了尚书令，任命为中书监。
English: Soon after, he dismissed Shang Shuling and appointed him as the Central Supervisor of Chinese Books.

古文：文惠太子薨，武帝检行东宫，见太子服御羽仪，多过制度，上大怒，以子良与太子善，不啓闻，颇加嫌责。
现代文：文惠太子去世，武帝到东宫检查，见到太子的服饰仪仗，很多都超过规定标准，皇上大怒，因为萧子良和太子要好，不曾向上奏明，让皇帝知道，因而皇上对他非常不满，大加斥责。
English: After the death of Prince Wenhui, Emperor Wu went to the East Palace to inspect and saw the prince's ceremonial costumes, many of which exceeded the prescribed standards. The emperor was furious, because Xiao Ziliang was better than the prince and did not inform the emperor, so the emperor was very dissatisfied with him and severely reprimanded him.

古文：武帝不豫，诏子良甲仗入延昌殿侍医药。
现代文：武帝生了病，诏令萧子良带着侍卫到延寿殿侍奉服药。
English: Emperor Wu fell ill and ordered Xiao Ziliang and his attendants to go to the Palace of Yan Shou to serve and take medicine.

古文：子良啓进沙门于殿户前诵经，武帝爲感梦见优昙钵花。
现代文：萧子良奏请让和尚在殿门前诵经，武帝因此在梦中见到了祥瑞花。
English: Xiao Ziliang asked the monk to chant a sutra in front of the palace gate, and Emperor Wu therefore saw Xiang Ruihua in his dream.

古文：子良案佛经宣旨，使御府以铜爲花，插御床四角。
现代文：萧子良按照佛经宣示旨意，让御府中做成铜花，插在御床的四角。
English: Xiao Ziliang, in accordance with the will of the Buddhist sutra, had a copper flower made in the imperial palace and inserted in the four corners of the imperial bed.

古文：日夜在殿内，太孙间日入参。
现代文：他日夜守在殿内，太孙每隔一天进去参见一次。
English: He keeps vigil in the hall day and night, and the great-grandson goes in every other day to see him.

古文：武帝暴渐，内外惶惧，百僚皆已变服，物议疑立子良。俄顷而苏，问太孙所在，因召东宫器甲皆入，遗诏使子良辅政，明帝知尚书事。
现代文：武帝病情突然加重，内外都很恐慌，百官都已经改变了服装，人们议论怀疑要立萧子良，不一会又苏醒过来，问太孙在哪里，于是召东宫的卫士都随着进宫，遗诏让萧子良辅政，明帝知尚书事。
English: Emperor Wu's condition suddenly worsened, causing panic both inside and outside the palace. All the officials had changed their clothes. People began to suspect that Xiao Ziliang was about to be elevated to the throne. After a while, they came to their senses and asked where their great-grandson was. The guards of the East Palace were then summoned to the palace. The emperor's last will and testament called for Xiao Ziliang to assist the government. Emperor Ming knew about the matter.

古文：子良素仁厚，不乐时务，乃推明帝。诏云： 事无大小，悉与鸾参怀 ，子良所志也。
现代文：萧子良平时仁厚，对政治事务不感兴趣，便推荐明帝，诏书说： 事情不论大小，都要跟萧鸾商量。 这正是萧子良的愿望。
English: Xiao Ziliang was usually benevolent and was not interested in political affairs, so he recommended Emperor Ming. The edict said, "No matter how big or small the matter is, you should discuss it with Xiao Ziliang." This was precisely Xiao Ziliang's wish.

古文：太孙少养于子良妃袁氏，甚着慈爱，既惧前不得立，自此深忌子良。
现代文：太孙自从少年时候起，就养在萧子良的妃子袁氏那里，很受到慈爱，他在前些时候，曾经很害怕不能被立为继承人，从此深深地忌恨萧子良。
English: Since he was a young boy, the great-grandson had been raised by Xiao Ziliang's concubine Yuan Shi, and was very loved by her. In the past, he had been very afraid that he would not be able to be appointed as the heir, and from then on, he deeply hated Xiao Ziliang.

古文：大行出太极殿，子良居中书省，帝使虎贲中郎将潘敞二百人仗，屯太极西阶之下。
现代文：武帝死后迁出了太极殿，萧子良住在中书省，皇帝让虎贲中郎将潘敞的二百武士，屯驻在太极殿西阶下面。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, he moved out of the Taiji Hall. Xiao Ziliang lived in Zhongshu Province. The emperor asked Vice-Premier Tigress to station two hundred of Pan Zhan's samurai under the west steps of the Taiji Hall.

古文：成服后，诸王皆出，子良乞停至山陵，不许。
现代文：穿上丧服以后，诸王都出去了，萧子良请求在棺材前停留，没有允许。
English: After putting on mourning clothes, all the kings went out. Xiao Ziliang asked to stay in front of the coffin, but was not allowed.

古文：进位太傅，增班剑爲三十人，本官如故，解侍中。
现代文：萧子良被晋升职位为太傅，增加仪仗为三十人，本官依旧，解除侍中职务。
English: Xiao Ziliang was promoted to the position of Taifu, increasing the honor guard to thirty people, but his position remained the same, and he was relieved of his duties as an attendant.

古文：隆昌元年，加殊礼，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，进督南徐州。
现代文：隆昌元年，加给他特殊的礼制，可以带剑穿履上殿，入朝不用趋步，赞拜不用报名，进而都督南徐州。
English: In the first year of Longchang, a special etiquette was added to him. He could enter the palace with a sword, enter the court without marching, and worship without signing up. He then became the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：其年疾笃，谓左右曰： 门外应有异。 
现代文：这年他病情很重，对身边的人说： 门外应该有异常情况。 
English: He was very ill this year, and said to people around him: There should be abnormal conditions outside the door.

古文：遣人视，见淮中鱼无算，皆浮出水上向城门。
现代文：派人去看，见淮河中的游鱼无数，都浮出水面向着城门。
English: They sent someone to take a look, and saw countless fish swimming in the Huai River, all of which surfaced and swam towards the city gate.

古文：寻薨，年三十五。
现代文：不久去世，年龄三十五岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged thirty-five.

古文：帝常虑子良异志，及薨，甚悦。
现代文：皇帝经常担心萧子良有异志，等他死后，非常高兴。
English: The emperor was often worried that Xiao Ziliang had ambitions, and he was very happy when he died.

古文：诏给东园温明秘器，敛以衮冕之服，东府施丧位，大鸿胪持节监护，太官朝夕送祭。
现代文：诏令供给东园的秘密丧葬器具，穿用最高级的衮冕服装，在东府建立丧位，大鸿胪持节监护，太官早晨晚上呈送祭品。
English: The Emperor issued an order to provide secret funerary equipment for Dongyuan, to wear the highest-grade crowned clothing, to establish a funeral seat in Dongfu, to have Dahong as the guardian of the festival, and to present offerings to the eunuchs in the morning and evening.

古文：又诏追崇假黄钺、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大宰、领大将军、扬州牧，绿綟绶，备九服锡命之礼，使持节、中书监、王如故。
现代文：又诏令追赠他为假黄钺、侍中、都督中外诸军事、太宰，兼大将军、扬州牧，绿绶带，具备九服锡命之礼，使持节、中书监、王的职位依旧。
English: It was also decreed that he should be posthumously awarded the title of "False Huang Di," "Junior Chamberlain," "Governor of the Middle and Outer Military Provinces," "Dazai," "Major General," " Yangzhou Patriarch," "Green Ribbon," "Has nine years of service and the gift of immortality," and the positions of "Holding Festival," "Chinese Book Supervisor" and "King" remained unchanged.

古文：给九旒鸾辂、黄屋左纛、轀輬车、前后部羽葆、鼓吹，挽歌二部，虎贲班剑百人，葬礼依晋安平王孚故事。
现代文：供给他九旒鸾辂、黄屋左纛、鍂车京车、前后部羽葆、乐队，挽歌二部，勇士仪仗一百人，葬礼依照晋朝安平王的先例。
English: He was provided with nine urns, the left urn of Huangya, the carriage of the imperial carriage, the front and rear parts of the feather urns, the band, two elegies, a hundred warriors, and the funeral was in accordance with the precedent of King Anping of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：初，豫章王嶷葬金牛山，文惠太子葬夹石。
现代文：起初，豫章王萧嶷葬在金牛山，文惠太子葬在夹石。
English: At first, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqi was buried in Jinniushan Mountain, and Prince Wen Hui was buried in Jianshi.

古文：子良临送，望祖硎山悲感叹曰： 北瞻吾叔，前望吾兄，死而有知，请葬兹地。 
现代文：萧子良送到现场，望着祖硎山悲伤地感叹说： 北面瞻看我的叔叔，前面望着我的兄长，死后如果还有知觉的话，请把我埋葬在这里。 
English: Xiao Ziliang was sent to the scene, looked at the ancestral mountain and sighed sadly and said: Look at my uncle to the north, look at my brother in front, if I am still conscious after death, please bury me here.

古文：及薨，遂葬焉。
现代文：等他死后，便在这里埋葬了他。
English: When he died, they buried him here.

古文：所着内外文笔数十卷，虽无文采，多是劝戒。
现代文：他所著的内外诗文数十卷，虽然没有文采，却有很多劝戒。
English: He wrote dozens of volumes of poetry both at home and abroad, and although there was no poetry, there was a lot of exhortation.

古文：子良既亡，故人皆来奔赴，陆惠晓于邸门逢袁彖，问之曰： 近者云云，定复何谓？
现代文：萧子良死了以后，旧时的朋友都来吊丧，陆惠晓在府门遇到了袁彖，问他说： 近来事件纷纭，究竟是怎么回事？
English: After Xiao Ziliang died, his old friends came to pay their respects. Lu Huixiao met Yuan Qi at the front gate of the house and asked him, "Recently, there have been a lot of incidents. What's going on?"

古文：王融见杀，而魏准破胆。
现代文：王融被杀，魏准破胆。
English: Wang Rong was killed, and Wei Jun was heartbroken.

古文：道路籍籍，又云竟陵不永天年，有之乎？ 
现代文：路上人们议论纷纷，又说竟陵王未能安享天年，有这事吗？ 
English: On the road, people were talking about it, saying that King Ling had not been able to enjoy his golden years. Was this true?

古文：答曰： 齐氏微弱，已数年矣，爪牙柱石之臣都尽，命之所馀，政风流名士耳。
现代文：回答说： 齐朝微弱，已经几年了，臂膀和柱石大臣都完了，命运所余下的，只是风流名士罢了。
English: He replied, "The Qi Dynasty is weak and has been for several years. The arm and pillar ministers are all gone, and all that is left is the celebrities.

古文：隆昌元年，爲卫将军、开府仪同三司，置兵佐。鄱阳王锵见害，以子卿代爲司徒。
现代文：如果不立好君主，就无法镇守和安定四海。王融虽然是为自身打算，实际上是安定国家，遗憾的是他不能果断处理事情，以至到了这种地步。道路上的谈论，自然是虚说，但是苍生正遭受涂炭，正应当侧耳细听。 
English: If you do not establish a good monarch, you will not be able to protect and stabilize the four seas. Although Wang Rong is planning for himself, it is actually a stable country. Unfortunately, he cannot deal with things decisively, and it has come to this point. The talk on the road is naturally false, but the people are suffering, and they should listen carefully.

古文：所居屋梁柱际血出溜于地，旬日而见杀。
现代文：建武年间，旧时的官员范云上表建议为萧子良立碑，事情没有成功。
English: During the Jianwu era, the old-time official Fan Yun suggested erecting a monument to Xiao Ziliang on the table, but the matter was not successful.

古文：鱼复侯子响字云音，武帝第四子也。
现代文：鱼复侯萧子响字云音，是武帝的第四个儿子。
English: Yu Fu Hou Xiao Zi is the fourth son of Emperor Wu.

古文：豫章王嶷无子，养子响。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷没有儿子，抚养了萧子响。
English: Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Yao did not have a son, but he raised Xiao Zi Rong.

古文：后嶷有子，表留爲嫡。
现代文：后来萧嶷又有了儿子，上表留他为嫡子。
English: Later, Xiao Yao had another son, and the upper table kept him as a legitimate son.

古文：武帝即位，爲南彭城、临淮二郡太守。
现代文：武帝即位，他担任南彭城、临淮二郡太守。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he served as the governor of Nan Pengcheng and Linhuai County.

古文：子响勇力绝人，开弓四斛力，数在园池中帖骑驰走竹树下，身无亏伤。
现代文：萧子响勇气力量过人，开弓有四斛的力量，多次于园池当中贴着马背在竹树下面奔驰，而身体毫无损伤。
English: Xiao Zixing had great courage and strength. He could open his bow with the strength of four fists. He repeatedly galloped under a bamboo tree with his horse's back in the middle of a garden pond, but his body was not injured.

古文：既出继，车服异诸王，每入朝辄忿，拳打车壁，武帝知之，令车服与皇子同。
现代文：过继给萧嶷以后，车服与诸王不同，每当入朝则十分愤怒，拳打车壁，武帝知道后，让他的车服与皇子相同。
English: After the succession to Xiao Jun, the chariot dress was different from the kings. Whenever he entered the court, he was very angry and punched the chariot wall. After Emperor Wu knew, he made his chariot dress the same as that of the prince.

古文：永明六年，有司奏子响宜还本，乃封巴东郡王。
现代文：永明六年，有关部门上奏萧子响应该回归本位，于是封为巴东郡王。
English: In the sixth year of Yongming, the relevant departments appealed to Xiao Zixing that he should return to his original position, so he was named the king of Badong County.

古文：七年，爲都督、荆州刺史。
现代文：七年，担任都督、荆州刺史。
English: For seven years, he served as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：直合将军董蛮粗有气力，子响要与同行。
现代文：直阁将军董蛮粗壮有力，萧子响邀请他一路同行。
English: The straight-backed general, Dong, was very strong and powerful, and Xiao Zixing invited him to accompany him all the way.

古文：蛮曰： 殿下癫如雷，敢相随邪？ 
现代文：董蛮说： 殿下癫狂如雷，怎么敢跟随您呢？ 
English: Dong Man said, "Your Highness is frantic, how dare I follow you?

古文：子响笑曰： 君敢出此语，亦复奇癫。 
现代文：萧子响笑着说： 您敢说出这样的话，也又是一个奇癫。 
English: Xiao Zi said with a loud laugh: If you dare to say such a thing, it is also a strange thing.

古文：上闻而不悦，曰： 人名蛮，复何容得蕴藉。 
现代文：皇上听到后很不高兴，说： 人名叫蛮，又怎么能够蕴藉！ 
English: When the Emperor heard this, he was very displeased and said, "How can a man be called a brute?

古文：乃改名爲仲舒。
现代文：于是给他改名为仲舒。
English: So he changed his name to Zhongshu.

古文：谓曰： 今日仲舒，何如昔日仲舒？ 
现代文：对他说： 今天的仲舒，与从前的仲舒相比怎么样？ 
English: Tell him: How does today's Zhongshu compare with the previous Zhongshu?

古文：答曰： 昔日仲舒，出自私庭，今日仲舒，降自天帝，以此言之，胜昔远矣。 
现代文：回答说： 从前的仲舒，出自私人家中，今天的仲舒，降自天帝，由此说来，胜过从前的很远了。 
English: He replied, "In the past, chanshu came from private households, but today's chanshu comes from the emperor, so it is far better than before.

古文：上称善。
现代文：皇上非常称赞。
English: The Emperor approves.

古文：子响少好武，带仗左右六十人，皆有胆干，数在内斋杀牛置酒，与之聚乐。
现代文：萧子响少年时就好武，左右带刀的武士六十人，都有胆力才干，他多次在内斋杀牛设酒，和他们相聚取乐。
English: When Xiao Zixing was a boy, he was good at martial arts. There were sixty knights with swords on either side of him, all of whom had courage and talent. He often slaughtered cattle in the inner courtyard, set out wine, and gathered with them to have fun.

古文：令私作锦袍绛袄，欲饷蛮交易器仗。
现代文：他让人私做了锦袍绛袄，打算赏给蛮人交换器杖。
English: He had me make a brocade cloak, intending to reward the savage with a cane.

古文：长史刘寅等连名密啓，上敕精检，寅等惧，欲秘之。
现代文：长史刘寅等联名秘密上奏，皇上下令仔细检查，刘寅等人很恐惧，想隐瞒起来。
English: Long history Liu Ying and others secretly recorded the joint name, and the emperor ordered a careful examination. Liu Ying and others were very afraid and wanted to hide it.

古文：子响闻台使至，不见敕，乃召寅及司马席恭穆、谘议参军江悆、殷昙粲、中兵参军周彦、典签吴修之、王贤宗、魏景深等俱入，于琴台下并斩之。
现代文：萧子响听说台使来到，却不见诏书，于是便召来刘寅和司马席恭穆、咨议参军江胒、殷昙粲、中兵参军周彦、典签吴修之、王贤宗、魏景深等一齐进来，在琴台下把他们全部斩首。
English: Xiao Zixing heard that the envoys from Taiwan had arrived, but did not see the imperial rescript, so he called Liu Ying and Sima Xi Gong Mu, the consultative envoy Jiang Qi, Yin Qi, the middle-ranking envoy Zhou Yan, the official envoy Wu Xiu Zhi, Wang Xian Zong, Wei Jing Sheng, and so on to come in together, and beheaded them all under the piano.

古文：上闻之怒，遣卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略、中书舍人茹法亮领羽林三千人检捕群小。
现代文：皇上听说非常恼怒，派卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略、中书舍人茹法亮率领羽林三千人搜捕那小子。
English: The emperor was said to be very angry, and he sent three thousand men from Ulin to search for the boy, led by the guard Hu Xizhong, the guerrilla general Yin Liang, and the Chinese scholar Zhu Fa Liang.

古文：敕 子响若束手自归，可全其性命 。
现代文：诏令说 萧子响如果束手投降，可以保全他的性命 。
English: The edict said that if Xiao Zixing surrendered, his life would be spared.

古文：谐之等至江津，筑城燕尾洲。
现代文：胡谐之等人到了江津，在燕尾洲筑城。
English: Hu Linzhi and others went to Jiangjin and built a city on Yanweizhou.

古文：子响白服登城，频遣信与相闻，曰： 天下岂有儿反，身不作贼，直是粗疏。
现代文：萧子响穿着白色衣服登上城头，频频地派遣信使和他们互相通话，说： 天下哪有儿子反叛的，本身并不作贼，只是有些粗疏罢了。
English: Dressed in white, Xiao Zixing ascended to the top of the city and frequently sent messengers to talk with them, saying: "There is no rebellious son in the world who is not a thief himself, but just a bit rough.

古文：今便单舸还阙，何筑城见捉邪？ 
现代文：现在我便单独乘船还朝，何必筑城被捉呢？ 
English: Why should I build a city and be taken captive, when I can sail back by myself?

古文：尹略独答曰： 谁将汝反父人共语。 
现代文：尹略独自回答说： 谁和你这个反叛父亲的人一块说话！ 
English: Yin Li alone replied, "Who will speak with you, a rebel against your father?"

古文：子响闻之唯洒泣。
现代文：萧子响听了只是流泪。
English: Xiao Zi only shed tears when she heard the news.

古文：又送牛数十头，酒二百石，果馔三十舆，略弃之江流。
现代文：又送了牛几十头，酒二百斤，果馔三十车，尹略都给扔进了江水中。
English: He also sent dozens of cattle, 200 catties of wine, and 30 carts of fruit, which Yin Liang threw into the river.

古文：子响胆力之士王冲天不胜忿，乃率党度洲攻垒斩略，而谐之、法亮单艇奔逸。
现代文：萧子响的胆力之士王冲天极其愤怒，便率领党徒渡过沙洲攻破城垒杀死了尹略，而胡谐之、茹法亮单独乘船逃掉了。
English: Wang Chongtian, a man of great courage, was extremely angry and led the party to cross the sandbar, break through the fortress and kill Yin Li, while Hu Junzhi and Ruo Farang escaped alone by boat.

古文：上又遣丹阳尹萧顺之领兵继之，子响即日将白衣左右三十人，乘舴艋中流下都。
现代文：皇上又派丹阳尹萧顺之领兵继续讨伐，萧子响当天就率领着白衣随从三十人，乘着舴艋小舟从中流开往京城。
English: The emperor also sent Danyang Yin Xiao Shun's leading troops to continue the crusade. On the same day, Xiao Zixing led 30 white-clad followers in a small raft from the middle of the stream to the capital.

古文：初，顺之将发，文惠太子素忌子响，密遣不许还，令便爲之所。
现代文：起初，萧顺之即将出发，文惠太子一向忌妒萧子响，秘密地安排他们不许萧子响回京，让他们进行完善处理。
English: At first, Xiao Shunzhi was about to leave. Prince Wen Hui, who had always been jealous of Xiao Zi Xing, secretly arranged for them not to allow Xiao Zi Xing to return to Beijing, so that they could carry out a thorough investigation.

古文：子响及见顺之，欲自申明，顺之不许，于射堂缢之。
现代文：萧子响在见了萧顺之以后，打算自己申明情况，萧顺之不允许，就在射堂将他缢死。
English: After Xiao Zixing saw Xiao Shun, he intended to clarify the situation himself, but Xiao Shun did not allow it, and strangled him to death in the hall.

古文：有司奏绝子响属籍，赐爲蛸氏。
现代文：经有关部门奏请，断绝了萧子响的属籍，赐他为蛸氏。
English: At the request of the relevant departments, Xiao Zi Xiang's lineage was cut off, and he was given the title of Shao.

古文：子响密作啓数纸，藏妃王氏裙腰中，具自申明，云： 轻舫还阙不得，此苦之深，唯愿矜怜，无使竹帛齐有反父之子，父有害子之名。 
现代文：萧子响秘密地写了好几张信函，藏在妃子王氏的裙腰中，详细地进行申辩，说： 轻舟还朝而不得，此中苦痛很深，只请加以哀怜，不要让史书上写下齐朝有反叛父亲的儿子，父亲有害死儿子的名声。 
English: Xiao Zixiang secretly wrote several letters and hid them in the skirts of the Prince Wang clan, arguing in detail, saying: The light boat is still in the morning, but it is not possible. The pain is very deep in this. Please only be pitiful. Don't let the history books write down the reputation of the Qi Dynasty having a son who rebelled against his father, and a son whose father died a harmful death.

古文：及顺之还，上心甚怪恨。
现代文：等萧顺之回来，皇上心里非常责怪和生气。
English: When Xiao Shun returned, the emperor was very angry and angry.

古文：百日于华林爲子响作斋，上自行香，对诸朝士嚬蹙。
现代文：一百天的时候在华林为萧子响作斋，皇上亲自行香，对各个朝士皱着眉头。
English: During the hundred days of fasting for Shou Tzu in Hualin, the emperor himself incense, frowning at the various morning warriors.

古文：及见顺之，呜咽移时，左右莫不掩涕。
现代文：等看见了萧顺之，呜咽了好长时间，左右的人无不流泪。
English: After seeing Xiao Shunzhi, he sobbed for a long time, and everyone around him was in tears.

古文：他日出景阳山，见一沐透掷悲鸣，问后堂丞： 此沐何意？ 
现代文：后来有一天出景阳山，看见有一只猿猴跳跃悲鸣，他问后面的官员： 这个猿猴是什么意思？ 
English: Later, one day, he went out of Jingyang Mountain and saw a monkey jumping and wailing. He asked the officials behind him: What does this monkey mean?

古文：答曰： 沐子前日堕崖致死，其母求之不见，故尔。 
现代文：回答说： 猿猴的孩子前日堕崖而死，它的母亲找它找不见，所以这样。 
English: He replied, "The ape's child fell down the cliff the day before and died, and his mother couldn't find him, so this is what happened.

古文：上因忆子响，歔欷良久，不自胜。
现代文：皇上因而想起了萧子响，感叹了很久，悲不自胜。
English: As a result, the emperor remembered Xiao Zixing and lamented for a long time, inconsolable.

古文：顺之惭惧，感病，遂以忧卒。
现代文：萧顺之惭愧惧怕，生了病，于是忧郁而死。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Xiao Shunzhi fell ill and died of melancholy.

古文：于是豫章王嶷上表曰： 故庶人蛸子响识怀靡树，见沦不逞，肆愤一朝，取陷凶德，身膏草野，未云塞衅。
现代文：这时豫章王萧嶷上表说： 已故的平民蛸子响在事业上没有建树，沦落无为，一时泄愤，陷入凶德，身死草野，未作血祭。
English: At this time, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqi said on the table: The deceased civilian Zizixing did not build a tree in his career, was reduced to inaction, temporarily vented his anger, fell into evil, died in the grassland, and did not make a blood sacrifice.

古文：但归罪司戮，迷而知返，抚事惟往，载伤心目。
现代文：只是伏罪受戮，迷途知返，回顾以往，令人伤心。
English: It's just sad to look back on the past, to suffer for sins committed, and to come back from the dead.

古文：伏愿一下天矜，使得旋窆馀麓，岂伊穷骸被德，实且天下归仁。 
现代文：在下希望陛下大发慈悲，让他归葬祖坟，这样不仅能让他的骸骨得到恩惠，而且也使天下人士归向仁德。 
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will show great mercy and allow him to be buried in the ancestral tomb. This will not only allow his bones to receive grace, but also make the world's people return to benevolence.

古文：上不许，贬爲鱼复侯。
现代文：皇上没有批准，把他贬为鱼腹侯。
English: The emperor did not approve, and he was relegated to the position of fish-belly mayor.

