古文：林鸿，字子羽，福清人。
现代文：林鸿，字子羽，福清人。
English: Lin Hong, Zi Yu, Fu Qingren.

古文：洪武初，以人才荐，授将乐县训导，历礼部精膳司员外郎。
现代文：洪武初，被荐举授将乐县训导，后官至礼部精膳司员外郎。
English: At the beginning of the Hongwu era, he was recommended to be awarded the title of General of Le County, and later he was promoted to the position of the official of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the official of the Ministry of Fine Foods.

古文：性脱落，不善仕，年未四十自免归。
现代文：禀性洒脱，不善做官，年未到四十自己就辞官归家。
English: He was impulsive and reckless, and not good at being an official. He resigned his post and returned home before the age of forty.

古文：闽中善诗者，称十才子，鸿为之冠。十才子者，闽郑定，侯官王褒、唐泰，长乐高棅、王恭、陈亮，永福王偁及鸿弟子周玄、黄玄，时人目为二玄者也。
现代文：闽中善于赋诗者有十人，称十才子，鸿为第一名，其他是闽县的郑定，侯官的王褒、唐泰，长乐的高木秉、王恭、陈亮，永福的王翶及林鸿的弟子周玄、黄玄，时人称为 二玄 。
English: There were ten people who were good at poetry-writing in Yunnan, and they were called the Ten Talents. Hong was the first. The others were Zheng Ding of Yunnan, Wang Bao and Tang Tai of Huan County, Takagi Bing, Wang Gong and Chen Liang of Changle, Wang Yao of Yongfu and Zhou Xuan and Huang Xuan, disciples of Lin Hong, who were called the Two Xuan at that time.

古文：鸿论诗，大指谓汉、魏骨气虽雄，而菁华不足。
现代文：林鸿论诗，认为汉、魏诗骨气虽雄伟，但精华不足。
English: Commenting on poetry, Lin Hong believed that although the backbone of Han and Wei poetry is majestic, it lacks essence.

古文：晋祖玄虚，宋尚条畅，齐、梁以下但务春华，少秋实。
现代文：晋诗崇尚玄虚，宋诗讲究流畅，齐、梁以下但务春花，少秋实。
English: Jin poetry advocates subtlety, Song poetry emphasizes fluency, Qi, Liang and lower Danmu spring flowers, less autumn.

古文：惟唐作者可谓大成。
现代文：惟唐代诗作可谓大成。
English: However, the poetry of the Tang Dynasty can be described as a great achievement.

古文：然贞观尚习故陋，神龙渐变常调，开元、天宝间声律大备，学者当以是为楷式。
现代文：然贞观时之诗还因袭前代弊病，神龙时则渐变常调。开元、天宝年间声律大备，学者当以此为楷模。
English: However, the poems of Zhenguan Shi still suffer from the ills of the previous generation, while those of Shenlong Shi gradually shift to a normal tone. Scholars should take this as a model, as the tone was well prepared during the Kaigen and Tenpo eras.

古文：闽人言诗者率本于鸿。
现代文：闽人论诗者大体根据鸿的观点。
English: On the other hand, the poet's view of the eunuch is generally based on Hong's view.

古文：同时赵迪、林敏、陈仲宏、郑关、林伯璟、张友谦亦以能诗名，皆鸿之弟子。王绂，字孟端，无锡人。
现代文：晋府引礼舍人浦源，字长浦，无锡人。慕鸿之名，越岭拜访。至鸿门，二玄请朗诵自己作品。鸿请他入社。王绂，字孟端，无锡人。
English: Jinfu invited Puyuan, surnamed Changpu, from Wuxi. In the name of Mu Hong, he visited across the ridge. To Hongmen, Er Xuan asked to recite his works. Hong invited him to join the company. Wang Yao, surnamed Mengduan, from Wuxi.

古文：博学，工歌诗，能书，写山木竹石，妙绝一时。
现代文：博学，工于诗歌，喜书法，所画山木竹石妙绝一时。
English: Erudite, skilled in poetry, fond of calligraphy, his paintings of mountains, trees, bamboo and stone are superb.

古文：洪武中，坐累戍朔州。
现代文：洪武中，因犯法而罚戍朔州。
English: In Hongwu Middle School, the punishment for breaking the law was to be sent to Lishuo County.

古文：永乐初，用荐，以善书供事文渊阁。
现代文：永乐初，被推荐，以其善书法而供职文渊阁。
English: At the beginning of Yongle, he was recommended to work for Wen Yuange because of his good calligraphy.

古文：久之，除中书舍人。
现代文：此后，任中书舍人。
English: After that, he was appointed as a member of the Board of Trustees.

古文：绂未仕时，与吴人韩奕为友，隐居九龙山，遂自号九龙山人。
现代文：绂在未做官之前，与吴人韩奕为友，隐居于九龙山，自号 九龙山人 。
English: Before he became an official, Zou befriended Han Yi, a Wu person, and lived in seclusion in Mount Kowloon, calling himself Mount Kowloon Man.

古文：于书法，动以古人自期。
现代文：对于书法，动辄期望自己达到古书法家的高度。
English: For calligraphy, I often expect myself to reach the height of ancient calligraphers.

古文：画不苟作，游览之顷，酒酣握笔，长廊素壁淋漓沾洒。
现代文：平时不随便做画，只是在游览时，乘酒酣之际，于长廊白壁上，尽情挥毫泼墨。
English: Usually, I don't draw casually, but when I'm on a tour, when I'm drinking wine, I like to splash ink on the white walls of the promenade.

古文：在京师，月下闻吹箫声，乘兴写《石竹图》，明旦访其人赠之，则估客也。
现代文：有人要用金币购买他的一小张字画，他便立即拂袖而走，闭门不接待，虽是富豪贵人也不顾及。在京师，月下闻吹箫声，他便乘兴画出《石竹图》，第二天访到吹箫之人，把这幅画送给他。
English: Someone wanted to buy a small piece of his calligraphy with gold coins, and he immediately whipped up his sleeves and left, closing the door and not receiving them, even though he was a rich nobleman. In Beijing, when he heard the sound of blowing under the moon, he took the opportunity to draw "Stone Bamboo," and the next day he visited the person who was blowing and gave him this painting.

古文：客以红氍毹馈，请再写一枝为配。
现代文：这是个商人，送他一床羊毛织红地毯，请他再画一幅。
English: It was a merchant, who gave him a bed of wool to weave a red carpet, and asked him to paint another one.

古文：绂索前画裂之，还其馈。
现代文：绂便把先送的那幅要了回来，当面撕毁，将赠物送还给这个商人。
English: The baboon then asked for the first painting back, tore it up in front of him, and returned the gift to the merchant.

古文：一日退朝，黔国公沐晟从后呼其字，绂不应。
现代文：有天退朝，黔国公沐晟在后面叫他的名字，绂不答理。
English: One day, when he was leaving for the imperial court, the lord of the country called his name from behind, but he did not answer.

古文：同列语之曰： 此黔国公也。 绂曰： 我非不闻之，是必与我索画耳。 
现代文：同僚告诉他，黔国公在叫你，绂说： 不是没听到，想必是来向我要画。 
English: A colleague told him that the Duke of Yan was calling for you, and Yan said, "It's not that I didn't hear him, he must have come to ask me to paint."

古文：晟走及之，果以画请，绂颔之而已。
现代文：晟赶上来，果然是请他画画。绂只是点头而已。
English: When I caught up with him, I asked him to draw. He just nodded.

古文：尝知滕县事，谪戍云南。
现代文：过了几年，晟写信来问，绂才做画。
English: A few years later, Zou wrote to ask if Zou could paint.

古文：其为诗颇豪放自喜，云南诗人称平、居、陈、郭，显其一也。
现代文：不久，他说： 我的画非直接送给黔公不可。黔公的客人平仲微，是我的朋友，看在友人情面我才给他做画，但也要等到黔公来求时才可。 
English: After a while, he said, "I can't give my paintings directly to Gong Gong. Gong Gong's guest, Ping Zhongwei, is my friend, so as a friend, I'll paint for him, but I'll wait until Gong Gong comes to ask."

古文：沈度，字民则。
现代文：其节操之高，超越世俗。
English: It is highly conservative and transcends the mundane.

古文：弟粲，字民望。松江华亭人。
现代文：沈度，字民则，弟灿，字民望，松江华亭人。
English: Shen Du, Zi Min Zi, Xiao Can, Zi Min Wang, Songjiang Huating.

古文：兄弟皆善书，度以婉丽胜，粲以遒逸胜。度博涉经史，为文章绝去浮靡。
现代文：兄弟皆善书法，而各有所长。度以柔美胜，灿以刚劲飘逸胜，度博涉经史，其文章没有浮靡之词。
English: The brothers are all good at calligraphy, but each has their own strengths. They excel in soft beauty, excel in strength, excel in history, and their articles are not full of buzzwords.

古文：洪武中，举文学，弗就。
现代文：洪武年间，以文学中举。
English: During the Hongwu era, literature was the medium of choice.

古文：坐累谪云南，岷王具礼币聘之，数进谏，未几辞去。
现代文：曾因事被贬于云南。岷王以厚礼聘请他，不久辞去。
English: He was once demoted in Yunnan due to an incident. King Min hired him with great courtesy, but he soon resigned.

古文：都督瞿能与偕入京师。
现代文：都督瞿能同他入京师。
English: The governor, Shinno, went to the capital with him.

古文：成祖初即位，诏简能书者入翰林，给廪禄，度与吴县滕用亨、长乐陈登同与选。
现代文：成祖即位，诏聘善书法者入翰林，度与吴县的滕用亨、长乐的陈登一同入选。
English: Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, and Zhao Hei, a good calligrapher, entered the Hanlin, and was selected together with Teng Yingheng from Wuxian and Chen Deng from Changle.

古文：是时解缙、胡广、梁潜、王琏皆工书，度最为帝所赏，名出朝士右。
现代文：当时，解缙、胡广、梁潜、王琏皆工于书法，而度之书法最为成祖赏识。
English: At that time, Xie Qian, Hu Guang, Liang Qian, and Wang Qian were all engaged in calligraphy, and Du's calligraphy was the most appreciated.

古文：日侍便殿，凡金版玉册，用之朝廷，藏秘府，颁属国，必命之书。
现代文：凡金版玉册，用之朝廷，或藏于秘府，或颁给属国者，都命度题字。
English: All gold-plated jade scrolls, whether used by the imperial court, or kept in secret, or given to subjects of the state, are required to be inscribed.

古文：遂由翰林典籍擢检讨，历修撰，迁侍讲学士。
现代文：度由翰林典籍升为检讨，又升为修撰，调任侍讲学士。
English: His degree was upgraded from reading classics to reviewing, and then to writing, and he was transferred to the post of assistant lecturer.

古文：粲自翰林待诏迁中书舍人，擢侍读，进阶大理少卿。
现代文：而灿自翰林待诏，调任中书舍人，升侍读，官阶进升为大理寺少卿。
English: However, Can Zi Hanlin waited for the imperial edict, was transferred to the post of middle school teacher, was promoted to attendant, and was promoted to the rank of junior secretary of Dali Temple.

古文：兄弟并赐织金衣，镂姓名于象简，泥之以金。
现代文：兄弟并赐织金衣，刻其姓名于象牙简片上，再涂上金粉。
English: The brothers were also given gold-embroidered robes, and their names were engraved on a piece of ivory, which was then coated with gold dust.

古文：赠父母如其官，驰传归，告于墓。
现代文：赠二人父母官职，令他们回家于墓前祭告父母。
English: He gave two parents official positions and made them go home to their graves to pay their respects to their parents.

古文：昆山夏昺者，字孟晹，与其弟昶以善书画闻，同官中书舍人，时号大小中书，而度、粲号大小学士。
现代文：昆山夏籨，字孟，与其弟夏昶均以善书画闻名于世，同为中书舍人，时人称为 大小中书 ，而称度与灿为 大小学士 。
English: Kunshan Xia Yao, also known as Meng, and his brother Xia Yao were both famous for their good calligraphy and painting. They were both devoted to Chinese calligraphy. At that time, they were known as the Great and Small Chinese Calligraphers, and the Great and Small Chinese Calligraphers.

古文：登于六书本原，博考详究，用力甚勤。
现代文：沈度，禀性敦厚，对人谦和，不随便取与。
English: Humble, tough and strong-willed, he is humble towards others and does not take things for granted.

古文：自周、秦以来，残碑断碣，必穷搜摩搨审度而辨定之。
现代文：有训导通过其朋友向度求书，并要求署名，度拒绝了。其友再三要求，终不肯署名。
English: A disciple asked Du for a book through his friend and asked him to sign it, but Du refused. His friend asked him repeatedly, but he finally refused to sign.

古文：得其传者，太常卿南城程南云也。
现代文：灿对其兄很恭敬，凡朝赐予，立即归其兄。
English: Can is very respectful of his brother. Whatever the emperor gives, immediately goes to his brother.

古文：聂大年，字寿卿，临川人。
现代文：聂大年，字寿卿，临川人。
English: He was born in the year of the Rooster, his name was Shouqing and he was from Linchuan.

古文：父同文，洪武中，官翰林侍书、中书舍人。
现代文：父同文，洪武年间历任翰林侍书、中书舍人。
English: His father was also a writer, and during the Hongwu era, he served as the secretary of Hanlin and the secretary of Zhongshu.

古文：燕王入京师，迎谒，道曷死，死后五月而大年生，母胡抚之。
现代文：燕王入京师，迎见时在路上中暑而死。死后五月生大年，由母胡氏抚养。
English: Yan Wang entered Beijing, but died of heatstroke on the way to meet him. After his death, he was raised by his mother, Hu Shi Rong.

古文：比长，博学，善诗古文。
现代文：大年成人后，博学多才，尤精于诗及古文。
English: After he became an adult, he became very knowledgeable and talented, especially in poetry and ancient literature.

古文：叶盛称其诗，谓三十年来绝唱也。
现代文：叶盛称赞其诗是三十年来的绝唱之作。
English: Ye Sheng praised his poem as a masterpiece of thirty years.

古文：书得欧阳率更法。
现代文：其书法得之于欧阳率更。
English: His calligraphy was inspired by Ouyang Zhou.

古文：宣德末，荐授仁和训导。
现代文：宣德末年，被荐举而授为仁和训导。
English: At the end of the Xuande era, he was recommended for promotion and given the title of "benevolence and discipline."

古文：母卒，归葬，哀感行路。
现代文：母亲去世，辞职归葬，其哀痛之深，感动了过往行人。
English: When my mother passed away, she resigned and was buried. The depth of her grief moved passers-by.

古文：里人列其母子贤行上之有司，诏旌其门。
现代文：同乡之人将他们母子贤德言行报告官府，朝廷诏令旌表。
English: Fellow villagers reported their mother's and son's virtuous words and deeds to the government, and the imperial court issued an imperial edict.

古文：服阕，分教常州，迁仁和教谕。
现代文：大年服丧期满，任常州教谕，后调仁和教谕。
English: At the end of the year-long mourning period, he was appointed as Changzhou preceptor, and later transferred to Jinhe preceptor.

古文：景泰六年荐入翰林，未几得疾卒。
现代文：景泰六年，被举荐入翰林院，不久病逝。
English: Jing Tai was only six years old when he was recommended to enter the Hanlin Academy. He died soon after.

古文：始，尚书王直以诗寄钱塘戴文进索画，自序昔与文进交，尝戏作诗一联，至是十年始成之。
现代文：起初，尚书王直以其诗寄与钱塘戴文进，求他为诗配画，信中说 ：昔日与文进交游，曾戏做诗一联，至今已十年才成。
English: At first, Shangshu Wang Zhi sent his poem to Qiantang Dai Wenzhin, asking him to match the poem with a painting. The letter said, "I used to travel with Wenzhin in the past, and we used to write a poem together, but it has only been ten years since then.

古文：大年题其后曰： 公爱文进之画，十年不忘。使以是心待天下贤者，天下宁复有遣贤哉。 
现代文：大年在信后写道： 公爱文进之画，十年不忘，如果以这样的心来对待天下贤者，则天下就没有被遗忘的贤人了。 
English: On the back of the letter, Danyun wrote, "If you treat the sages of the world with such a heart, there will be no forgotten sages in the world."

古文：蒋忠，字主忠，仪真人，徙居句容。
现代文：王直听了这话，既不生气，也不举荐大年。
English: Wang Zhi listened to this and neither got angry nor recommended Datian.

古文：王贞庆，字善甫，驸马都尉宁子也。
现代文：大年病重时，做诗送给王直，诗中有 镜中白发熟怜我，湖上青山欲待谁 之句。直说 ：这是要我为他写墓志铭。 
English: When he was gravely ill, he composed a poem and sent it to Wang Zhi. In the poem, there is a line: "The white hair in the mirror pities me, the young man on the lake wants to treat me." Zhi said: "This is for me to write his epitaph."

古文：折节好士，有诗名，时称金粟公子。
现代文：于是在大年死后，为大年写了《墓志铭》。
English: So, after Otani's death, he wrote the Epitaph for Otani.

古文：张弼，字汝弼，松江华亭人。
现代文：张弼，字汝弼，松江府华亭人。
English: Zhang Qian, also known as Ru Qian, is from Huating, Matsue.

古文：成化二年进士。授兵部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：成化二年进士，受兵部主事，又晋升为员外郎。
English: After two years of training, he was promoted to the rank of junior officer, was assigned to be in charge of the military department, and was promoted to the rank of foreign affairs officer.

古文：迁南安知府，地当两广冲，奸人聚山谷为恶，悉捕灭之。
现代文：后调任南安知府。南安地处两广要冲，奸人聚集山谷，出没无常，为恶多端，弼将他们全数捕灭。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to Nan'an Prefecture. Nan'an is located at the crossroads of two provinces. The traitors gathered in the valley, haunted the place, and were full of evil. He hunted them all down.

古文：毁淫祠百数十区，建为社学。
现代文：又废除淫祠一百数十处，以此建为社学。
English: In addition, more than a hundred adulterous shrines were abolished, and this was used as a social science.

古文：谢病归，士民为立祠。
现代文：因病辞官还乡，当地士民立祠纪念他。
English: Due to illness, the dictionary officer returned to his hometown, and the local people set up a small shrine to commemorate him.

古文：弼自幼颖拔，善诗文，工草书，怪伟跌宕，震撼一世。
现代文：张弼自幼聪敏，出类拔萃，善写诗文，工于草书。其草书奇特，放纵不羁。
English: Zhang Yao was bright from a young age, outstanding, good at writing poetry, and skilled in cursive. His cursive is peculiar and unbridled.

古文：自号东海。张东海之名，流播外裔。
现代文：自号东海，张东海之名流传到外国。
English: Since the name Donghai, the fame of Zhang Donghai has spread to foreign countries.

古文：为诗，信手纵笔，多不属稿，即有所属，以书故，辄为人持去。
现代文：他做诗信手纵笔，多不起草，即使有草稿，因别人爱其字，也立即被拿去。
English: He writes poetry by hand, rather than scribbling, and even if there is a draft, it is immediately taken away because others love his words.

古文：迁浙江参政，罢归。程敏政，字克勤，休宁人，南京兵部尚书信子也。
现代文：弼与李东阳、谢铎友善，他曾评价自己 ：我平生是书法不如诗词，诗词不如文章。 东阳开玩笑说： 英雄欺人时常如此，不可信。 谢铎称赞他好学不倦，诗文成一家之言。程敏政，字克勤，休宁人，南京兵部尚书程信之子。
English: He was friendly with Li Dongyang and Xie Qi, and once said of himself: "In my life, calligraphy is not as good as poetry, and poetry is not as good as writing." Dongyang joked: "Heroes often deceive people, so they can't be trusted." Xie Qi praised him for his tireless learning, and poetry became the language of the family.

古文：十岁侍父官四川，巡抚罗绮以神童荐。英宗召试，悦之，诏读书翰林院，给廪馔。
现代文：十岁时随父亲在四川做官，有奇才，巡抚罗绮视他为神童，举荐于朝廷，英宗召入朝面试，果然才华出众，非常高兴，诏令他在翰林院读书，衣食由官府供给。
English: At the age of ten, he followed his father to work as an official in Sichuan. He was a prodigy, and the governor Luo Zang regarded him as a child prodigy and recommended him to the imperial court. Ying Zong was summoned to the imperial court for an interview. His talent was outstanding, and he was very happy. He was ordered to study at the Hanlin Academy, and his food and clothing were provided by the government.

古文：学士李贤、彭时咸爱重之，贤以女妻焉。
现代文：学士李贤、彭时都喜欢他，颇器重他，贤把自己女儿许配给他。
English: Bachelors Li Xian and Peng Shih both liked him and held him in high esteem. Xian betrothed his daughter to him.

古文：成化二年进士及第，授编修，历左谕德，直讲东宫。
现代文：敏政于成化二年进士及第，授编修，任左谕德，为太子讲学。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, Min Zheng became a scholar and the first to be awarded the title of editor-in-chief, and he was appointed to lecture for the prince.

古文：翰林中，学问该博称敏政，文章古雅称李东阳，性行真纯称陈音，各为一时冠。
现代文：翰林中，学问最广博的要数敏政，文章古雅数李东阳，德行真纯数陈音，各为一时之冠。
English: In the Hanlin, the most extensive learning is the number of Min Zheng, the article is the ancient and elegant number of Li Dongyang, and the virtue is the true and pure number of Chen Yin, each of which is the crown of the moment.

古文：孝宗嗣位，以宫僚恩擢少詹事兼侍讲学士，直经筵。
现代文：孝宗即位，提升敏政为少詹事兼侍讲学士，负责经筵讲座。
English: With the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Min Zheng was promoted to Shozhanzhi and Assistant Lecturer, responsible for lectures on economics.

古文：敏政名臣子，才高负文学，常俯视侪偶，颇为人所疾。
现代文：敏政为名臣之子，才高，以文学自负，常看不起同辈人，因而颇为人所忌怨。
English: As the son of a famous minister, Minzheng was highly talented, boastful in literature, and often looked down on his contemporaries. As a result, he was quite hated by people.

古文：弘治元年冬，御史王嵩等以雨灾劾敏政，因勒致仕。
现代文：弘治元年冬，御史王嵩等借雨水为灾，弹劾敏政，强迫他退职。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Hongzhi era, Wang Song and others used the rain as a disaster to impeach Minzheng and force him to retire.

古文：五年起官，寻改太常卿兼侍读学士，掌院事。
现代文：五年后才又起用，改任太常卿兼侍读学士，掌翰林院事。
English: Five years later, he was reappointed to the post of Tai Changqing (Grand Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China) as well as an attendant bachelor, and served as Hanlin Academician.

古文：进礼部右侍郎，专典内阁诰敕。
现代文：晋升为礼部右侍郎，专管内阁诰敕。
English: Promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, he was in charge of the Cabinet Ceremonies.

古文：十二年与李东阳主会试，举人徐经、唐寅预作文，与试题合。
现代文：弘治十二年，与李东阳主持会试，举人徐经、唐寅预做文，与考试题相合。
English: In the 12th year of Hongzhi, he presided over the examination with Li Dongyang, and invited Xu Jing and Tang Yin to prepare essays, which coincided with the examination questions.

古文：给事中华昶劾敏政鬻题，时榜未发，诏敏政毋阅卷，其所录者令东阳会同考官覆校。
现代文：给事中华昶弹劾敏政，说他出卖了试题。当时还未发榜，诏敏政不阅卷，将录取的人令东阳会同考官复校。
English: At that time, there was still no list of candidates, so Minzheng did not read the papers, and the person who was admitted was sent back to Dongyang with the examiner.

古文：二人卷皆不在所取中，东阳以闻，言者犹不已。
现代文：徐、唐二人试卷皆不在所取复校的试卷之中。东阳向朝廷报告如此情况。
English: The examination papers of both Xu and Tang were not among those taken for the reopening of the school. Dongyang reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：敏政、昶、经、寅俱下狱，坐经尝贽见敏政，寅尝从敏政乞文，黜为吏，敏政勒致仕，而昶以言事不实调南太仆主簿。
现代文：批评者还不肯罢休，将敏政、昶、经、寅俱下狱。因为徐经曾送礼求见敏政，唐寅曾向敏政乞求文章，将此二人贬为吏，强制敏政辞职，华昶以弹劾不符事实罪调为南京太仆寺主簿。
English: The critics still refused to give up, and sent Minzheng, Zou, Jing, and Yin to prison. Because Xu Jing had sent gifts to ask to see Minzheng, Tang Yin had begged Minzheng for an article, demoted the two to officials, forced Minzheng to resign, and transferred Hua Wei to the main book of Nanjing Taigu Temple for the crime of impeachment not corresponding to the facts.

古文：敏政出狱愤恚，发痈卒。
现代文：敏政出狱愤慨不已，不久病逝。
English: Minzheng was outraged when he was released from prison and died soon after.

古文：后赠礼部尚书。或言敏政之狱，傅瀚欲夺其位，令昶奏之。
现代文：后赠礼部尚书，有人说敏政下狱，是傅瀚想夺他的职位，唆使华昶劾奏。
English: After the gift of the gift department, some people said that Min Zheng was jailed because Fu Han wanted to seize his position and instigated Huayuan to impeach him.

古文：事秘，莫能明也。罗玘，字景鸣，南城人。
现代文：其中的秘密，至今不明。罗玘，字景鸣，南城人。
English: The secret is still unknown. Luo Gan, Zha Jingming, Nancheng people.

古文：博学，好古文，务为奇奥。
现代文：博学，好古文，文章追求奇特深奥。
English: Erudite, good ancient literature, the article pursues the strange and profound.

古文：年四十困诸生，输粟入国学。
现代文：四十岁时，向朝廷纳粟而得入国子监学习。
English: At the age of forty, he was allowed to study at the Imperial Children's Prison after accepting a stipend from the imperial court.

古文：丘浚为祭酒，议南人不得留北监。玘固请不已，浚骂之曰： 若识几字，倔强乃尔！ 
现代文：当时，丘浚为国子监祭酒，规定南人不得留在北京国子监，玘极力请求，浚骂他说： 你识几个字，如此之倔强！ 
English: At that time, Qiaozhen was the National Children's Supervisor's ceremonial wine, and it was stipulated that South Koreans were not allowed to stay in Beijing's National Children's Supervisor. Zou strongly requested and scolded him, saying: You know a few words, so stubborn!

古文：玘仰对曰： 惟中秘书未读耳。 
现代文：罗玘回答说： 只有宫中秘藏的书未读。 
English: Luo Gan replied, "Only the secret books in the palace are unread."

古文：浚姑留之，他日试以文，乃大惊异。
现代文：浚暂且让他留下来。有一天考他文章，浚看后大为惊异。
English: Dredge let him stay for the time being. One day, I examined his article, and after reading it, I was very surprised.

古文：成化末，领京闱乡试第一。
现代文：成化末年，在京应考第一。
English: In the last years of Chenghua, it ranked first in the Beijing entrance examination.

古文：明年举进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：第二年中进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to junior high school teacher, elected junior high school teacher, and was awarded the title of editor.

古文：益肆力古文，每有作，或据高树，或闭坐一室，瞑目隐度，形容灰槁。
现代文：他更加着力于古文，每当写作时，或上到高树，或闭坐一室，冥思苦想，形容憔悴。
English: He is more focused on ancient texts. Whenever he writes, he either climbs a tall tree or sits alone in a room, meditating and describing.

古文：自此文益奇，玘亦厚自负。
现代文：从此，文章更奇，玘也更加自负。
English: Since then, the articles have become more bizarre, and the baboons have become more conceited.

古文：尤尚节义。
现代文：罗玘注重节义。
English: Luo Gan pays attention to the meaning of the festival.

古文：台谏救刘逊尽下狱，玘言当优容以全国体。
现代文：司谏官员因救刘逊而尽下狱，玘建议宽大。
English: An official of the Ministry of Public Security was sentenced to life in prison for saving Liu Xun. The Ministry of Public Security recommended clemency.

古文：中官李广死，遗一籍，具识大臣贿交者。帝怒，命言官指名劾奏。
现代文：宦官李广死，留下一册籍，上面记有贿赂他的大臣姓名，皇帝大怒，命谏官指名弹劾。
English: The eunuch Li Guang died, leaving behind a book with the names of the ministers who had bribed him. The emperor was furious and ordered the eunuch to be impeached.

古文：玘上言曰： 大臣表正百僚，今若此，固宜置重典。然天下及四裔皆仰望之，一旦指名暴其恶，启远人慢朝廷心。
现代文：罗玘上书说 ：大臣为百官之表率，如今贿赂宦官，固应重治其罪，但天下及四周邻国都看着朝廷，一旦指名暴露其罪恶，边境及海外之人，会产生轻视朝廷之心。
English: Luo Yu's petition said: The minister is an example of a hundred officials, and now he has bribed a eunuch, and he should be punished severely for his crime. However, the whole world and the surrounding neighbors are watching the imperial court. Once he nominates someone who exposes his crimes, both at the border and abroad, the heart of the imperial court will be despised.

古文：李梦阳下狱，玘言： 寿宁侯托肺腑，当有以保全之。梦阳不保，为侯累。 帝深纳焉。秩满，进侍读。
现代文：谏官们并未看册籍上记的是些什么，只凭猜想来论罪，如何分清是玉还是石？一经揭发论罪，玷污终身。臣请朝廷密谕这些大臣称病退职，或借他事撤职，这样不损朝廷威声，而吏治清廉。 皇帝采纳。玘任职期满，晋升为侍读。
English: The eunuchs did not look at what was written in the register, but only guessed at the crime, how to distinguish whether it was jade or stone? Once the crime was revealed, it would be tarnished for life. The vassal asked the court to secretly instruct these ministers to resign due to illness, or to be dismissed for other reasons, so as not to damage the prestige of the court, and the officials would be clean. The emperor accepted. The eunuch's term of office expired, and he was promoted to attendant.

古文：正德初，迁南京太常少卿。
现代文：正德初年，调任南京太常寺卿。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was transferred to Nanjing Taiji Temple.

古文：刘瑾乱政，李东阳依违其间。
现代文：刘瑾乱政，李东阳对此态度是模棱两可。
English: Liu Bei's government was chaotic, and Li Dongyang's attitude toward this was ambiguous.

古文：玘，东阳所举士也，贻书责以大义，且请削门生之籍。
现代文：玘在科考进士时，东阳为主考官。他写信给东阳，批评他不忠不义，请削去他为其门生的名分。
English: He wrote to Dongyang, criticizing him for being disloyal and unfair, and asked him to take away his disciple title.

古文：寻进本寺卿，擢南京吏部右侍郎。
现代文：不久，玘晋升为南京吏部右侍郎。
English: Soon, Zou was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Cadre.

古文：遇事严谨，僚属畏惮。
现代文：他办事严谨，僚属都怕他。
English: He is strict in his work, and his colleagues and relatives are afraid of him.

古文：畿辅盗纵横，而皇储未建，玘疏论激切，且侵执政者。
现代文：京师地区盗贼纵横，而且尚未册立皇太子。玘上书批评，言词激切，指责了执政大臣。
English: Thieves are rampant in the Beijing region, and a crown prince has not yet been appointed. The letter criticizes, fiercely, and accuses the ruling minister.

古文：七年冬，考绩赴都，遂引疾致仕归。
现代文：正德七年冬，为考核其政绩而来到北京，称病辞官归家。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Zhengde's reign, he came to Beijing to evaluate his political performance, and returned home saying that he was ill.

古文：宁王宸濠慕其名，遣使馈，玘避之深山。
现代文：宁王宸濠慕其名，遣人来送礼，玘避于深山不见。
English: Ning Wang admires his name, sends people to give gifts, and disappears into the mountains.

古文：及叛，玘已病，驰书守臣约讨贼，事未举而卒。
现代文：宸濠反叛时，玘已病，写信江西守臣，约兵讨贼，但事未办成就去世了。
English: When Zou rebelled, Zou was already ill and wrote a letter to the governor of Jiangxi Province, asking for soldiers to fight against the bandits, but he died without accomplishing anything.

古文：嘉靖初，赐谥文肃，学者称圭峰先生。
现代文：嘉靖初年，赐谥文肃，学者称他 圭峰先生 。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, scholars called him Mr. Guifeng.

古文：储巏，字静夫，泰州人。
现代文：储巏，字静夫，扬州府泰州人。
English: 储,字静夫, Yangzhou Prefecture, Taizhou people.

古文：九岁能属文。
现代文：九岁就能写文章。
English: A nine-year-old can write an article.

古文：母疾，刲股疗之，卒不起。家贫，力营墓域。
现代文：母亲患病，他割自己身上的肉为母亲治病。母亲病逝，虽家贫仍尽力营造坟墓。
English: When his mother fell ill, he cut his own flesh to heal her. When she died, despite the family's poverty, he did his best to build a grave.

古文：旦哭冢，夜读书不辍。
现代文：白日哀守墓旁，夜间仍读书不辍。
English: During the day, she mourns by the grave, and at night, she continues to read.

古文：成化十九年乡试，明年会试，皆第一。授南京考功主事。
现代文：成化十九年乡试中举，翌年会试第一名，授南京考功主事。
English: In the 19th year of Chenghua, he won the junior high school examination of the township examination. The next year, he won the first place in the examination, and was awarded the Nanjing examination.

古文：孝宗嗣位，疏荐前直谏贬谪者，主事张吉、王纯，中书舍人丁玑，进士李文祥，吉等皆录用。
现代文：孝宗即位，疏荐以前直谏而遭贬谪的臣僚，如主事张吉、王纯，中书舍人丁玑，进士李文祥等，都被录用。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, he recommended the appointment of ministers who had previously been directly appointed but had been demoted, such as Zhang Ji, Wang Chun, who had been in charge, Ding Jun, who had been in charge of Chinese literature, and Li Wenxiang, who had been promoted to the position.

古文：久之，进郎中。
现代文：其后，巏晋升为郎中。
English: After that, Zou was promoted to junior vassal.

古文：吏部尚书耿裕知其贤，调北部，考注臧否，一出至公。
现代文：吏部尚书耿裕知巏贤能，调他入北京吏部。其考核官吏的好坏及其政绩的得失，完全出于公心，毫无偏私。
English: Geng Yu, a senior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was aware of his merits and transferred him to the Beijing Ministry of Civil Affairs. His assessment of the merits and demerits of officials and their political achievements was entirely out of public interest, without any partiality.

古文：尝核实一官，裕欲改其评，巏正色曰： 公所执，何异王介甫！ 
现代文：有次考核一官员，耿裕改他的评语，巏严肃地说 ：公这样做，同王介甫无异！ 
English: Once, when assessing an official, Geng Yu changed his comment and said solemnly: "To do so publicly is no different from Wang Jiefu!

古文：群僚咸在侧，裕大惭，徐曰： 郎中言是，然非我莫能容也。 
现代文：当时，其他官员都在一旁，使得裕难看。裕轻轻说道 ：郎中的话说得对，但除我之外，别人是不能容忍的。 
English: At that time, other officials were on the sidelines, making Yu look bad.Yu said softly, "What my brother-in-law said is right, but I can't tolerate anyone else.

古文：擢太仆少卿，请命史官记注言动，如古左右史，时不能用。
现代文：升巏为太仆少卿，奏请命史官记载皇帝的言行，如古代左右史官那样。
English: He was promoted to the position of a servant of the emperor, and he asked the historian to record the emperor's words and deeds, just like the historians in ancient times.

古文：进本寺卿。
现代文：这意见当时不能采纳。巏进升为太仆寺卿。
English: This opinion could not be accepted at the time. So Jin was promoted to the position of Daju-ji-kyo.

古文：武宗立，塞上有警，条御边五事，又陈马政病民者四事，多议行。
现代文：武宗即位，边境有警，巏条陈防御边境五事，又陈马政害民四事，这些意见多被采行。
English: Wu Zong ascended to the throne, there were police at the border, there were five cases of Zhao Jiao Chen defending the border, and four cases of Chen Ma Zheng harming the people, and most of these opinions were adopted.

古文：正德二年改左佥都御史，总督南京粮储。
现代文：正德二年改任左佥都御史，总督南京粮食储备。
English: Zhengde was transferred to the post of Zuoying Metropolitan Historian and Governor of Nanjing Grain Reserve two years later.

古文：召为户部右侍郎，寻转左，督仓场，所至宿弊尽厘。
现代文：后召回北京任户部右侍郎，不久，又转为左侍郎，监督仓场。他所到之处，原有的弊病都被清除。
English: After that, he was recalled to Beijing as the right-hand man of the household department, and soon he was transferred to the left-hand man to supervise the warehouse. Wherever he went, the original ills were eliminated.

古文：刘瑾用事，数陵侮大臣，独敬巏，称为先生。巏愤其所为，五年春，引疾求去。
现代文：刘瑾窃取朝政，多次侮辱朝廷大臣，唯独尊敬储巏，称他先生，而巏对刘瑾的所作所为十分愤慨。
English: Liu Ye stole the imperial government and repeatedly insulted the imperial minister. He only respected Zuo Ye and called him "sir," while Zou was very indignant at Liu Ye's actions.

古文：诏许乘传，有司俟疾痊以闻。
现代文：正德五年，称病辞职，诏许他乘驿站车马归家，病愈，地方官府须立即奏报朝廷。
English: In the fifth year of Zhengde's reign, he resigned, saying that he was ill. He was allowed to return home by stagecoach. When he recovered, the local government should immediately report to the imperial court.

古文：其秋，瑾败，以故官召，辞不赴。
现代文：是年秋，刘瑾被诛，召巏回朝官复原职。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Liu Bei was arrested and recalled to the imperial court to resume his duties.

古文：后起南京户部左侍郎，就改吏部，卒官。
现代文：巏不奉诏，后来起任南京户部左侍郎，随即改为吏部左侍郎。
English: He did not obey the edict, and later he was appointed as the Left Attendant of the Household Department in Nanjing, and then he was changed to the Left Attendant of the Cadre Department.

古文：巏体貌清羸，若不胜衣；淳行清修，介然自守。
现代文：不久去世。巏身体瘦弱，好像连穿衣也嫌重。
English: He died soon after. He was thin and frail, and it seemed that he didn't even like to wear clothes.

古文：工诗文。好推引知名士，辟远非类，不恶而严。
现代文：他很有修养，注意节操，工于诗文，好推荐和引进知名人士，不论这人是在偏僻地方还是在遥远的地方。
English: He was cultured, disciplined, poetic, and good at recommending and introducing famous people, whether in remote or distant places.

古文：进士顾璘尝谒尚书邵宝，宝语曰： 子立身，当以柴墟为法。 
现代文：进士顾璘在拜谒尚书邵宝时，宝对他说： 你立身处世，应以柴墟为榜样。 
English: When the scholar Gu Jun was paying homage to the scholar Shang Shu Shao Bao, Bao said to him: You should take the example of Chai Shu as you go about your life.

古文：柴墟者，巏别号也。嘉靖初，赐谥文懿。
现代文：柴墟是巏的别号。嘉靖初年，赐谥文懿。
English: Chaiyue is another name for Jie. In the first year of Jiajing, Jie Wenjun was born.

古文：李梦阳，字献吉，庆阳人。
现代文：李梦阳，字献吉，庆阳人。
English: Li Mengyang, also known as Xianji and Qingyang.

古文：父正，官周王府教授，徙居开封。母梦日堕怀而生，故名梦阳。
现代文：出生时其母梦日落怀中，因名梦阳。
English: When he was born, his mother was pregnant with him, and his name was Mengyang.

古文：弘治六年举陕西乡试第一，明年成进士，授户部主事。
现代文：弘治六年在陕西乡试中第一，第二年中进士，授户部主事。
English: For six years, Hongzhi ranked first in the Shaanxi Township Junior High School Examination, and was promoted to Junior High School Student in the second year, and became the head of the Junior High School Admissions Department.

古文：迁郎中，榷关，格势要，构下狱，得释。
现代文：后调任户部郎中，因得罪权势被下狱，后终释放。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of a junior assistant to the head of the household department. He was sent to prison for offending authority and was eventually released.

古文：十八年，应诏上书，陈二病、三害、六渐，凡五千余言，极论得失。末言： 寿宁侯张鹤龄招纳无赖，罔利贼民，势如翼虎。 
现代文：弘治十八年，应诏上书五千余言，极论政治之得失，最后指出 ：寿宁侯张鹤龄招徕无赖，图利害民，其势之嚣张如添翼之虎。 
English: In the eighteenth year of Hongzhi, more than five thousand words were written in response to the imperial edict, discussing the gains and losses of politics, and finally pointed out: Shuning Hou Zhang Heling recruited rogues, targeted the interests of the people, and his arrogance spread like a tiger with wings.

古文：鹤龄奏辨，摘疏中 陛下厚张氏 语，诬梦阳讪母后为张氏，罪当斩。
现代文：鹤龄深恨，摘出梦阳疏中 陛下厚张氏一语 ，诬告梦阳是在讽刺母后，其罪当斩。
English: With deep hatred, He Ling extracted a sentence from Mengyang's diary, falsely accusing Mengyang of satirizing his mother, and his crime was to be beheaded.

古文：金夫人诉不已，帝弗听，召鹤龄闲处，切责之，鹤龄免冠叩头乃已。
现代文：母后金夫人哭诉于皇帝。孝宗不得不令锦衣卫将梦阳逮捕下狱，虽不久就释放，但夺其俸禄。
English: His mother, Empress Dowager Jin, cried to the emperor. Xiaozong had to have Mengyang arrested and imprisoned by Jin Yiwei. Although he was soon released, he was deprived of his salary.

古文：左右知帝护梦阳，请毋重罪，而予杖以泄金夫人愤。帝又弗许，谓尚书刘大夏曰： 若辈欲以杖毙梦阳耳，吾宁杀直臣快左右心乎！ 
现代文：左右知孝宗袒护梦阳，建议对他不加重罪，只施以杖刑，以泄金夫人之愤，皇帝也不准，对尚书刘大夏说： 你们是想借杖刑把梦阳打死，难道我宁愿杀一直言大臣来取得左右的欢心吗？ 
English: Both sides knew that Xiaozong Zongjun was protecting Mengyang, and suggested that he not be given a more serious crime, but only be punished with a cane, to vent the anger of Mrs. Jin, but the emperor did not allow it, and said to Shangshu Liu Daxia: You want to use a cane to kill Mengyang, would I rather kill the minister to gain the favor of the right and left?

古文：他日，梦阳途遇寿宁侯，詈之，击以马箠，堕二齿，寿宁侯不敢校也。
现代文：后来有一天，梦阳在途中遇到张鹤龄，辱骂他，用马鞭打掉了他两颗牙齿，而张鹤龄不敢与他计较。
English: Later, one day, Mengyang met Zhang Hailing on the way, insulted him, and knocked out two of his teeth with a horse whip, but Zhang Hailing did not dare to quarrel with him.

古文：孝宗崩，武宗立，刘瑾等八虎用事，尚书韩文与其僚语及而泣。
现代文：孝宗崩，武宗即位，宦官刘瑾等 八虎 专权，横行无忌，尚书韩文与同僚无力对付，只是相对哭泣。
English: Emperor Xiaozong died, Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and eunuch Liu Bei became the leader of the Eight Tigers. The Eight Tigers had absolute power and ran rampant. Shangshu Hanwen and his colleagues were powerless to deal with them, and only wept in comparison.

古文：梦阳进曰： 公大臣，何泣也？ 
现代文：李梦阳为他们出谋划策以除掉 八虎 ，事被泄露，刘瑾假传圣旨，贬梦阳为山西布政司经历。
English: Li Mengyang made a plan for them to get rid of the Eight Tigers, the matter was leaked, Liu Ye falsely transmitted the holy will, and Mengyang was relegated to the post of Shanxi Provincial Political Secretary.

古文：文曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：不久又将他逮捕入狱，意欲除掉，因康海说服了刘瑾，才得幸免。
English: Soon after, he was arrested and put in prison. He wanted to get rid of him, but he was only spared because Kanghai convinced Liu Yao.

古文：曰： 比言官劾群奄，阁臣持其章甚力，公诚率诸大臣伏阙争，阁臣必应之，去若辈易耳。 文曰： 善 ，属梦阳属草。
现代文：刘瑾罪发被诛，又起用梦阳为江西提学副使。参政吴廷举与梦阳不和，上疏弹劾他侵夺官权，武宗诏遣大理寺卿燕忠去审理此案，将梦阳拘留于广信狱中。诸生万余为梦阳申冤，官府拒不受理，又有人弹劾梦阳欺压同僚，挟制上司。
English: Liu Xuan was arrested for the crime, and Mengyang was appointed as the vice-envoy of Jiangxi to promote learning. Wu Tingju, a politician, had a disagreement with Mengyang, and Shang Su impeached him for encroaching on official power. Emperor Wu sent Yan Zhong, the head of the Dali Temple, to try the case and detained Mengyang in the Guangxin Prison. More than 10,000 people petitioned for Mengyang, but the government refused to accept it. Others impeached Mengyang for bullying his colleagues and blackmailing his superiors.

古文：弘治时，宰相李东阳主文柄，天下翕然宗之，梦阳独讥其萎弱。
现代文：于是梦阳带着原来官衔归家闲居。李梦阳还归故里后，更加放纵不羁，不肯居于人下，修建林园，宴请宾客，打猎于繁台、晋丘之间，自号 空同子 ，名声远扬海内。
English: As a result, Mengyang took his former official title and returned home to idle. After Li Mengyang returned to his hometown, he was even more indulgent and uninhibited, refusing to live under the people, building a forest garden, inviting guests, hunting in the middle of the plateau and Jinqiu, calling himself the son of the sky, and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：倡言文必秦、汉，诗必盛唐，非是者弗道。与何景明、徐祯卿、边贡、朱应登、顾璘、陈沂、郑善夫、康海、王九思等号十才子，又与景明、祯卿、贡、海、九思、王廷相号七才子，皆卑视一世，而梦阳尤甚。
现代文：宁王宸濠谋反伏诛，御史周宣上章指李梦阳为宸濠同党，被捕下狱，幸大学士杨廷和、尚书林俊等力救，但确曾为宸濠做过《阳春书院记》一文，被革除官职，不久去世。梦阳才气宏伟，以复古自命。讲文章则必以秦汉为模范，论诗歌则必以盛唐为准则，不如此不算正道。他与同时的何景明、徐祯卿、边贡、朱应登、顾王、陈沂、郑善文、康海、王九思合称为 十才子 ，又与何景明、徐祯卿、边贡、康海、王九思、王廷相共称为 七才子 。这些人藐视一切，以梦阳为最。
English: In the last chapter of the History of Zhou Xuan, Ning Wang Xing conspired against and ambushed Li Mengyang. Li Mengyang was accused of being a member of the same party as Xing, and was arrested and imprisoned. Fortunately, scholars Yang Tinghe and Shang Shulin Jun were able to save him. However, he did write an article for Xing, "Yangchun Academy Chronicle," and was dismissed from his post. He died soon after. Mengyang was a great talent, and he was proud of his retro style. He had to use Qin and Han as a model for his essays, and he had to use the Tang Dynasty as a standard for his poetry

古文：吴人黄省曾、越人周祚，千里致书，愿为弟子。
现代文：吴人黄省曾、越人周祚都千里致信，表示愿为弟子。
English: Wu's Huang Zeng and Yue's Zhou Qi both sent letters to thousands of people, expressing their willingness to be disciples.

古文：迨嘉靖朝，李攀龙、王世贞出，复奉以为宗。
现代文：嘉靖年间，李攀龙、王世贞等，再奉他为宗师。
English: During the Jiajing period, Li Panglong, Wang Shizhen, etc. followed him and served him as a master.

古文：天下推李、何、王、李为四大家，无不争效其体。
现代文：天下诗文推李、何、王、李四大家，争相效法。
English: Li, He, Wang and Li are the four masters of poetry in the world, competing to follow each other's example.

古文：终身所服膺效法者，梦阳也。
现代文：但后来有人讥笑李梦阳的诗文是模拟剽窃，看起来似司马迁之文，杜少陵之诗，但失去了他们的精髓。
English: Later, however, some people ridiculed Li Mengyang's poems as simulated plagiarism. They looked like Sima Qian's poem and Du Shao Ling's poem, but they lost their essence.

古文：何景明，字仲默，信阳人。
现代文：何景明，字仲默，信阳人。
English: He Jingming, Zhi Zhongmiao, Xinyangren.

古文：八岁能诗古文。
现代文：八岁即能做诗和古文。
English: By the age of eight, he could recite poetry and ancient texts.

古文：弘治十一年举于乡，年方十五，宗藩贵人争遗人负视，所至聚观若堵。
现代文：弘治十一年乡试中举，这时年方十五岁。十五年进士及第，授中书舍人。
English: In the 11th year of Hongzhi, when he was 15 years old, he won the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：十五年第进士，授中书舍人。与李梦阳辈倡诗古文，梦阳最雄骏，景明稍后出，相与颉颃。正德改元，刘瑾窃柄。
现代文：与李梦阳等人以诗文相唱和，梦阳的诗文最佳，景明虽年轻些，但能与梦阳抗衡。正德改元，刘瑾窃取政权。
English: With Li Mengyang and others, they sang poems to each other. Mengyang's poems were the best. Although Jingming was younger, he could compete with Mengyang. Zhengde changed the era, and Liu Bei stole power.

古文：上书吏部尚书许进劝其秉政毋挠，语极激烈。
现代文：景明上书吏部尚书许进，劝他把握住政权，不要向刘瑾屈服，语气极为激烈。
English: Jingming Shangshu Xujin, the chief secretary, urged him to hold on to power and not to give in to Liu Bei. The tone was extremely fierce.

古文：已，遂谢病归。
现代文：随后，他称病告假归家。
English: He then went home on sick leave.

古文：逾年，瑾尽免诸在告者官，景明坐罢。
现代文：过了一年，瑾将所有告假的官员尽行免职，景明也在其中。
English: A year later, Zou dismissed all the officials who had taken leave of absence, including Jingming.

古文：瑾诛，用李东阳荐，起故秩，直内阁制敕房。
现代文：刘瑾被诛，由李东阳的推荐，景明官复原职，掌管内阁制敕房。
English: Liu Wei was appointed, recommended by Li Dongyang, restored to the post of Jingming official, in charge of the Cabinet Office.

古文：李梦阳下狱，众莫敢为直，景明上书吏部尚书杨一清救之。
现代文：李梦阳下狱，大家不敢为他申冤，而景明上书吏部尚书杨一清援救。
English: When Li Mengyang was released from prison, no one dared to seek redress for him, but Yang Yiching, a clerk at the Jingming High School, came to his rescue.

古文：九年，乾清宫灾，疏言义子不当畜，边军不当留，番僧不当宠，宦官不当任。
现代文：正德九年，乾清宫火灾，景明上疏提出不应养义子，京城不应留住边防军，不应宠信西域僧人，不应重用宦官。
English: In the 9th year of Zhengde, when the Qianqing Palace was on fire, Jingming Shangsuo proposed that the emperor should not raise a son-in-law, the capital should not retain border guards, should not favor Western monks, and should not re-employ eunuchs.

古文：留中。久之，进吏部员外郎，直制敕如故。
现代文：这份奏疏被扣压，未进呈皇帝。久后，进升吏部员外郎，仍掌管制敕。
English: This report was suppressed and not submitted to the emperor. A long time later, Gairo, who had been promoted to the position of an official, was still in charge of the administration.

古文：钱宁欲交欢，以古画索题，景明曰： 此名笔，毋污人手。 
现代文：钱宁欲与景明交为朋友，将一幅大画请景明题名，景明说： 此画出于名家之手，不要玷污了名人的手迹。 
English: Channing wanted to make friends with Jingming, so he asked Jingming for the title of a large painting. Jingming said, "This painting was made by a famous family. Don't tarnish the famous person's handwriting."

古文：留经年，终掷还之。
现代文：在景明那里留了一年，最后还是原物退还。
English: It stayed there for a year, and eventually the original was returned.

古文：寻擢陕西提学副使。
现代文：不久，景明升为陕西提学副使。
English: Soon, Jingming was promoted to the vice-envoy of Shaanxi to promote education.

古文：廖鹏弟太监銮镇关中，横甚，诸参随遇三司不下马，景明执挞之。
现代文：廖鹏弟太监廖銮镇守关中，横行霸道，廖銮的随从人员遇三司不下马，景明将他们逮捕鞭挞。
English: Liao Peng's younger brother, the eunuch Liao Ye, was caught in the middle of guarding the gate of Liao Ye's town and behaved in a domineering manner. When three of Liao Ye's attendants refused to dismount, Jingming arrested and whipped them.

古文：其教诸生，专以经术世务。
现代文：他所教育的诸生专以经学、儒学及时务为主。
English: The sentient beings he educated were mainly focused on the study of the classics, Confucianism, and current affairs.

古文：遴秀者于正学书院，亲为说经，不用诸家训诂，士始知有经学。
现代文：选拔优秀者于正学书院，景明亲自为学生讲经，而不用诸家对辞句的解释，士子始知有经学。
English: The best students were selected to attend the Zhengxue Academy, and Jingming himself lectured on the scriptures to the students, without the need for the families to explain the words and phrases. The scholars began to know about the scriptures.

古文：嘉靖初，引疾归，未几卒，年三十有九。
现代文：嘉靖初，因病归家，不久逝世，年仅三十九岁。
English: At the beginning of Jiajing, he returned home due to illness, and died soon after, aged only thirty-nine.

古文：景明志操耿介，尚节义，鄙荣利，与梦阳并有国士风。
现代文：景明为人正直，重节义，鄙视荣利，与梦阳并有国士之风度。
English: Jingming was an honest person, respected justice, despised glory and profit, and had the demeanor of a statesman with Mengyang.

古文：两人为诗文，初相得甚欢，名成之后，互相诋諆。
现代文：两人学诗做文，开始一唱一和，成名之后却相互诋毁。
English: The two of them studied poetry and writing, and began to sing together, but after they became famous, they slandered each other.

古文：资颖特，家不蓄一书，而无所不通。
现代文：梦阳主张摹仿，景明则主张创造，各树旗帜，互不相让，两人交游也分手了。
English: Mengyang advocated imitation, while Jingming advocated creation. The two did not concede to each other, and they parted ways.

古文：自为诸生，已工诗歌，与里人唐寅善，寅言之沈周、杨循吉，由是知名。
现代文：有人说景明之才本不及梦阳，但其诗则比梦阳的诗好。然而，天下人在谈论诗时，则必何、李并称，与边贡、徐贞卿合称为 四杰 。徐祯卿，字昌谷，吴县人。
English: Some people say that Jingming's talent is not as good as Mengyang's, but his poetry is better than Mengyang's. However, when people around the world talk about poetry, they must also say what, Li, and together with Bengong and Xu Zhenqing, they are called the four masters.

古文：举弘治十八年进士。
现代文：天资特别聪敏，家未藏一书，但他却无所不通。
English: He is gifted with extraordinary intelligence. He does not have a single book in his home, yet he knows everything.

古文：孝宗遣中使问祯卿与华亭陆深名，深遂得馆选，而祯卿以貌寝不与。
现代文：自入学成为生员之后，已工于诗歌，与同乡唐寅友善，寅向沈周、杨循吉介绍了祯卿的才学，祯卿由此知名于世。
English: Since he entered the school as a freshman, he has been working on poetry, and he is friendly with his fellow townsmen Tang Yin. Tang Yin introduced his talent to Shen Zhou and Yang Xueji, which made him famous in the world.

古文：授大理左寺副，坐失囚，贬国子博士。
现代文：弘治十八年中进士，授大理左寺副，因过失而被囚，贬为国子博士。
English: In his eighteenth year, Koji was promoted to priest and given the title of vice-priest of Dari Zuji Temple. He was imprisoned for negligence and demoted to the status of Kuniko doctor.

古文：祯卿少与祝允明、唐寅、文征明齐名，号 吴中四才子 。
现代文：祯卿年少时与祝允明、唐寅、文征明齐名，号称 吴中四才子 。
English: When he was young, Gongqing was as famous as Zhu Yunming, Tang Yin, and Wen Zhengming, and was known as one of the Four Talents of Wuzhong.

古文：其为读，喜白居易、刘禹锡。
现代文：其做诗，喜效法白居易、刘禹锡。
English: When he wrote poetry, he followed the example of Bai Juyi and Liu Yuxi.

古文：既登第，与李梦阳、何景明游，悔其少作，改而趋汉、魏、盛唐，然故习犹在，梦阳讥其守而未化。
现代文：登进士后，与李梦阳、何景明交游，悔其少年时之作，改而学汉、魏、盛唐的风格，然旧习仍在，梦阳讥笑他 守而未化 。
English: After he was promoted to academician, he became friends with Li Mengyang and He Jingming. He regretted what he had done when he was a boy, and instead learned the styles of Han, Wei, and the Tang Dynasty. However, the old learning was still there, and Mengyang mocked him, but he did not change.

古文：卒，年二十有三。
现代文：二十三岁去世。
English: He died at the age of 23.

古文：祯卿体癯神清，诗熔炼精警，为吴中诗人之冠，年虽不永，名满士林。
现代文：祯卿，身体瘦弱，而思想明晰，其诗精练，为吴中诗人之冠，年寿虽不久，但名扬于知识界。
English: Gongqing, his body thin and weak, but his thoughts clear, his poetry concise, is the crown of poets in Wuzhong. Although his age is not long, he is famous in the intellectual world.

古文：子伯虬，举人，亦能诗。杨循吉，字君谦，吴县人。
现代文：杨循吉，字君谦，吴县人。
English: Yang Xueji, alias Jun Qian, from Wuxian County.

古文：成化二十年进士。授礼部主事。
现代文：成化二十年进士，授礼部主事。
English: He has been a graduate for 20 years and is in charge of the awarding department.

古文：善病，好读书，每得意，手足踔掉不能自禁，用是得颠主事名。
现代文：多病，好读书，每当有所得。不禁手舞足蹈，因此得 癫主事 之名。
English: He was often ill, loved to read, and always had something to do. He could not help dancing with his hands and feet, which earned him the title of "master of his own affairs."

古文：一岁中，数移病不出。
现代文：一年之中，常数次患病。
English: In the course of a year, he often falls ill several times.

古文：弘治初，奏乞改教，不许。遂请致仕归，年才三十有一。
现代文：弘治初，请求改为教谕，未准，于是辞官回家，这时才三十一岁。
English: At the beginning of the Hongzhi era, his request was changed to an edict, but it was not approved, so the official went home. He was only thirty-one years old at the time.

古文：结庐支硎山下，课读经史，旁通内典、稗官。
现代文：建庐舍于支硎山下，攻读经史，旁通内典、稗官小说。
English: He built a hermitage at the foot of Mount Shikotsu, and studied the history of scripture, sidetracked scriptures, and eunuch novels.

古文：父母殁，倾赀治葬，寝苫墓侧。
现代文：父母去世，他尽家中资财来治丧事，在墓旁铺草为床。
English: When his parents died, he used all the money in the family to pay for the funeral and made a bed of grass next to the grave.

古文：性狷隘，好持人短长，又好以学问穷人，至颊赤不顾。
现代文：气量狭小，好说人短处，又好以学问为难别人，弄得别人面红耳赤，他也不顾。
English: He does not care if he is narrow-minded, likes to point out people's shortcomings, and likes to embarrass others with learning, making others red-faced.

古文：清宁宫灾，诏求直言，驰疏请复建文帝尊号，格不行。
现代文：清宁宫火灾，皇帝下诏求直言进谏。循吉上疏请恢复建文帝尊号，受到抵制，不能实行。
English: After the fire at the Qingning Palace, the emperor issued an edict demanding that the Emperor be allowed to return to the throne. The Emperor's request to restore the title of Emperor Jianwen was resisted and could not be implemented.

古文：武宗驻跸南都，召赋《打虎曲》，称旨，易武人装，日侍御前为乐府、小令。
现代文：武宗至南京，召循吉做《打虎曲》。写成后，武宗满意，令他换武人服装，每天侍奉于皇帝之前，做乐府、小令。
English: Wuzong went to Nanjing and summoned Xueji to compose the "Tiger-Beating Song." After it was written, Wuzong was satisfied, so he changed his warrior clothes and served the emperor every day as a music master and a page boy.

古文：帝以优俳畜之，不授官。
现代文：武宗把他作为艺人，而不授官。
English: Emperor Wuzong treated him as an entertainer, but did not give him an official position.

古文：循吉以为耻，阅九月辞归。
现代文：循吉认为这是耻事，时经九个月，终辞职归家。
English: Shouji thought this was a disgrace, and after nine months, he finally resigned and returned home.

古文：既复召至京，会帝崩，乃还。
现代文：后来又召至京师，这时武宗驾崩，他又回去了。
English: Later, he was summoned to the capital again, but when Emperor Wu died, he went back again.

古文：嘉靖中，献《九庙颂》及《华阳求嗣斋仪》，报闻而已。
现代文：嘉靖年间，他献《九庙颂》及《华阳求嗣斋仪》。晚年寂寞，更加怪癖。
English: During the Jiajing period, he presented "Song of the Nine Temples" and "Hua Yang Succession Ritual." In his later years, he was lonely, and his quirks became more pronounced.

古文：晚岁落寞，益坚癖自好。尚书顾璘道吴，以币贽，促膝论文，欢甚。
现代文：尚书顾王路过吴时，带着礼物去看他，两人促膝谈论文学，相交甚欢。
English: When Shang Shu Gu Wang passed by Wu, he took a gift to see him, and the two of them had a heart-to-heart talk about literature and enjoyed each other's company.

古文：俄郡守邀璘，璘将赴之，循吉忽色变，驱之出，掷还其币。
现代文：忽然郡守来邀请顾王，王准备应邀去，循吉立即色变，把王赶走，把礼物丢还给他。
English: Suddenly, the county magistrate came to invite Gu Wang. Wang was ready to accept the invitation, but Shouji immediately changed his mind, drove Wang away, and threw the gift back to him.

古文：明日，璘往谢，闭门不纳。
现代文：第二天，王去赔罪，循吉闭门不接纳。
English: The next day, Wang went to make amends, but Chengji closed the door and would not accept.

古文：卒，年八十九。
现代文：循吉八十九岁而逝。
English: He died at the age of eighty-nine.

古文：允明以弘治五年举于乡，久之不第，授广东兴宁知县。
现代文：其诗文自定为《松筹堂集》。他的作品还另有十余种，差不多千卷。祝允明，字希哲，长洲人。弘治五年乡试中举，但总是不中进士。授广东兴宁知县。
English: He self-identified his poem as "Matsuchidang Collection." There are also more than ten kinds of his works, almost a thousand volumes. Zhu Yunming, surnamed Xizhe, was born in Changzhou. He passed the junior high school entrance examination in his hometown of Hongzhi for five years, but he always failed to enter the junior high school. He was awarded the title of Guangdong Xingningchi County.

古文：捕戮盗魁三十余，邑以无警。
现代文：他在该县捕杀盗魁三十余人，全县安宁无事。
English: He caught and killed more than 30 bandits in the county, and the whole county was peaceful.

古文：稍迁应天通判，谢病归。嘉靖五年卒。
现代文：不久，调应天府通判，因病辞谢，嘉靖五年逝世。
English: Not long after, in response to Tianfu Tongzhan, he resigned due to illness, and Jiajing died five years later.

古文：允明生而枝指，故自号枝山，又号枝指生。
现代文：允明生来手上多生一指，故自号 枝山 ，又号 枝生指 。
English: Yunming was born with an extra finger on his hand, so he called himself "Edayama" or "Edayama Finger."

古文：五岁作径尺字，九岁能诗，稍长，博览群集，文章有奇气，当筵疾书，思若涌泉。
现代文：五岁能写一尺大的字，九岁能做诗。长大博览群书，文章有奇气，能在筵席上秉笔疾书，文思若泉涌一般。
English: Five-year-old can write one-foot-tall characters, nine-year-old can do poetry. He grew up reading a lot of books, the articles are wondrous, he can write quickly at a banquet, and his writing is like a fountain.

古文：尤工书法，名动海内。
现代文：尤工于书法，名扬海内。
English: He is particularly skilled in calligraphy and is well-known overseas.

古文：好酒色六博，善新声，求文及书者踵至，多贿妓掩得之。
现代文：好酒色游乐，善创作新曲，向他求文和书法者接踵而来，而多需买通歌妓才能得到。
English: He was fond of drinking and carousing, and good at composing new songs. Those who asked him for literature and calligraphy came one after another, but most of them had to buy their way through the courtesans to get it.

古文：恶礼法士，亦不问生产，有所入，辄召客豪饮，费尽乃已，或分与持去，不留一钱。
现代文：他讨厌礼法，也不事生产，有些收入便拿去请客豪饮，直到把钱花光为止，或者分给别人，自己一钱不留。
English: He hates etiquette, he doesn't do anything productive, and he takes some of his income to treat guests to booze until he runs out of money, or gives it to others, leaving no money for himself.

古文：子续，正德中进士，仕至广西左布政使。
现代文：晚年更加贫困，每出去，向他追账的相随于后，而允明则更加沾沾自喜。
English: In his later years, he was even more impoverished. Every time he went out, he was followed by people chasing him for money, while Yunming was even more complacent.

古文：唐寅，字伯虎，一字子畏。
现代文：他著有诗文集六十卷，另有杂著百余卷。唐寅，字伯虎，又字子畏。
English: He is the author of sixty volumes of poetry and prose collections, as well as more than a hundred miscellaneous volumes.

古文：性颖利，与里狂生张灵纵酒，不事诸生业。
现代文：禀性非常聪敏。与同里狂生张灵纵酒贪杯，不从事任何职业。
English: He is very intelligent. He drinks heavily with fellow madman Zhang Ling and does not engage in any occupation.

古文：祝允明规之，乃闭户浃岁。
现代文：祝允明劝他，他一年闭门不出。
English: Zhu Yunming advised him not to leave the house for a year.

古文：举弘治十一年乡试第一，座主梁储奇其文，还朝示学士程敏政，敏政亦奇之。
现代文：弘治十一年乡试第一名，主考官梁储认为其文不凡，带回朝给学士程敏政看，敏政也认为不同凡响。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongzhi, he won the first place in the township examination. The chief examiner, Liang Yuan, thought that his writing was extraordinary. He brought it back to the North to show it to the bachelor, Cheng Min Zheng. Min Zheng also thought it was extraordinary.

古文：未几，敏政总裁会试，江阴富人徐经贿其家僮，得试题。
现代文：不久，敏政主持会试，江阴富人徐经贿赂了敏政的家童偷得试题。
English: Soon, Min Zheng presided over the examination, and the rich man Xu Jing from Jiangyin bribed Min Zheng's children to steal the exam questions.

古文：事露，言者劾敏政，语连寅，下诏狱，谪为吏。
现代文：事情败露后，言官弹劾政敏，牵连到唐寅，下诏将他入狱，贬为吏。
English: After the affair was exposed, the spokesman impeached Zheng Min, implicated Tang Yin, and ordered him to be jailed and demoted to the rank of official.

古文：寅耻不就，归家益放浪。
现代文：寅认为这是对自己的侮辱，不肯去。归家后更加放荡。
English: Yin thought it was an insult to himself and refused to go. After returning home, he became even more debauched.

古文：宁王宸濠厚币聘之，寅察其有异志，佯狂使酒，露其丑秽。宸濠不能堪，放还。
现代文：宁王宸濠以重金聘他，寅看出宸濠有图谋不轨之意，借酒任性，装出一付丑像，令人恶心，宸濠不能忍受，放他回去了。
English: Ning Wangyu hired him with a large sum of money. Yin saw that Yu had the intention of plotting something improper, was self-willed with alcohol, and put on an ugly image, which was disgusting. Yu could not bear it, and let him go back.

古文：筑室桃花坞，与客日般饮其中，年五十四而卒。
现代文：他筑室于桃花坞，每日在此与客饮酒。终年五十四。
English: He built a room in Taohwa Dock, where he drinks with guests every day. He is fifty-four years old.

古文：寅诗文，初尚才情，晚年颓然自放，谓后人知我不在此，论者伤之。
现代文：寅诗文早年才华横溢，晚年则颓废放纵，认为后人不能因此来看待他。
English: In his early years, Yin Shiwen was brilliant, but in his later years he was decadent and indulgent, and he believed that future generations could not look at him in this way.

古文：吴中自枝山辈以放诞不羁为世所指目，而文才轻艳，倾动流辈，传说者增益而附丽之，往往出名教外。时常熟有桑悦者，字民怿，尤怪妄，亦以才名吴中。书过目，辄焚弃，曰： 已在吾腹中矣。 
现代文：桑悦，字民怿，常熟人。
English: Sangyue, the Chinese character for "people," is a frequent acquaintance.

古文：敢为大言，以孟子自况。
现代文：性格尤其怪诞，也是吴中闻名的才子。每读书，过目后立即焚弃，自称： 已在吾腹中矣。 
English: His personality is particularly bizarre, and he is also a well-known talent in Wuzhong. Every time he reads a book, he immediately burns it after reading it, claiming: "It's already in my stomach."

古文：或问翰林文章，曰： 虚无人，举天下惟悦，其次祝允明，又次罗玘。 
现代文：好说大话，把自己比作孟子。有人问他翰林们的文章谁好，他说： 没有人，全天下数我第一，其次是祝允明，再就是罗王己。 
English: He liked to talk big and likened himself to Mencius. Someone asked him who liked Hanlin's articles, and he said: "No one, the whole world counts me first, followed by Zhu Yunming, and then Luo Wangji."

古文：为诸生，上谒监司，曰 江南才子 。
现代文：做学生时，去拜谒监司，说他自己是 江南才子 ，监司大为吃惊，请他来校刊书籍。
English: When he was a student, he went to visit the superintendent and said that he was a talented person from Jiangnan Province. The superintendent was very surprised and invited him to come to the school to publish books.

古文：监司大骇，延之较书，预刊落以试悦，文义不属者，索笔补之。
现代文：在刊印书籍时，预先将书中的字句脱落几处以考桑悦，悦将文义不连接的地方补正。
English: When publishing a book, it is a good idea to correct the missing words in the book in advance, and correct the places where the meaning is not connected.

古文：年十九举成化元年乡试，试春官，答策语不雅训，被斥。三试得副榜，年二十余耳，年籍误二为六，遂除泰和训导。
现代文：十九岁中成化元年乡试举人。礼部会试中，悦在笔问的答卷里辞句不雅而被斥责，三试中副榜，这时二十余岁，而册籍上把二误为六，派任泰和训导。
English: At the age of nineteen, Chenghua Township in the first year of the 19th century tried to nominate people. In the middle of the examination of the etiquette club, Yue was reprimanded for making an indecent remark in the answer sheet of the written question. In the middle of the third examination, he was more than 20 years old, but he mistook two for six in the register, and assigned him to be a coach.

古文：学士丘浚重其文，属学使者善遇之。使者至，问： 悦不迎，岂有恙乎？ 
现代文：学士丘浚看中了桑悦的文才，派使去好好待遇他，使者到后问当地官吏： 悦不出来迎接，是生病了吗？ 
English: The scholar Qujun took a fancy to the literary talent of San Yue, and sent an envoy to treat him well. After the envoy arrived, he asked the local officials: If Yue can't come out to greet him, is he sick?

古文：长吏皆衔之，曰： 无恙，自负才名不肯谒耳。 
现代文：一些地位较高的官员都忌恨桑悦，因而回答说： 没病，他自负有才学，不肯来见你罢了。 
English: Some high-ranking officials were jealous of Sangyue, so they replied: "He is not ill, he is conceited and studious, he just does not want to see you."

古文：使者遣吏召不至，益两使促之。悦怒曰： 始吾谓天下未有无耳者，乃今有之。与若期，三日后来，渎则不来矣。 
现代文：使者派人去召他，去了两次，悦怒曰 ：原来我以为天下不会有没耳朵的人，今天看来还是有的，定个时间，三天后再来，如果待我轻慢就不来了。 
English: The messenger sent someone to summon him, he went twice, and angrily said: Originally, I thought that there would be no one in the world without ears, but today it seems that there still are. Set a time, come back in three days, and if you treat me with contempt, I won't come.

古文：使者恚，欲收悦，缘浚故，不果。
现代文：使者怨恨在心，想把他逮捕起来，但因丘浚的缘故而没有敢这样做。
English: The envoy had a grudge against him and wanted to arrest him, but did not dare to do so because of the dredging.

古文：三日来见，长揖使者。使者怒，悦脱帽竟去。
现代文：三日后使者来见，悦只对他行长揖礼，使者恼怒，悦脱帽而去。
English: Three days later, the envoy came to see him, and Yue only bowed to him. The envoy was angry, and Yue took off his cap and left.

古文：使者下阶谢，乃已。
现代文：使者只得赶去赔罪，这才了事。
English: The messenger had to rush to make amends, and that was that.

古文：迁长沙通判，调柳州。
现代文：后升长沙通判，又调柳州通判。
English: Later, Changsha's sentence was raised, and Liuzhou's sentence was raised again.

古文：会外艰归，遂不出。
现代文：这时父亲去世，他从此再不出来做官。
English: At this time, his father died, and he was no longer able to work as an official.

古文：居家益狂诞，乡人莫不重其文，而骇其行。
现代文：在家更加放荡不羁，本乡人莫不重视他的文章，而对其行为摇头咋舌。
English: At home, he is even more debauched. Local people do not pay attention to his articles, but shake their heads at his behavior.

古文：初，悦在京师，见高丽使臣市本朝《两都赋》，无有，以为耻，遂赋之。
现代文：原先，悦在京师见高丽使臣买本朝的《两都赋》，以没有买到而感到耻辱。
English: Originally, Yue had seen the Goryeo envoys in Beijing buying this dynasty's "Two Cities" and felt humiliated for not being able to buy it.

古文：居长沙，著《庸言》，自以为穷究天人之际。
现代文：悦便给他做了一篇赋。住长沙时著《庸言》，自认为把天与人的关系研究清楚了。
English: When he lived in Changsha, he wrote "The Sayings" and thought that he had studied the relationship between heaven and man clearly.

古文：所著书，颇行于世。
现代文：他所著的书，流行于世。
English: The books he has written are popular around the world.

古文：边贡，字廷实，历城人。
现代文：边贡，字廷实，历城人。
English: "Bengong," "Tingshi," "Lichengren."

古文：祖宁，应天治中。父节，代州知州。
现代文：祖父边宁为应天府诏中，父亲边节为代州知州。
English: His grandfather, Bian Ning, was from Yingtianfu, and his father, Bian Jie, was from Daizhou and Chizhou.

古文：贡年二十举于乡，第弘治九年进士。除太常博士，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：贡二十岁乡试中举，弘治九年为进士，授太常博士，后升为兵科给事中。
English: Gong won the junior high school examination at the age of 20, while Hongzhi was promoted to a scholar at the age of nine and awarded the title of doctor of military science.

古文：孝宗崩，疏劾中官张瑜，太医刘文泰、高廷和用药之谬，又劾中官苗逵、保国公朱晖、都御史史琳用兵之失。
现代文：孝宗崩，边贡上疏弹劾宦官张瑜、太医刘文泰、高廷和错误用药所致；又弹劾宦官苗逵、保国公朱晖、都御史史琳在西北抵御外强入侵之用兵错误。
English: Xiaozong passed away, and the eunuch Zhang Yu, the eunuch Liu Wentai, and Gao Ting were impeached by the eunuch, and the eunuch Miao Wei, the eunuch Zhu Xi, and the eunuch Shi Xilin were impeached for the error of using soldiers to resist foreign invasion in the northwest.

古文：改太常丞，迁卫辉知府，改荆州，并能其官。
现代文：历任太常寺丞，卫辉知府，荆州知府，陕西、河南提学副使。
English: He has successively served as Vice-Minister of Education of Taizhong Temple, Weihui Prefecture, Jingzhou Prefecture, Shaanxi Province and Henan Province.

古文：历陕西、河南提学副使，以母忧家居。
现代文：在任河南提学副使时，母亲去世，居家服丧。
English: When he was the deputy envoy of Henan to promote education, his mother passed away and was buried at home.

古文：嘉靖改元，用荐，起南京太常少卿，三迁太常卿，督四夷馆，擢刑部右侍郎，拜户部尚书，并在南京。贡早负才名，美风姿，所交悉海内名士。久官留都，优闲无事，游览江山，挥毫浮白，夜以继日。
现代文：嘉靖改元，起任南京太常寺少卿，升为南京刑部侍郎、南京户部尚书。贡早就以其才华知名于世，姿态英俊，所交游者都是海内名士。长期在南京做官，悠闲无事，游览江山，咏诗饮酒，夜以继日。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Jiajing was promoted to the position of Nanjing Taizhong Temple Shaoqing, and was promoted to the position of Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department chamberlain, and Nanjing Household Department Shangshu. Gong has long been known for his talent, handsome posture, and his friends are famous people at sea. He has been working as an official in Nanjing for a long time, leisurely, touring the country, drinking poetry, day and night.

古文：都御史劾其纵酒废职，遂罢归。
现代文：都御史弹劾他纵酒废职，被罢官，归家。
English: The Metropolitan Archives impeached him for drunkenness and dereliction of duty. He was dismissed and returned home.

古文：顾璘，字华玉，上元人。
现代文：顾璘，字华玉，上元人。
English: Gu Gu, the character Huayu, Shangyuan people.

古文：弘治九年进士。授广平知县，擢南京吏部主事，晋郎中。
现代文：弘治九年进士，授广平知县，后连续晋升为南京吏部主事、郎中。
English: In the ninth year of the Hongzhi era, he was awarded the title of Guangping County, after which he was continuously promoted to the head of the Nanjing cadre department and to the highest rank.

古文：正德四年出为开封知府，数与镇守太监廖堂、王宏忤，逮下锦衣狱，谪全州知州。
现代文：正德四年出任开封知府，多次与镇守太监廖堂、王宏不和，被捕下锦衣卫狱，贬全州知州。
English: Zhengde served as the governor of Kaifeng for four years, repeatedly quarreled with the town guard eunuchs Liaodong and Wang Hong, was arrested and sent to Jinwei Prison, and was demoted to chizhou.

古文：秩满，迁台州知府。
现代文：在全州任期满，调任台州知府。
English: At the end of his term in Jeonju, he was transferred to be the governor of Taizhou.

古文：历浙江左布政使，山西、湖广巡抚，右副都御史，所至有声。
现代文：后历任浙江左布政使，山西、湖广巡抚，右副都御史，所到之处，其声名卓著。
English: Later, successively serving as the political envoy of Zhejiang Zuo Bu, the inspector of Shanxi and Huguang, and the right vice-governor of the capital, his reputation was outstanding everywhere he went.

古文：迁吏部右侍郎，改工部。董显陵工毕，迁南京刑部尚书。
现代文：调任吏部右侍郎，后改工部右侍郎，负责显陵工程，工竣后调任南京刑部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the right-hand man of the cadre department, and later to the right-hand man of the engineering department, responsible for the tomb-exposing project. After the completion of the project, he was transferred to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：罢归，年七十余卒。
现代文：罢职归家，终年七十余岁。
English: He resigned from his post and returned home, at the age of over seventy.

古文：璘少负才名，与何、李相上下。
现代文：顾璘年少时就以才华而闻名，与李梦阳、何景明不相上下。
English: When he was young, Gu Yao was famous for his talent. He was on a par with Li Mengyang and He Jingming.

古文：虚己好士，如恐不及。
现代文：为人谦虚，好交结士人，总怕自己不如他们。
English: He is a modest person, good at socializing with scholars, and always afraid of being inferior to them.

古文：在浙，慕孙太初一元不可得见。
现代文：在浙江时，仰慕孙太初一元，但未得见。
English: When he was in Zhejiang, he admired Sun Taizu's one yuan, but did not see it.

古文：道衣幅巾，放舟湖上，月下见小舟泊断桥，一僧、一鹤、一童子煮茗，笑曰： 此必太初也。 
现代文：有天他穿着道服，打扮成儒生模样，游于西湖之上，月下见一小船停泊在断桥下，船上有一僧、一鹤、一童子正在烧茶。璘笑道： 此必太初。 
English: One day, he swam across the West Lake in his Buddhist robes, dressed as a Confucian scholar. Under the moonlight, he saw a small boat moored under a broken bridge. On board, a monk, a crane, and a boy were making tea. He smiled and said, "This must be the first time."

古文：移舟就之，遂往还无间。
现代文：便令船靠近他们，从此与孙太初经常往来不断。
English: He then ordered the ship to come closer to them, and from then on he had frequent contact with Sun Taichung.

古文：抚湖广时，爱王廷陈才，欲见之，廷陈不可。
现代文：璘在任湖广巡抚时，爱王廷陈之才，想与他会见，廷陈不愿。
English: When he was the governor of Hukang, he loved Wang Ting Chen Zhicai and wanted to meet with him, but Ting Chen did not want to.

古文：侦廷陈狎游，疾掩之，廷陈避不得，遂定交。
现代文：璘侦察到廷陈出游，猝不及防地拜访于途中，廷陈躲避不及，从此二人交往不断。
English: Zou detected that Ting Chen was on a trip, and visited him unexpectedly on the way. Ting Chen could not avoid him, and the two of them have been in constant contact ever since.

古文：既归，构息园，大治幸舍居客，客常满。
现代文：璘归乡后，建 息园 一座，内有客房，常常客满。
English: After he returned to his hometown, he built a rest home with a guest room, which was often full.

古文：从弟瑮，字英玉，以河南副使归，居园侧一小楼，教授自给。
现代文：璘的堂弟顾王栗，字英玉，任河南副使，归来后住在 息园 旁一小楼内，以教授学生为生。
English: Gong's cousin, Gu Wangguli, nicknamed Yingyu, was a deputy envoy to Henan Province. After returning home, he lived in a small building next to the kindergarten and taught students for a living.

古文：璘时时与客豪饮，伎乐杂作。
现代文：璘时时与客人豪饮、歌乐齐鸣。
English: He is always drinking and singing with his guests.

古文：呼瑮，瑮终不赴，其孤介如此。
现代文：呼参加，王栗不来，可见其孤僻。
English: Call to participate, Wang Li does not come, it can be seen that he is lonely.

古文：初，璘与同里陈沂、王韦，号 金陵三俊 。
现代文：璘与同乡人陈沂、王韦号称 金陵三俊 。
English: He and his fellow townsmen Chen Zhen and Wang Wei are known as the "Three Wise Men of Jinling."

古文：其后宝应朱应登继起，称四大家。
现代文：其后又有宝应的朱应登，并称 四大家 。
English: After that, Zhu Yingden of Baoying also appeared, and called the four of us.

古文：璘诗，矩矱唐人，以风调胜。
现代文：璘之诗仿效唐人，注重情调。
English: Zou's poems imitate the Chinese, focusing on the mood.

古文：韦婉丽多致，颇失纤弱。
现代文：王韦的诗委婉华丽而失于纤弱。
English: Wang Wei's poetry is euphemistic and gorgeous, but it lacks subtlety.

古文：沂与韦同调。
现代文：沂诗与韦相同。
English: The rhyme scheme is the same as Wei's.

古文：应登才思泉涌，落笔千言。
现代文：应登才思如泉涌一般，落笔千言。
English: You should think of yourself as a spring, and write a thousand words.

古文：然璘、应登羽翼李梦阳，而韦、沂则颇持异论。
现代文：璘与应登偏向于李梦阳，而韦、沂则颇不以为然。
English: Zou and Yingden are partial to Li Mengyang, while Wei and Zou are quite unconvinced.

古文：三人者，仕宦皆不及璘。
现代文：沂、韦、应登三人的仕途都不如顾璘。
English: Gong, Wei and Ying are not as good as Gu.

古文：仪真蒋山卿、江都赵鹤亦与璘遥相应和。
现代文：陈沂字鲁南，正德中进士。王韦字钦佩，弘治年间中进士。朱应登字升之，弘治中进士。
English: Chen Xingzhe, surnamed Lunan, was a member of Zhengde Junior High School. Wang Wei, surnamed Zhanpu, was a member of Hongzhi Junior High School. Zhu Ying, surnamed Zhanpu, was a member of Hongzhi Junior High School.

古文：沿及末造，风流未歇云。郑善夫，字继之，闽县人。
现代文：南京自洪武、永乐初以来，文章讲求风雅的气氛不隆，自璘主持词坛以后，士大夫们争相附会风雅，诗的格调大为改观，直到明末还是如此。郑善夫，字继之，闽县人。
English: Since the early days of Hongwu and Yongle in Nanjing, the atmosphere of seeking elegance has not flourished. Since Zou presided over the poetry circle, scholars have been competing to add elegance, and the style of the poem has changed greatly. Until the end of the Ming Dynasty, this was still the case. Zheng Shanfu, the word follows, is a person from Zou County.

古文：弘治十八年进士。
现代文：弘治十八年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of eighteen.

古文：连遭内外艰，正德六年始为户部主事，榷税浒墅，以清操闻。
现代文：由于父母相继逝世，于正德六年才出任户部主事，负责征收浒墅关税，以清廉有节操而闻名。
English: Because his parents died one after another, Yu Zhengde only served as the head of the household department for six years, responsible for the collection of villa tariffs, and was known for his integrity and self-discipline.

古文：时刘瑾虽诛，嬖幸用事。
现代文：太监刘瑾虽诛，但一些受皇帝宠爱的人仍旧当道。
English: Although the eunuch Liu Bei was a scoundrel, some people who were favored by the emperor were still in power.

古文：善夫愤之，乃告归，筑草堂金鳌峰下，为迟清亭，读书其中，曰： 俟天下之清也。 
现代文：善夫愤慨之下，告假还乡。筑草堂于金鳌峰下，题为 迟清亭 ，每日在此读书，声称要 等待天下政治清明 。
English: Under the indignation of the good man, he returned home on leave. Chikusa-do Hall at the foot of Kinpusen Peak, entitled Chiqing Pavilion, read here every day, claiming to wait for the world's politics to be clear.

古文：寡交游，日晏未炊，欣然自得。
现代文：很少与人交游，天晚还未吃饭，却欣然自得。
English: He rarely mingles with people, and even though he hasn't eaten for days and nights, he's happy to indulge himself.

古文：起礼部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：起任礼部主事，进升员外郎。
English: He was appointed as the head of the ceremonial department, and promoted to the position of outside groom.

古文：武宗将南巡，偕同列切谏，杖于廷，罚跪五日。
现代文：武宗要南巡，善夫与同僚急切谏阻，受到皇帝的鞭笞，罚跪五日。
English: When Emperor Wuzong wanted to make a tour to the south, the virtuous man and his colleagues eagerly resisted. They were whipped by the emperor and forced to kneel for five days.

古文：善夫更为疏草，置怀中，属其仆曰： 死即上之。 
现代文：善夫草拟了奏疏藏于怀中，嘱咐仆人说： 我死后，你立即将此奏疏进呈皇帝。 
English: The good man hid the manuscript in his bosom and told his servant: "When I die, you must immediately present this manuscript to the emperor."

古文：幸不死，叹曰： 时事若此，尚可靦颜就列哉！ 
现代文：幸未死，叹息道： 时事如此，还能不顾羞愧而立于朝廷！ 
English: Fortunately, he did not die, he sighed, "Such is the current situation, I can still stand in the imperial court despite my shame!"

古文：乞归未得，明年力请，乃得归。
现代文：于是请求辞职归家，未准。第二年又极力申请，这才获准归家。
English: So he asked to resign and return home, but was not allowed. The following year, he applied again, and was finally allowed to return home.

古文：嘉靖改元，用荐起南京刑部郎中，未上，改吏部。
现代文：嘉靖改元，由人举荐，起任南京刑部郎中，还未上任，又改为吏部郎中。
English: Jiaying was recommended by others to become the vice-minister of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, but before he took office, he was changed to the vice-minister of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：行抵建宁，便道游武夷、九曲，风雪绝粮，得病卒，年三十有九。
现代文：行抵建宁，便道游览武夷、九曲，因风雪受寒又无粮食，患病而逝，年三十九岁。
English: Arrived in Jianning, took a side trip to Wuyi and Jiuqu, suffered from cold and no food due to wind and snow, fell ill and passed away at the age of 39.

古文：原岳，字汝高，亦闽县人，肇淛同年进士，终湖广副使。
现代文：善夫品行端正，七弟妹的婚嫁全由他出资操办；母舅家相继去世二十七人，也都是他予以安葬。所交结者全是名士，其中，与孙一元、殷云霄、方豪尤其友好。
English: He was a virtuous man. He paid for all the weddings of his seven younger brothers and sisters. He also buried the 27 members of his maternal uncle's family who died one after another. All of his acquaintances were celebrities, and he was especially friendly with Sun Yat-yuan, Yin Yunxiao, and Fang Hao.

古文：陆深，字子渊，上海人。
现代文：做诗竭力摹仿杜甫。陆深，字子渊，上海人。
English: He tried his best to imitate Du Fu in his poetry. Lu Sheng, Zi Yuan, Shanghainese.

古文：弘治十八年进士，二甲第一。选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：弘治十八年进士，二甲第一，选庶吉士，授编修。
English: He entered the priesthood in 18th year of Hongzhi, ranked first in 2nd year of Heian period, and was awarded the post of editor-in-chief.

古文：刘瑾嫉翰林官亢己，悉改外，深得南京主事。
现代文：刘瑾嫉妒翰林官高于自己，把他们均改为京外官，深也在内，为南京主事。
English: Liu Bei was jealous of Hanlin's higher rank than his own, so he changed them all to Beijing Foreign Ministers, including Shen Zang, who was in charge of Nanjing.

古文：瑾诛，复职，历国子司业、祭酒，充经筵讲官。
现代文：瑾诛后，深复职，历任国子司业、祭酒，充经筵讲官。
English: After retirement, he was reinstated, and successively served as the secretary of state, the minister of education, the minister of sacrificial wine, and the preacher of the sermon.

古文：奏讲官撰进讲章，阁臣不宜改窜。忤辅臣，谪延平同知。
现代文：他奏请令阁臣不得改窜讲官所撰的经筵讲义，因而得罪了内阁辅臣，被贬为延平同知。
English: He appealed to the cabinet ministers not to change the economic lecture written by the lecturer, which offended the cabinet aides and was relegated to Yanping Tongzhi.

古文：晋山西提学副使，改浙江。累官四川左布政使。
现代文：后晋升山西提学副使，又任浙江提学副使，官至四川左布政使。
English: Later, he was promoted to vice-envoy of Shanxi and vice-envoy of Zhejiang, and then to vice-envoy of Sichuan.

古文：松、茂诸番乱，深主调兵食，有功，赐金币。
现代文：四川松茂地区诸民族反叛，朝廷派兵征讨，深负责调运军饷有功，赐金币。
English: In the Matsumae region of Sichuan, various ethnic groups rebelled, and the imperial court sent soldiers to quell the rebellion. He was deeply responsible for the transfer of troops and awarded gold coins for meritorious service.

古文：嘉靖十六年召为太常卿兼侍读学士。
现代文：嘉靖十六年召回京任太常卿兼侍读学士。
English: In the 16th year of Jiajing, he was called back to Beijing to serve as the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：世宗南巡，深掌行在翰林院印，御笔删侍读二字，进詹事府詹事，致仕。
现代文：世宗南巡，深掌管皇帝行宫翰林院印，皇帝删去 侍读 二字。进升詹事府詹事。
English: The Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection of the Southern Inspection

古文：工书，仿李邕、赵孟頫。
现代文：后退休，死后谥文裕。陆深，年少时与徐祯卿相互切磋，故文章有名。
English: After retirement, after the death of Gong Wenyu. Lu Sheng, when he was young, he and Xu Yuxing exchanged ideas, so the article is famous.

古文：尝鉴博雅，为词臣冠。然颇倨傲，人以此少之。同邑有王圻者，字元翰。
现代文：工于书法，仿李邕、赵孟兆页。然为人颇傲慢，因此，人们对他稍有非议。王圻，字元翰，上海人。
English: He worked in calligraphy, imitating Li Qian and Zhao Meng Zhao. However, he was quite arrogant, so people criticized him a little. Wang Qian, Zhiyuan Han, from Shanghai.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。除清江知县，调万安。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年进士，授清江知县，调万安知县。
English: In the 44th year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, awarded Qing Jiangchi County and transferred to Wan'an Chixian County.

古文：擢御史，忤时相，出为福建按察佥事，谪邛州判官。
现代文：升为御史，与当政宰相不和，出京为福建按察佥事，又贬为邛州判官。
English: He was promoted to imperial historian, fell out with the current prime minister, went to Beijing to investigate Fujian affairs, and was demoted to judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：两知进贤、曹县，迁开州知州。
现代文：历任进贤、曹县两县知县，开州知州，官至陕西布政参议。
English: Successive officials of Jinxian, Cao County, two counties of Zhixian, Kaizhou Zhizhou, and officials from Shaanxi have been appointed as political advisors.

古文：历官陕西布政参议，乞养归，筑室淞江之滨，种梅万树，目曰梅花源。
现代文：奏请归家奉养父母，在淞江边筑一室，环室种梅树万棵，命名为 梅花源 。
English: So please return home to support your parents, build a room on the edge of the Li River, and plant thousands of plum trees around the room, and name it the source of plum blossoms.

古文：以著书为事，年逾耄耋，犹篝灯帐中，丙夜不辍。
现代文：以著书为业，虽年过七十，仍日夜著书不停，直至三更。
English: Although he is in his seventies, he continues to write books day and night until he is in his thirties.

古文：所撰《续文献通考》诸书行世。
现代文：所撰《续文献通考》，此书流行于世。
English: His book "Continuous Literature Survey" is popular all over the world.

古文：初，圻以奏议为赵贞吉所推。
现代文：原先，圻因奏议为赵贞吉推崇。
English: In the past, Zhao Zhengyi was highly respected because of his proclamation.

古文：张居正与贞吉交恶，讽圻攻之，不应。
现代文：张居正与贞吉有积怨，暗示圻攻击贞吉，圻不从。
English: Zhang Juzheng had a grudge with Zhengyi, suggesting that he attacked Zhengyi, but Zhengyi did not comply.

古文：高拱为圻座主，时方修隙徐阶，又以圻为私其乡人不助己，不能无恚，遂摭拾之。
现代文：高拱是圻中进士的主考官，与徐阶不和，认为圻是徐阶的同乡，偏袒他而不帮助自己，对圻心怀怨恨，伺机报复。
English: Gao Gong was the chief examiner of the students of the middle school in Handan. He did not get along with Xu Jiaru. He thought that Handan was a fellow villager of Xu Jiaru. He favored him and did not help himself. He harbored resentment against Handan and waited for an opportunity to take revenge.

古文：王廷陈，字穉钦，黄冈人。
现代文：王廷陈，字穉钦，黄冈人。
English: Wang Ting Chen, Ziyu Qin, Huanggang people.

古文：父济，吏部郎中。
现代文：父济，曾任吏部郎中。
English: His father, Kazuchika, was a junior official in the Ministry of Justice.

古文：廷陈颖慧绝人，幼好弄，父抶之，辄大呼曰： 大人奈何虐天下名士！ 
现代文：廷陈自幼聪慧超人，但好玩耍，父亲打他，他大呼道 ：大人为何虐待天下名士！ 
English: Since childhood, Ting Chen has been an intelligent superman, but he likes to play. When his father beat him, he cried out: Why do adults mistreat the world's celebrities?

古文：武宗下诏南巡，与同馆舒芬等七人将疏谏，馆师石珤力止之。
现代文：正德十二年进士，选为庶吉士，更加有才华而放纵不羁。武宗下诏南巡，廷陈与同馆舒芬等七人准备上疏劝阻，为馆师石王缶极力制止。
English: In the 12th year of Zhengde's reign, he was promoted to the rank of a scholar, and was selected as an associate of Guizhi. He was more talented and indulgent. During the Southern Inspection of Emperor Wu, seven people including Ding Chen and fellow scholar Shu Fen were prepared to dissuade him from entering the fraternity, and he tried his best to stop it for the scholar Shi Wang Can.

古文：廷陈赋《乌母谣》，大书于壁以刺，珤及执政皆不悦。
现代文：廷陈做《乌母谣》写在墙壁上进行讽刺，王缶及当政者都不高兴。
English: When Ting Chen satirized the Wu Mu Song by writing it on the wall, Wang Can and the politicians were not happy.

古文：已而疏上，帝怒，罚跪五日，杖于廷。
现代文：随后仍上疏，武宗大怒，施行廷杖，罚跪五日。
English: Subsequently, he still went up, and Emperor Wuzong was furious, imposed the imperial scepter, and punished him to kneel for five days.

古文：时已改吏科给事中，乃出为裕州知州。
现代文：这时他改任吏科给事中，因此事而出京为裕州知州。
English: At this time, he was transferred to the position of a clerk in charge of affairs, so he left Beijing for Yuzhou Chizhou.

古文：廷陈不习为吏，又失职怨望，簿牒堆案，漫不省视。
现代文：廷陈本来就不好好学习如何做官，加上因失职而受到谴责，文书档案堆满一桌，不去审阅。
English: Ting Chen was not good at learning how to be an official. In addition, he was reprimanded for dereliction of duty. The paperwork files were piled up on a table, and he did not review them.

古文：夏日裸跣坐堂皇，见飞鸟集庭树，辄止讼者，取弹弹之。
现代文：夏天赤脚坐在公堂上审案，见飞鸟集中栖息在庭内树上，他立即叫控告人停止起诉，自己取弹子去打鸟。
English: Sitting barefoot in the courtroom in the summer to hear a case, he saw a concentration of birds roosting in the trees in the courtyard. He immediately told the plaintiff to stop the prosecution and take a marble to hit the birds himself.

古文：上官行部，不出迎。
现代文：上官到他这地方来，他不去迎接。
English: When superior officers come to his place, he does not go to meet them.

古文：已而布政使陈凤梧及巡按御史喻茂坚先后至，廷陈以凤梧座主，特出迓。
现代文：布政使陈凤梧及巡按御史喻茂坚来到他所管辖的裕州。因为凤梧是他考进士的主考官，所以特意出迎。
English: The Bu government sent Chen Fengwu and the inspector-general of history Yu Maojian to Yuzhou, which was under his jurisdiction. Since Fengwu was the chief examiner of his entrance examination, he made a special visit to welcome him.

古文：凤梧好谓曰： 子候我固善，御史即来，候之当倍谨。 
现代文：凤梧嘱咐他： 你待我固然好，御史即刻就来，你更应要加倍谨慎迎候。 
English: Feng Wu instructed him: Although you have treated me well, the Emperor will come immediately, and you should be doubly cautious in welcoming him.

古文：廷陈许诺。
现代文：廷陈点头答应了。
English: Ting Chen nodded and agreed.

古文：及茂坚至，衔其素骄蹇，有意裁抑之，以小过榜州吏。
现代文：御史喻茂坚对廷陈平素来傲慢非常不满，有意压压他的威风，到来时借一桩小事鞭打州吏。
English: Grand Historian Shujian was very dissatisfied with the arrogance of Emperor Qianping, and intended to suppress his authority. When he arrived, he used a small matter to whip the state officials.

古文：廷陈为跪请，茂坚故益甚。
现代文：廷陈为其属吏下跪求情，茂坚更加厉害。
English: Ting Chen kneeled down to plead for his subordinate officers, and Maojian was even more powerful.

古文：廷陈大骂曰： 陈公误我。 
现代文：廷陈大骂： 陈公害苦了我！ 
English: Ting Chen cursed loudly: Chen Gong has hurt me!

古文：直上堂搏茂坚，悉呼吏卒出，锁其门，禁绝供亿，且将具奏。
现代文：便径直上堂去把茂坚揪下来锁在公堂内，不给他饮食，并准备报告上级。
English: He then went straight to the court to pin down and lock up Mao Jian in the courtroom, denying him food and drink, and prepared to report to his superiors.

古文：茂坚大窘，凤梧为解，乃夜驰去。
现代文：茂坚狼狈不堪，凤梧从中调解，茂坚连夜逃走。
English: Maojian was overwhelmed, Fengwu mediated, and Maojian fled overnight.

古文：寻上疏劾之，适裕人被案者逸出，奏廷陈不法事，收捕系狱，削籍归。
现代文：不久，茂坚上章弹劾廷陈，恰巧裕州有个要逮捕归案的人跑了，更是弹劾廷陈违法，将他逮捕下狱，削官归乡。
English: Not long after, Mao Jian's superior general impeached Ting Chen. It just so happened that a person in Yuzhou who was to be arrested ran away. Moreover, impeaching Ting Chen was against the law, and he was arrested and sent to prison. He was demoted and returned to his hometown.

古文：世宗践阼，前直谏被谪者悉复官，独廷陈以畦吏议不与。
现代文：世宗即位，以前因直言亟谏而被贬谪的人都复了官，唯独廷陈例外。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and all those who had previously been demoted for their outspokenness were reinstated, with the sole exception of Ting Chen.

古文：屏居二十余年，嗜酒纵倡乐，益自放废。士大夫造谒，多蓬发赤足，不具宾主礼。
现代文：廷陈隐居二十余年，每日嗜酒作乐，更加颓废，士大夫登门看他，他常常是蓬头赤足，不行宾主之礼。
English: Ting Chen lived in seclusion for more than 20 years. He drank and partied every day, and became even more decadent. The sheriff came to see him. He was often barefoot, and did not do the host's bidding.

古文：时衣红紫窄袖衫，骑牛跨马，啸歌田野间。
现代文：时常穿着红紫窄袖衣衫，骑牛跨马，大声歌唱于田野间。
English: They often wear red and purple narrow-sleeved shirts, ride bulls across horses, and sing loudly in the fields.

古文：嘉靖十八年诏修《承天大志》，巡抚顾璘以廷陈及颜木、王格荐。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，诏修《承天大志》，巡抚顾王举荐廷陈和颜木、王格参与。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial edict was issued to revise the "History of Heaven and Earth," and the governor Gu Wang recommended the participation of Ting Chen, Yan Mu and Wang Ge.

古文：木，应山人，官亳州知州。
现代文：书修成，皇帝不满意，仅赐银币而已。
English: The emperor was not satisfied with the revision of the book, and only gave him a silver coin.

古文：格，京山人，官河南佥事。李濂，字川父，祥符人。
现代文：廷陈才高，诗文为当时所重视，一般才士很少有超过他的。李濂，字川父，祥符人。
English: Ting Chen was highly talented. Poetry was valued at the time, and it was rare for an ordinary talented person to surpass him. Li Qian, father of Zechuan, was from Xiangfu.

古文：举正德八年乡试第一，明年成进士。
现代文：正德八年乡试第一名，第二年中进士。
English: Zhengde won the first place in the eight-year township examination, and was promoted to a scholar in the second year.

古文：授沔阳知州，稍迁宁波同知，擢山西佥事。
现代文：授沔阳知州，不久调为宁波同知，又升山西佥事。
English: He was awarded the title of Yangchizhou, and was soon transferred to Ningbo Tongzhi, and then to Shanxi Tongzhi.

古文：嘉靖五年以大计免归，年才三十有八。
现代文：嘉靖五年因考核地方官吏而被免职归家。这时不过三十八岁。
English: In the fifth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was dismissed from his post and returned home due to the assessment of local officials. At that time, he was only 38 years old.

古文：濂少负俊才，时从侠少年联骑出城，搏兽射雉，酒酣悲歌，慨然慕信陵君、侯生之为人。
现代文：李濂年少自负有俊才，常随同一些侠少年骑马出城打猎，酒酣则慷慨悲歌。他很仰慕信陵君、侯生之为人。
English: At a young age, Li Yao was proud of his talent. He often went out hunting on horseback with a group of young knights. He was a generous drinker of sad songs. He greatly admired Xinlingjun and Hou Shengxing.

古文：一日作《理情赋》，友人左国玑持以示李梦阳，梦阳大嗟赏，访之吹台，濂自此声驰河、雒间。
现代文：著有《理情赋》，友人左国玑拿去给李梦阳看，梦阳十分叹赏，于吹台访到了他。从此，濂声名远及河名隹之间。
English: His friend, Zuo Guozhen, took him to see Li Mengyang, the author of "Fu of Reason," and Mengyang was so impressed that he visited him in Huidai. From then on, Zou's fame spread far and wide, even to Hebei Zou.

古文：既罢归，益肆力于学，遂以古文名于时。
现代文：罢官归家后，更加努力于学，以能写古文而闻名于世。
English: After returning home, he put more effort into his studies and became famous for being able to write ancient texts.

古文：初受知梦阳，后不屑附和。
现代文：最初受到李梦阳的赏识，后来他不屑于附和梦阳。
English: Initially appreciated by Li Mengyang, he later disdained to follow Mengyang.

古文：里居四十余年，著述甚富。
现代文：在家住四十年，著作很多。
English: He lived at home for forty years and wrote many books.

