古文：公孙丑问曰： 夫子加齐之卿相，得行道焉，虽由此霸王不异矣。
现代文：公孙丑问： 老师您要是担任齐国的卿相，能实现自己的抱负，即使成就霸业和王业，也不足为怪。
English: Gongsun Qiu asked, "Teacher, if you serve as the prime minister of Qi, it is not surprising that you can achieve your ambitions, even if you achieve hegemony and kingship.

古文：如此，则动心否乎？ 
现代文：如果这样，您会动心吗？ 
English: If so, would you be interested?

古文：孟子曰： 否。我四十不动心。 
现代文：孟子说： 不会，我四十岁后就不动心了。 
English: Mencius said, "No, I won't be interested after I'm forty.

古文：曰： 若是，则夫子过孟贲远矣。 
现代文：公孙丑说： 若是这样，先生比孟贲要强多了。 
English: Gongsun Yushi said, "In that case, my master is much stronger than Meng Yao."

古文：曰： 是不难，告子先我不动心。 
现代文：孟子说： 做到这个并不难，告子不动心比我还要早。 
English: Mencius said, "It's not difficult to do this. The disciple's lack of enthusiasm is even earlier than mine.

古文：曰： 不动心有道乎？ 
现代文：公孙丑问： 做到不动心有什么方法吗？ 
English: Public Grandson Ugly asked: Is there any way to achieve immobility?

古文：曰： 有。北宫黝之养勇也，不肤桡，不目逃，思以一豪挫于人，若挞之于市朝。
现代文：孟子说： 有，北宫黝培养勇气的方法是：肌肤被刺破而不退缩，眼睛被刺不转睛，若是有一根毫毛被别人伤害，也觉得犹如在广庭大众下遭到鞭打一样。
English: Mencius said: Yes, Bei Gongjun's method of cultivating courage is: the skin is pierced without flinching, the eyes are pierced without turning a blind eye, and if a single hair is injured by others, it feels like being whipped in front of a large audience.

古文：不受于褐宽博，亦不受于万乘之君。视刺万乘之君，若刺褐夫。无严诸侯。恶声至，必反之。
现代文：他既不愿受普通平民的侮辱，也不愿受大国君主的侮辱；把刺杀大国君主看作如同刺杀普通平民一样；他不尊敬诸侯，受到辱骂必然要骂回去。
English: He did not want to be insulted either by ordinary civilians or by the monarchs of great powers; he regarded the assassination of the monarchs of great powers as the same as the assassination of ordinary civilians; he did not respect the princes, and if he was insulted, he would inevitably insult them back.

古文：孟施舍之所养勇也，曰： 视不胜犹胜也。量敌而后进，虑胜而后会，是畏三军者也。
现代文：孟施舍培养勇气的方法又不同，他说： 我对待不能战胜的敌人和对待能够战胜的敌人一样，如果估量敌方的强弱而后前进，思虑胜败后才交锋，就是害怕敌方的三军。
English: Meng Shixia's method of cultivating courage is different. He said: I treat the invincible enemy and the enemy who can be defeated in the same way. If you assess the strength and weakness of the enemy and then advance, and only fight after thinking about victory and defeat, you are afraid of the enemy's three armies.

古文：舍岂能为必胜哉？
现代文：我怎么能因为必胜才战斗？
English: How can I fight because I want to win?

古文：能无惧而已矣。 
现代文：我只是无所畏惧罢了。 
English: I'm just fearless.

古文：孟施舍似曾子，北宫黝似子夏。
现代文：孟施舍像曾子，北宫黝像子夏。
English: Meng Shishe as Zeng Zi, Bei Gong Zou as Zixia.

古文：夫二子之勇，未知其孰贤，然而孟施舍守约也。
现代文：这两个人的勇气，我也不知道谁更好些，但孟施舍的方法较为简约。
English: The courage of these two people, I don't know who is better, but Meng's method of giving alms is more concise.

古文：昔者曾子谓子襄曰： 子好勇乎？
现代文：从前曾子告诉子襄说 你崇尚勇敢吗？
English: Once upon a time, Zeng Zi told Zi Xiang, "Do you believe in being brave?

古文：吾尝闻大勇于夫子矣：自反而不缩，虽褐宽博，吾不惴焉；自反而缩，虽千万人，吾往矣。 
现代文：我曾经听我的老师孔子谈论过关于大勇的论述：反躬自问而觉理亏，哪怕对方是平民，也不能去恐吓；反躬自问而觉理直，即使面对千军万马，我也毫不退缩，勇往直前。 
English: I once heard my teacher, Confucius, talk about the discourse of great courage: I ask myself and feel the loss of reason, even if the other party is a civilian, I cannot intimidate; I ask myself and feel the truth, even in the face of thousands of soldiers, I do not flinch, I go forward.

古文：孟施舍之守气，又不如曾子之守约也。 
现代文：孟施舍保持无所畏惧的勇气，这又不如曾子所守的原则来得简约。 
English: Meng Shizhe maintained fearless courage, which is not as simple as the principle of Zengzi.

古文：曰： 敢问夫子之不动心，与告子之不动心，可得闻与？ 
现代文：公孙丑说： 请问先生的不动心与告子的不动心，可以说给我听听吗？ 
English: Gongsun Yushi said, "I'd like to ask you about your husband's lack of emotion and your son-in-law's lack of emotion. Can you tell me what you heard?

古文： 告子曰： 不得于言，勿求于心；不得于心，勿求于气。 
现代文：孟子说： 告子说： 不懂得对方的语言，就无法理解对方的心思；不理解对方的心思，就无法理解对方的意气。 
English: Mencius said: Gu Zi said: If you don't understand the other person's language, you can't understand the other person's mind; if you don't understand the other person's mind, you can't understand the other person's spirit.

古文：不得于心，勿求于气，可；不得于言，勿求于心，不可。
现代文：不理解对方的心思，就无法理解对方的意气，是可以的；不懂得对方的语言，就无法理解对方的心思，就不可以了。
English: If you don't understand the other person's mind, you can't understand the other person's spirit, and that's okay; if you don't understand the other person's language, you can't understand the other person's mind, and that's not okay.

古文：夫志，气之帅也；气，体之充也。
现代文：人的意志，乃是人的意气的主帅，人的意气，是充满人体内的巨大的精神力量。
English: The human will is the master of the human spirit, and the human spirit is a great spiritual force that fills the human body.

古文：夫志至焉，气次焉。
现代文：意志确立了方向，意气就会跟随。
English: When the will establishes a direction, the spirit will follow.

古文：故曰： 持其志，无暴其气。  
现代文：所以说： 保持自己的意志，不要糟蹋自己的意气。  
English: Therefore, he said, "Maintain your own will, and do not squander your own spirit."

古文： 既曰 志至焉，气次焉 ，又曰 持其志无暴其气 者，何也？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 您既然说： 志到哪里，气也随之到哪里。 又说： 保持自己的意志，不要滥用自己的意气。 这是为什么呢？ 
English: Gongsunushi asked again, "Since you said, 'Wherever one's aspiration goes, one's qi also goes with it,' and also said, 'Maintain one's own will and do not abuse one's spirit,' why is that?"

古文：曰： 志壹则动气，气壹则动志也。今夫蹶者趋者，是气也，而反动其心。 
现代文：孟子说： 意志专一则会使意气转移，意气专一又会使意志摇摆，现在看那些倒行逆施、趋炎附势的人，正是因为意气用事影响了他们的心志。 
English: Mencius said: The single-mindedness of the will will cause the transfer of the spirit, and the single-mindedness of the spirit will cause the will to swing. Now look at those who are going backwards, inflaming and gaining momentum, precisely because the spirit has influenced their minds.

古文： 敢问夫子恶乎长？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 请问先生擅长什么呢？ 
English: Grandson Ugly asked again: What is Mr. Ugly good at?

古文：曰： 我知言，我善养吾浩然之气。 
现代文：孟子说： 我善于分析了解别人的言辞，我善于培养我的浩然之气。 
English: Mencius said: I am good at analyzing and understanding other people's words, and I am good at cultivating my magnanimous spirit.

古文： 敢问何谓浩然之气？ 
现代文：公孙丑说： 我想再请问一下什么叫做浩然之气？ 
English: Public Grandson Ugly said: I would like to ask you again, what is called a great spirit?

古文：曰： 难言也。其为气也，至大至刚，以直养而无害，则塞于天地之间。
现代文：孟子说： 这很难说清楚，它作为一种气，是最伟大、最刚强，用正直去培养它而不损害它，那就会充满于天地之间。
English: Mencius said, "It is difficult to explain. As a kind of qi, it is the greatest and strongest. Cultivate it with honesty without damaging it, and it will fill the space between heaven and earth."

古文：其为气也，配义与道；无是，馁也。
现代文：这种气，要配上最佳行为方式和正常的道路，如果不是，就会泄气。
English: This energy must be matched with the best behavior and the normal path, otherwise it will be discouraged.

古文：是集义所生者，非义袭而取之也。行有不慊于心，则馁矣。
现代文：它是集聚最佳行为方式在心中所生起的，不是凭偶然的最佳行为方式所能获取的。行为中有不满足于心的，就会泄气。
English: It is the accumulation of the best behavior that arises in the mind, not the accidental acquisition of the best behavior. If the behavior does not satisfy the mind, it will be discouraged.

古文：我故曰，告子未尝知义，以其外之也。
现代文：所以我说，告子不一定知道最佳的行为方式，因为他把义看作是外在的东西。
English: That's why I said that the teller doesn't necessarily know the best way to behave, because he sees righteousness as something external.

古文：必有事焉而勿正，心勿忘，勿助长也。
现代文：如果有事情必然要发生，先不要去纠正，心里面不要忘记它，不要去助长它。
English: If something is bound to happen, don't correct it first, don't forget it in your heart, and don't encourage it.

古文：无若宋人然：宋人有闵其苗之不长而揠之者，芒芒然归。谓其人曰： 今日病矣，予助苗长矣。 
现代文：千万不要像宋国人那样，宋国有个人担心他的禾苗长不快而把禾苗拔高，累了一天回家，告诉家里人说： 今天我太担忧，所以帮助禾苗长高了。 
English: Don't be like the Song people, who worried about the growth of their seedlings and pulled them up. Tired, they went home one day and told their families, "I was too worried today, so I helped the seedlings grow taller."

古文：其子趋而往视之，苗则槁矣。
现代文：他的儿子赶快跑去一看，禾苗都枯萎了。
English: His son quickly ran to check and saw that all the seedlings had withered.

古文：天下之不助苗长者寡矣。
现代文：天下不拔苗助长的人太少了。
English: There are too few people in the world who do not help grow seedlings.

古文：以为无益而舍之者，不耘苗者也；助之长者，揠苗者也。非徒无益，而又害之。 
现代文：以为没有什么益处而放弃的人，就是不锄草松土的懒汉；帮助禾苗快速成长的人，就是拔苗助长的人；他们这样做，不但没有什么好处，反而会伤害事情的发展。 
English: Those who give up thinking that there is no benefit are lazy people who do not weed the loose soil; those who help the seedlings grow quickly are those who pull the seedlings; they do not do any good, but will hurt the development of things.

古文： 何谓知言？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 什么叫作善于分析了解别人的言辞呢？ 
English: Gongsun ugly also asked: What is good at analyzing and understanding other people's words?

古文：曰： 诐辞知其所蔽，淫辞知其所陷，邪辞知其所离，遁辞知其所穷。
现代文：孟子说： 听了偏颇不正的言辞就知道其有所隐蔽，听了夸大的言辞就知道其有所沉溺，听了邪恶的言辞就知道其有所偏离，听了搪塞的言辞就知道其有所困穷。
English: Mencius said, "If you listen to biased and improper speech, you will know that it is hidden; if you listen to exaggerated speech, you will know that it is indulgent; if you listen to evil speech, you will know that it is deviant; if you listen to evasive speech, you will know that it is impoverished.

古文：生于其心，害于其政；发于其政，害于其事。
现代文：这是从心里产生，而危害到政务；如果萌发于政务，就会妨害事情的办理。
English: This arises from the heart and harms government affairs; if it originates in government affairs, it will interfere with the handling of affairs.

古文：圣人复起，必从吾言矣。 
现代文：如果再有圣人出现，也会同意我这个见解的。 
English: If another saint were to appear, he would agree with me.

古文： 宰我、子贡善为说辞，冉牛、闵子、颜渊善言德行。
现代文：公孙丑又问： 宰我、子贡善于言辞，冉牛、闵子、颜渊善于阐述规律的变化。
English: Gongsun ugly also asked: Zhai me, Zigong are good at words, Ran Niu, Zang Zi, Yan Yuan are good at explaining the changes in the law.

古文：孔子兼之，曰： 我于辞命则不能也。 
现代文：孔子则都有，可他还是说： 我对于辞令，是不擅长的。 
English: Confucius had both, but he still said: I am not good at rhetoric.

古文：然则夫子既圣矣乎？ 
现代文：那么先生已经是圣人了吗？ 
English: So is my husband already a saint?

古文：曰： 恶！是何言也？
现代文：孟子说： 唉呀，这是什么话？
English: Mencius said, "Alas, what is this saying?

古文：昔者子贡，问于孔子曰： 夫子圣矣乎？ 
现代文：从前子贡向孔子问道： 先生是圣人吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, Zigong asked Confucius: Is my teacher a saint?

古文：孔子曰： 圣则吾不能，我学不厌而教不倦也。 
现代文：孔子说： 圣人那是我做不到的，我能做到的只是学习感到满足、教人不知道疲惫罢了。 
English: Confucius said, "Sage, I can't do that. All I can do is learn to be satisfied and teach people not to be tired."

古文：子贡曰： 学不厌，智也；教不倦，仁也。
现代文：子贡说： 学习上不满足，是智慧；教育上不怠倦，是仁的表现。
English: Zigong said: Not being satisfied in learning is wisdom; not being tireless in education is a manifestation of benevolence.

古文：仁且智，夫子既圣矣！ 
现代文：既有爱又有智，先生就是圣人了。 
English: With both love and wisdom, my teacher is a saint.

古文：夫圣，孔子不居，是何言也？ 
现代文：那圣人，孔子都不敢自居，你这是什么话？ 
English: That sage, Confucius, did not dare to present himself as such. What are you saying?

古文： 昔者窃闻之：子夏、子游、子张皆有圣人之一体，冉牛、闵子、颜渊则具体而微。
现代文：公孙丑又问： 从前我听说，子夏、子游、子张都各有孔圣人的一方面的长处，冉牛、闵子、颜渊则学得很具体，请问先生您属于哪一种？ 
English: Gongsun Yuxi also asked: I once heard that Zixia, Ziyu and Zizhang all have the strengths of a sage, while Ran Niu, Zizi and Yan Yuan are very specific. Which one do you belong to, sir?

古文：敢问所安。 
现代文：孟子说： 暂时不谈这些吧。 
English: Mencius said: Let's not talk about this for the time being.

古文：曰： 姑舍是。 曰： 伯夷、伊尹何如？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 伯夷、伊尹这两个人怎么样？ 
English: The ugly grandson also asked: How are Bo Yi and Yi Yin?

古文：曰： 不同道。
现代文：孟子说： 他们处世之道不同。
English: Mencius said: Their way of dealing with the world is different.

古文：非其君不事，非其民不使；治则进，乱则退，伯夷也。
现代文：不是他认可的君主不侍奉，不是他认可的民众不使唤，世道太平就出来做官，世道昏乱便退而隐居，这是伯夷的处世态度。
English: It's not that the monarchs he approves of don't serve, it's not that the people he approves of don't work, it's not that the world is so peaceful that they come out to work as officials, it's that the world is so chaotic that they retreat into seclusion. This is Bo Yi's attitude to life.

古文：何事非君，何使非民；治亦进，乱亦进，伊尹也。
现代文：任何君主都侍奉，任何人民都使唤，国家能治理也上进，国家混乱亦上进，这就是伊尹。
English: Any monarch will serve, any people will serve, the ability to govern the country will advance, and the chaos of the country will advance. This is Yi Yin.

古文：可以仕则仕，可以止则止，可以久则久，可以速则速，孔子也。
现代文：可以出仕就出仕，可以退避就退避，能长久干就长久干，能迅速果断就迅速果断，这就是孔子。
English: If you can serve, then serve; if you can avoid, then avoid; if you can work for a long time, then work for a long time; if you can be quick and decisive, then be quick and decisive. This is Confucius.

古文：皆古圣人也，吾未能有行焉；乃所愿，则学孔子也。 
现代文：他们都是古代的圣人，我没有能做到他们那样；至于我所愿望的，则是向孔子学习。 
English: They are all ancient sages, and I have not been able to do what they did; as far as I am concerned, I want to learn from Confucius.

古文： 伯夷、伊尹于孔子，若是班乎？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 伯夷、伊尹能与孔子相提并论吗？ 
English: Gongsunushi also asked: Can Bo Yi and Yi Yin be compared to Confucius?

古文：曰： 否。自有生民以来，未有孔子也。 
现代文：孟子说： 不，自有人类以来，没有比得上孔子的。 
English: Mencius said, "No, since the beginning of mankind, there has been no one like Confucius.

古文：曰： 然则有同与？ 曰： 有。
现代文：公孙丑说： 那么，他们之间有相同的地方吗？ 孟子说： 有得。
English: Gongsun Ug said, "So, is there a similarity between them?" Mencius said, "Yes, there is."

古文：得百里之地而君之，皆能以朝诸侯有天下。行一不义、杀一不辜而得天下，皆不为也。
现代文：得到方圆百里的土地而统治之，他们都能使诸侯来朝见，使天下统一；要他们做一件不合道理的事、杀一个无辜的人来得到天下，他们都不会干。
English: If they get a hundred-mile-square land and rule it, they can make the princes come to the imperial court and unify the world; if they are asked to do an unreasonable thing, to kill an innocent person to gain the world, they will not do it.

古文：是则同。 
现代文：这就是他们的共同之处。 
English: That's what they have in common.

古文：曰： 敢问其所以异？ 
现代文：公孙丑又问： 那他们之间不同的地方呢？ 
English: Ugly Grandson asked again: What are the differences between them?

古文：曰： 宰我、子贡、有若智足以知圣人。汙，不至阿其所好。
现代文：孟子说： 宰我、子贡、有若，他们的智谋足以了解圣人，他们再卑劣也不至于阿谀奉承。
English: Mencius said, "Kill me, Ziguang, and Arubao, their wisdom is enough to understand the saints, and they are no longer despicable to flatter.

古文：宰我曰： 以予观于夫子，贤于尧舜远矣。 
现代文：宰我说： 依我来观察孔夫子，其贤能超过尧、舜很多了。 
English: Zai said to me, "According to my observation of Confucius, his ability is much greater than that of Xing and Yao.

古文：子贡曰： 见其礼而知其政，闻其乐而知其德。由百世之后，等百世之王，莫之能违也。
现代文：子贡说： 见其外表就知道其政务如何，听到其音乐就知道其君施政的规律，即使从百世之后来评价这百世之中的君王，没有一个能违背孔子的主张。
English: Zigong said: You can see his appearance to know how his government works, and you can hear his music to know the rules of his reign. Even if you evaluate the kings in this century from a hundred years later, none of them can contradict Confucius's proposition.

古文：自生民以来，未有夫子也。 
现代文：自有人类以来，就没有比得上孔子的人。 
English: Since the dawn of mankind, there has been no one comparable to Confucius.

古文：有若曰： 岂惟民哉？
现代文：有若说： 难道只有民众有高下之分吗？
English: If someone were to say: Is it only the people who are superior and inferior?

古文：麒麟之于走兽，凤凰之于飞鸟，太山之于丘垤，河海之于行潦，类也。
现代文：麒麟比于走兽，凤凰比于飞鸟，泰山比于土堆，河海比于水塘，都是同类。
English: The unicorn is the same as the beast, the phoenix is the same as the bird, Mount Tai is the same as the mound, and the river and the sea are the same as the pond.

古文：圣人之于民，亦类也。
现代文：圣人比于民众，也是同类。
English: The saints are of the same kind as the people.

古文：出于其类，拔乎其萃，自生民以来，未有盛于孔子也。  
现代文：但却远远地超过了他的同类，大大高出他的同类，自有人类以来，没有谁比孔子更负有盛名的了。  
English: However, he was far ahead of his peers, much higher than his peers. Since the dawn of mankind, no one has been more famous than Confucius.

