古文：东海孝子郭纯丧母，每哭则群鸟大集。
现代文：原文有个名叫郭纯的东海孝子，他母亲过世后，每当他思母号哭，他家庭院的上空就有大批的飞鸟聚集，一时传为奇谈。
English: There was a filial son of the East China Sea named Guo Chun. After his mother's death, whenever he thought of his mother and cried, a large number of birds gathered in the sky over his family yard. It was rumored for a while.

古文：使检有实，旌表门闾。
现代文：官府派员调查发觉确有此事，于是奏请皇帝，在闾门立旌旗表扬。
English: The government sent an official to investigate and found that this was indeed the case, so they petitioned the emperor to raise a banner of praise at the gate.

古文：复讯，乃是每哭即撒饼于地，群鸟争来食之。其后数数如此，鸟闻哭声，莫不竞凑，非有灵也。
现代文：后来，有人一再追查孝子飞鸟群聚的原因，原来是孝子每次号哭时，就把饼散撒在地上，飞鸟就争相来食，每次都如此，日后，飞鸟一听哭声，就群聚盘旋在他家庭院上空，并非是飞鸟有灵性，被孝子所感动。
English: Later, someone repeatedly investigated the reason for the flocks of birds gathering around the filial son. It turned out that every time the filial son cried, he would scatter the bread on the ground, and the birds would scramble to eat. This happened every time. In the future, as soon as the birds heard the cries, they would gather and hover over his courtyard. It was not that the birds had spirituality and were moved by the filial son.

古文：河东孝子王燧家猫、犬互乳，其子言之州县，遂蒙旌表。
现代文：河东孝子王燧的家里，所饲养的猫狗，竟然猫哺犬子，犬育猫儿，官府听闻此事，也赐旌旗表扬。
English: When the government heard about the cats and dogs that were raised in the home of the filial son of the East River, Wang Xi, the cats were actually nursing the puppies, and the dogs were raising the cats. The government also gave the flag of praise.

古文：讯之，乃是猫、犬同时产子，取其子互置窠中，饮其乳惯，遂以为常。
现代文：问及王燧，原来是猫狗同时产子，家人互调其子，日久也就哺育习惯了。
English: When asked about Wang Yao, it turned out that the cat and the dog gave birth at the same time, and the family members switched their children, and they got used to breastfeeding.

古文：田单妙计，可惜小用。
现代文：这原本是齐人田单欺骗燕人的计谋，用来欺骗乡民，实在是小用了。
English: This was originally a trick of Qi Ren Tian Shan to deceive Yan people, and it was used to deceive the villagers. It was really of little use.

古文：然撒饼亦资冥福，称孝可矣!
现代文：然而撒饼喂鸟也算是行善事、积阴德，就这点看，也还可以称孝子。
English: However, scattering bread and feeding birds is also considered to be a good deed, accumulating virtue, and from this point of view, it can also be called filial piety.

