古文：晋文公解曹地以分诸侯。
现代文：晋文公削减曹国的封地，将其分给各诸侯国。
English: Emperor Jinwen reduced Cao's fiefs and distributed them to various provinces.

古文：僖公使臧文仲往，宿于重馆，重馆人告曰： 晋始伯而欲固诸侯，故解有罪之地以分诸侯。
现代文：鲁僖公派臧文仲前去受领，途中住在重邑的馆舍。馆舍的看守人对他说： 晋国刚刚称霸，想加固诸侯对它的信服，所以削减得罪霸主的曹国土地分给给个诸侯。
English: Lu Yao sent Yao Wenzhong to receive it, and on the way he stayed at a guesthouse in Chongyi. The caretaker of the guesthouse said to him, "Jin State has just gained supremacy, and in order to strengthen the confidence of the lords, the land of Cao State, which offended the overlord, was reduced and given to a lord.

古文：诸侯莫不望分而欲亲晋，皆将争先；晋不以固班，亦必亲先者，吾子不可以不速行。
现代文：诸侯无不希望分到土地，一定会争先恐后地亲近晋国。晋国未必按照诸侯间原来的等级次序来分配，一定会给先去的人占便宜，您不能不火速前去。
English: All the lords want to get their hands on the land, so they will be scrambling to get close to Jin. Jin may not be distributed according to the original hierarchy among the lords, but it will be advantageous to those who go first. You can't go without haste.

古文：鲁之班长而又先，诸侯其谁望之？
现代文：鲁国按等级次序本来就排在前面，又抢先到达，诸侯谁还敢企望同鲁国相比呢？
English: According to the hierarchical order, the state of Lu was originally in the front row and arrived first. Who would dare to compare with the state of Lu?

古文：若少安，恐无及也。 
现代文：倘若您稍稍歇息，恐怕就失去机会了。 
English: If you take a short break, you might miss your chance.

古文：从之，获地于诸侯为多。
现代文：文仲听从了看守人的建议，果然在诸侯中所分得的土地最多。
English: Wenzhong listened to the suggestion of the warden, and as expected, he received the most land among the princes.

古文：反，既复命，为之请曰： 地之多也，重馆人之力也。
现代文：回到鲁国复命后，他为看守人请功说： 土地分得这么多，是重邑馆舍看守人的功劳啊。
English: After returning to the State of Lu and receiving his orders, he took credit for the caretaker, saying, "It is the merit of the caretaker of the Chongyi Mansion that the land was divided so much.

古文：臣闻之曰： 善有章，虽贱赏也；恶有衅，虽贵罚也。 
现代文：我听说： 一个人的善德彰明昭著，即使身分低下，也应该给予奖赏；一个人的恶行得到证实，即使地位高贵也应该给予惩罚。 
English: I have heard it said that if a man's virtue is conspicuous, even if he is lowly, he should be rewarded; if a man's wickedness is proved, even if he is high, he should be punished.

古文：今一言而辟境，其章大矣，请赏之。 
现代文：现在由于看守人的一句话而扩大了国家的疆土，他的功劳再明显不过，请国君奖赏他。 
English: Now, thanks to the watchman's words, the country's territory has been expanded. His merit could not be more obvious. I ask the sovereign to reward him.

古文：乃出而爵之。
现代文：僖公于是把这个看守人从仆隶中提拔出来，赏赐给他大夫爵位。
English: The lord of the castle then promoted the guard from the ranks of servants and gave him the title of daifu.

