古文：圣贤之业，皆以薄葬省用为务。
现代文：圣贤的事业，都是以薄葬节省财物为宗旨。
English: The cause of saints and sages are all based on the principle of thin burial and saving money.

古文：然而世尚厚葬，有奢泰之失者，儒家论不明，墨家议之非故也。
现代文：然而世间崇尚厚葬，有铺张浪费的恶习，是由于儒家论述不清楚，墨家的论述又不正确的缘故。
English: However, due to the fact that the Confucian discourse is not clear and the Mohist discourse is not correct, the world has a bad habit of advocating lavish burials and extravagant waste.

古文：墨家之议右鬼，以为人死辄为神鬼而有知，能形而害人，故引杜伯之类以为效验。
现代文：墨家的观点崇尚鬼，认为人死就变为鬼而且有知觉，能变成活人的形象来害人，所以引用杜伯变鬼之类的事例来作为证明。
English: The view of the Mohists advocated ghosts, believing that when people die, they become ghosts and are sentient, and can become the image of a living person to harm people, so they cited examples such as Du Bo's ghost as proof.

古文：儒家不从，以为死人无知，不能为鬼，然而赙祭备物者，示不负死以观生也。
现代文：儒家不相信这一点，认为死人没有知觉，不能变成鬼，然而在帮助别人办理丧事和举行祭祀时却备办了各种东西，这是为了不背弃死去的人借以劝勉话着的人。
English: Confucians do not believe in this, believing that the dead have no consciousness and cannot become ghosts. However, when helping others to handle funerals and hold sacrifices, they prepare all kinds of things. This is in order not to betray the dead and use them to persuade the speaker.

古文：陆贾依儒家而说，故其立语不肯明处。
现代文：陆贾依照儒家的观点而论葬礼，所以他在提出自己的主张时，却不愿明确地判定有没有鬼。
English: Lu Jia was discussing funerals according to the Confucian view, so he did not want to clearly determine whether there was a ghost when he made his proposal.

古文：刘子政举薄葬之奏，务欲省用，不能极论。
现代文：刘子政呈递关于薄葬的奏章，宗旨是想节省财物，但没有透彻地说明道理。
English: Liu Zizheng submitted a report on thin burial, the purpose of which was to save money and materials, but did not thoroughly explain the reason.

古文：是以世俗内持狐疑之议，外闻杜伯之类，又见病且终者，墓中死人来与相见，故遂信是，谓死如生。
现代文：因此世俗之人内心持有怀疑的看法，外面又听见杜伯变鬼之类的传说，又听说将要病死的人往往有坟里的死人来和他相见的事，所以就相信了有鬼的说法，认为死人像活人一样。
English: For this reason, secular people hold a skeptical view in their hearts. Outside, they hear legends such as Doberman changing into a ghost. They also hear that people who are about to die often have the dead in the grave come to meet them. Therefore, they believe in the ghost story and think that the dead are like the living.

古文：闵死独葬，魂狐无副，丘墓闭藏，谷物乏匮，故作偶人以侍尸柩，多藏食物以歆精魂。
现代文：人们哀怜死人单独埋葬，灵魂孤单无人陪伴，丘墓封闭掩藏，谷物缺乏，所以制作偶人去侍奉装有死尸的棺材，在坟墓中多多储藏食物以便让鬼享用。
English: People lamented that the dead were buried alone, the soul was alone and unaccompanied, the mound tomb was closed and hidden, and grain was scarce, so they made puppets to serve the coffin containing the dead body, and stored a lot of food in the grave for the ghosts to enjoy.

古文：积浸流至，或破家尽业，以充死棺；杀人以殉葬，以快生意。
现代文：这种风气逐渐发展影响所至，有的人倾家荡产，用殉葬品装满死人的棺材，甚至杀人用以殉葬，以满足活人的心愿。
English: This culture has gradually developed to the point where some people go bankrupt, fill the coffins of the dead with funerary goods, and even kill people for funerary purposes in order to satisfy the wishes of the living.

古文：非知其内无益，而奢侈之心外相慕也。
现代文：他们并不是不知道把殉葬品放在棺内没有好处，而是受奢侈之心的影响在外表上相互炫耀，讲究排场。
English: It's not that they don't know that it's not good to have funerary objects in the coffin, but they are influenced by the heart of luxury to show off each other on the outside and pay attention to pomp.

古文：以为死人有知，与生人无以异。孔子非之而亦无以定实。
现代文：认为死人确实有知觉，跟活人没有什么不同，孔子反对这种说法，但也无法去断定事情的真象是怎样的。
English: Confucius disagreed with the view that the dead are indeed sentient and no different from the living, but he was unable to determine the truth of the matter.

古文：然而陆贾之论两无所处。
现代文：而陆贾的论述，两方面都没有作出肯定的回答。
English: In Lu Jia's discussion, both sides did not give a positive answer.

古文：刘子政奏，亦不能明儒家无知之验，墨家有知之故。
现代文：刘子政的奏章，也不能阐明儒家关于鬼无知的证明是什么，墨家关于鬼有知的理由是什么。
English: Liu Zizheng's record also cannot clarify what the Confucianist's proof of the ignorance of ghosts is, and what the reason for the knowledge of ghosts is for the Mohists.

古文：事莫明於有效，论莫定於有证。
现代文：没有比有效验更能说明事情真象的了，没有比有证据更能肯定论点正确的了。
English: There is no better indicator of the truth of a matter than a valid test, and there is no better confirmation of the correctness of an argument than evidence.

古文：空言虚语，虽得道心，人犹不信。
现代文：空洞虚假的语言，即使符合根本的道理，人们仍然不会相信。
English: Empty and false words, even if they are consistent with the fundamental truth, will not be believed.

古文：是以世俗轻愚信祸福者，畏死不惧义，重死不顾生，竭财以事神，空家以送终。
现代文：因此社会上鄙陋无知轻信祸福的人，怕得罪死人而不怕违背道理，只看重死人而不顾全活人，耗尽财产以侍奉鬼神，不惜倾家荡产办理丧事。
English: Therefore, people in society who are mean, ignorant, and gullible, who believe in good and evil, are afraid of offending the dead, but not afraid of violating the truth, only value the dead, but do not care about the living, exhaust their property to serve ghosts and gods, and do not hesitate to spend all their money on funerals.

古文：辩士文人有效验，若墨家之以杜伯为据，则死无知之实可明，薄葬省财之教可立也。
现代文：如果辩士、文人论证人死无知确有根据，就像墨家用杜伯变鬼的例子来论证人死有知一样，那么人死无知的真实情况就可以明白，薄葬节省财物的教化就可以树立了。
English: If debaters and literary figures have a solid basis for arguing that witnesses are ignorant of death, just as the Mexicans used the example of Du Bo to change ghosts to argue that witnesses are knowledgeable of death, then the true situation of ignorance of death can be understood, and the enlightenment of thin burial and saving of property can be established.

古文：今墨家非儒，儒家非墨，各有所持，故乖不合，业难齐同，故二家争论。
现代文：现今墨家否定儒家，儒家否定墨家，各有各的主张，所以互相矛盾，观点难以一致，因此两家争论不休。
English: Nowadays, the Mohists deny the Confucians, and the Confucians deny the Mohists. Each side has its own opinions, so they contradict each other, and their opinions are difficult to coincide. Therefore, the two sides argue endlessly.

古文：世无祭祀复生之人，故死生之义未有所定。
现代文：世上没有因为受到祭祀而复活的人，所以关于死生方面的道理没有定论。
English: There are no people in the world who have been resurrected as a result of being sacrificed, so the truth about life and death is not conclusive.

古文：实者死人暗昧，与人殊途，其实荒忽，难得深知。
现代文：实际上死人的情况不明，与活人存在于不同的世界，死人的真实情况是捉摸不定的，难以深刻的了解。
English: In fact, the situation of the dead is unclear, and they exist in a different world from the living. The true situation of the dead is elusive and difficult to understand.

古文：有知无知之情不可定，为鬼之实不可是。
现代文：死人有知与无知的真情不能断定，人死后到底是否变鬼也就不可能确定。
English: It is not possible to determine whether a dead person is wise or ignorant, and it is also impossible to determine whether a person has become a ghost after death.

古文：通人知士，虽博览古今，窥涉百家，条入叶贯，不能审知。
现代文：知识渊博的有见识的人，虽然博览古今，遍阅诸子百家著作，深入细致，能融会贯通，也不能清楚地了解此事。
English: Knowledgeable and insightful people, although they are well versed in ancient and modern times, have read hundreds of works, are in-depth and meticulous, can integrate and penetrate, and cannot clearly understand this matter.

古文：唯圣心贤意，方比物类，为能实之。
现代文：只有圣贤的心思，将各种事物进行对比研究，才能肯定哪一种观点是正确的。
English: Only the mind of a sage, by comparing and studying various things, can determine which view is correct.

古文：夫论不留精澄意，苟以外效立事是非，信闻见於外，不诠订於内，是用耳目论，不以心意议也。
现代文：论证问题不集中精力深入思考，只是根据表面现象来判断事情的是非，只依据外在的见闻，不通过内心分析判断，这就是光凭耳目见闻而不是通过内心思考来论事。
English: Argumentation does not concentrate on in-depth thinking, but only judges the rights and wrongs of things according to surface phenomena, only on the basis of external knowledge, and does not analyze and judge through the heart. This is to discuss things by eye and ear, rather than through inner thinking.

古文：夫以耳目论，则以虚象为言；虚象效，则以实事为非。
现代文：光凭耳目见闻来论事，那就会凭虚假的现象说话，相信了虚假现象，那就会把实事当成是错的。
English: If you only talk about things based on what you have seen and heard, then you will be talking about false phenomena, and if you believe in false phenomena, then you will consider the facts to be wrong.

古文：是故是非者不徒耳目，必开心意。
现代文：所以判断是非不能只依靠耳目的见闻，一定要通过内心的思考。
English: Therefore, judging right and wrong cannot only rely on seeing and hearing, but must be done through inner thinking.

古文：墨议不以心而原物，苟信闻见，则虽效验章明，犹为失实。
现代文：墨家的观点不是经过用心思考而只是考察事物的表面现象得出来的，只是相信耳目的见闻，就即使效验十分显著，仍然是偏离真实的。
English: The opinion of a mystic is not obtained by thinking with his heart, but only by examining the surface of things. He only believes what he hears and sees. Even if the effect is very significant, it is still a deviation from the truth.

古文：失实之议难以教，虽得愚民之欲，不合知者之心，丧物索用，无益於世。此盖墨术所以不传也。
现代文：偏离真实的主张难以用来指导别人，即使符合无知之人的心意，也不会符合有智之士的心意，即使不倾家荡产以殉葬，对世人也没有好处，这大概就是墨家学说不能流传的原因。
English: It is difficult to guide others by deviating from true propositions. Even if it conforms to the will of the ignorant, it will not conform to the will of the wise. Even if it does not lead to ruin and death, it is of no benefit to the world. This is probably the reason why the teachings of the Mohists cannot be spread.

古文：鲁人将以玙敛，孔子闻之，径庭丽级而谏。
现代文：鲁国人将要用玙璠装殓季平子，孔子听见这件事，直接穿过庭院一步跨上一级台阶而去谏阻。
English: The people of Lu were going to decorate the pavilion with gongs. When Confucius heard about this, he went straight across the courtyard and stepped on the first step to oppose them.

古文：夫径庭丽级，非礼也，孔子为救患也。
现代文：直接穿过庭院一步跨上一级台阶，不符合礼的规范，孔子是为防止祸乱就不顾礼了。
English: Directly crossing the courtyard and stepping on the first step does not meet the norms of etiquette. Confucius disregarded etiquette in order to prevent calamity.

古文：患之所由，常由有所贪。
现代文：祸乱的产生，常常是由于贪欲引起的。
English: The generation of calamity is often caused by greed.

古文：璠玙，宝物也，鲁人用敛，奸人间之，欲心生矣。
现代文：玙璠是宝物，鲁人用它来装殓，奸诈的人窥探到它，贪欲之心必然产生。
English: The skull is a treasure, the Lu people use it to decorate, the treacherous people spy on it, and the greedy heart is bound to arise.

古文：奸人欲生，不畏罪法，不畏罪法，则丘墓抇矣。
现代文：奸诈之人的贪欲产生后，就不怕犯罪触法。不怕犯罪触法，那么丘墓就会被盗掘了。
English: After the greed of treacherous people arises, they are not afraid of crimes against the law. If they are not afraid of crimes against the law, then the hill tombs will be robbed.

古文：孔子睹微见著，故径庭丽级，以救患直谏。
现代文：孔子从细微的小事预见到明显的大事，所以直接穿过庭院一步跨上一级台阶，为防止祸乱而直接谏阻。
English: Confucius foresaw the obvious big things from the small things, so he walked directly through the courtyard and stepped on the first step to prevent the disaster and directly resisted.

古文：夫不明死人无知之义，而著丘墓必抇之谏，虽尽比干之执人，人必不听。
现代文：不阐明死人无知的道理，而标榜丘墓一定会被盗的阻谏，即使尽到像比干那样的忠诚，人们也必定不会相信的。
English: Without clarifying the truth that the dead are ignorant, and advertising that the mound tombs will certainly be blocked by theft, even if they are as loyal as Bi Gan, people will certainly not believe it.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸侯财多不忧贪，威强不惧抇。
现代文：诸侯因为财产多就不怕厚葬把自己搞穷，因为权势大也不怕人家来掘墓。
English: Because they had a lot of property, the princes were not afraid of being impoverished by heavy burials, and because they had great power, they were not afraid of people digging up their graves.

古文：死人之议，狐疑未定，孝子之计，从其重者。
现代文：由于对死人有知还是无知的议论还有怀疑拿不定主意，所以孝子的想法总是倾向于厚葬。
English: Because of the debate about whether the dead person was knowledgeable or ignorant, and because of doubts about whether to make up one's mind, the thoughts of the filial son always tend to favor a thick burial.

古文：如明死人无知，厚葬无益，论定议立，较著可闻，则璠之礼不行，径庭之谏不发矣。
现代文：如果阐明死人无知，厚葬没有好处，主张观点确定下来，明明白白地让大家都知道，那么用玙璠装殓的礼节就不会实行，直接穿过庭院去阻谏的事就不会发生了。
English: If it is made clear that the dead are ignorant and that a large funeral is not beneficial, and if the views advocated are established and made clear to everyone, then the etiquette of decorating with wreaths will not be implemented, and the thing of going directly through the courtyard to obstruct will not happen.

古文：今不明其说而强其谏，此盖孔子所以不能立其教。
现代文：现在不阐明主张而极力去阻谏，这大概就是孔子不能传播他的教化的原因了。
English: This is probably the reason why Confucius could not spread his enlightenment.

古文：孔子非不明死生之实，其意不分别者，亦陆贾之语指也。
现代文：孔子不是不明白死人有知无知的真实情况，他之所以故意不讲清楚人死无知，也就含有陆贾议论的那种意旨。
English: It is not that Confucius did not understand the true situation of the dead's knowledge and ignorance. The reason why he deliberately did not make it clear that people are ignorant of death also contains the intention of Lu Jia's discussion.

古文：夫言死无知，则臣子倍其君父。
现代文：讲到人死无知，那么臣、子就会违背君、父。
English: When it comes to human ignorance, then the vassal and the son will disobey the prince and the father.

古文：故曰： 丧祭礼废，则臣子恩泊；臣子恩泊，则倍死亡先；倍死亡先，则不孝狱多。 
现代文：所以说： 丧祭的礼节荒废，就使臣、子的恩情淡薄。臣、子的恩情淡薄，那就会背弃死人忘记祖先。背弃死人忘记祖先，犯不孝之罪的人就会多起来。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "If the etiquette of funerals is abandoned, then the kindness of ministers and sons will be weak. If the kindness of ministers and sons is weak, then they will turn their backs on the dead and forget their ancestors. If they turn their backs on the dead and forget their ancestors, then the number of people who commit the sin of filial piety will increase."

古文：圣人惧开不孝之源，故不明死无知之实。
现代文：圣人怕开不孝之罪的源头，所以有意不阐明死人无知的真实情况。
English: The saint was afraid of uncovering the source of the sin of filial piety, so he deliberately did not clarify the true situation of the dead man's ignorance.

古文：异道不相连，事生厚，化自生，虽事死泊，何损於化？
现代文：活人与死人的道理互不相关，对活着的人奉养优厚，好的风俗自然会形成，即使对死去的人事奉淡薄些，对于风俗教化有什么损害呢？
English: The principles of the living and the dead are not related to each other. For the living, the upbringing is good, and good customs will naturally form. Even if the dead are treated lightly, what is the damage to the custom of enlightenment?

古文：使死者有知，倍之非也。如无所知，倍之何损？
现代文：假如死人是有知的，违背他的心愿就不对；假如死人什么也不知道，违背他又有什么损害呢？
English: If the dead person is aware, it is not right to go against his wishes; if the dead person does not know anything, what harm is there in going against him?

古文：明其无知，未必有倍死之害。不明无知，成事已有贼生之费。
现代文：阐明死人无知，不一定有违背死人的祸害；不阐明死人无知，事实上已经存在着损害活人的浪费现象
English: To expose the ignorance of the dead is not necessarily to expose the evil of the dead; not to expose the ignorance of the dead is in fact to expose the waste of the living

古文：孝子之养亲病也，未死之时，求卜迎医，冀祸消、药有益也。
现代文：孝子伺侍父母的病，父母还没有死的时候，求人算卦请医生治疗，希望灾祸消除、医药有效。
English: Filial sons and daughters attend to their parents' illnesses, and when their parents are not yet dead, they ask for help and treatment from doctors, hoping that the scourge will be eliminated and medicine will be effective.

古文：既死之後，虽审如巫咸，良如扁鹊，终不复生。
现代文：父母死了之后，即使有精明如巫咸，高明如扁鹊那样的人，最终也不再有什么用处。
English: After the death of their parents, even if there are people who are as shrewd as Wuxian and as clever as Bian Que, they will eventually no longer be of any use.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：知死气绝，终无补益。
现代文：他们知道人死气绝，算卦医药终归没有什么益处。
English: They know that people are exhausted and that there is no benefit to be gained from the practice of medicine.

古文：治死无益，厚葬何差乎！
现代文：医治死人没有益处，厚葬和给死人治病有什么差别呢？
English: There is no profit in curing the dead. What is the difference between a good burial and curing the dead?

古文：倍死恐伤化，绝卜拒医，独不伤义乎！
现代文：背弃死人恐怕有损教化，不去卜问不请医生，难道就不损伤道义吗？
English: Turning one's back on the dead is probably detrimental to enlightenment. If one does not ask questions or see a doctor, does this not damage one's morals?

古文：亲之生也，坐之高堂之上，其死也，葬之黄泉之下。
现代文：父母活着的时候，安坐在高堂之上；父母死了，埋葬在黄泉之下。
English: When my parents were alive, they were sitting on the roof of a high-rise building; when they died, they were buried under the Yangtze River.

古文：黄泉之下，非人所居，然而葬之不疑者，以死绝异处，不可同也。
现代文：黄泉之下，不是人居住的地方，然而埋葬他们在黄泉之下而没有疑虑，是由于死人断气以后不再同活人相处，不可能同住在一起的缘故。
English: Hell is not a place where people live, but they are buried there without hesitation, because after death, the dead no longer live with the living, and it is impossible to live together.

古文：如当亦如生存，恐人倍之，宜葬於宅，与生同也。
现代文：如果对待死人应当也像对待活人一样，恐怕活着的亲人背弃他，就应当把死者葬在家中，跟活人居住在一起。
English: If the dead are to be treated in the same way as the living, lest the living turn their backs on them, then the dead should be buried at home and live with the living.

古文：不明无知，为人倍其亲，独明葬黄泉，不为离其先乎？
现代文：不肯阐明死人无知，因为害怕人们会背弃他们的父母，却偏偏阐明人死后应该埋葬在黄泉，难道不怕人们遗弃他们的祖先吗？
English: If he does not want to clarify the ignorance of the dead, for fear that people will abandon their parents, but clarifies that people should be buried in hell after death, is he not afraid that people will abandon their ancestors?

古文：亲在狱中，罪疑未定，孝子驰走，以救其难。
现代文：父母亲关押在牢里，罪行尚有怀疑没有定案，孝子四出奔走以挽救父母的灾难。
English: With their parents in prison, and the crime still under suspicion, the sons and daughters run around to save their parents from disaster.

古文：如罪定法立，终无门户，虽曾子、子骞，坐泣而已。
现代文：如果罪已确定依法判处，再也找不到什么门路救亲人了，即使是曾子、子骞这样的孝子，也只能坐着哭泣而已。
English: If the crime has been determined and sentenced according to law, there is no longer any way to save the relatives. Even the filial sons such as Zengzi and Zibo can only sit and cry.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：计动无益，空为烦也。
现代文：因为考虑到再去活动也无济于事，只不过是白费精力而已。
English: Because taking into account that going to the event again will not help, it is just a waste of energy.

古文：今死亲之魂，定无所知，与拘亲之罪决不可救何以异？
现代文：如今死去的父母亲的魂魄确实什么也不知道，这和被关押的父母亲已定罪而无可救援有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between the souls of the parents who are now dead and do not know anything, and the parents who are in prison and have been convicted and cannot be rescued?

古文：不明无知，恐人倍其先，独明罪定，不为忽其亲乎！
现代文：不肯阐明死人无知，担心人们背弃他们的祖先，偏偏阐明罪行确定无法挽救，就不害怕人们轻视他们的父母吗？
English: Are they not afraid of exposing the ignorance of the dead, of betraying their ancestors, of exposing the irredeemability of crime, of despising their parents?

古文：圣人立义，有益於化，虽小弗除；无补於政，虽大弗与。
现代文：圣人制定礼义，有益于教化，即使是小的礼节也不取消；对政治没有好处，即使是再大的礼节也不赞同。
English: It is beneficial for enlightenment for saints to establish etiquette, and even minor etiquette is not abolished; it is not beneficial for politics, and even major etiquette is not approved.

古文：今厚死人，何益於恩？
现代文：现在厚葬死人，对报答死者的恩义有什么好处呢？
English: What good does it do to repay the dead by burying them now?

古文：倍之弗事，何损於义？
现代文：背弃死者，不搞厚葬，对报答亲人的恩义有什么损害呢？
English: What is the harm in repaying the kindness of relatives by abandoning the dead and not having a lavish funeral?

古文：孔子又谓：为明器不成，示意有明，俑则偶人，象类生人。故鲁用偶人葬，孔子叹。
现代文：孔子又说，虽然殉葬的器物做得不精致，但表示了人们认为人死后还很神明的心意。俑就是偶人，形状像活人一样，所以鲁国用偶人殉葬，孔子为此而叹息。
English: Confucius also said that although the utensils used for the funeral were not very elaborate, they expressed the people's belief that people are still very divine after death. The skull is a doll, shaped like a living person, so Lu used a doll for the funeral, and Confucius sighed for this.

古文：睹用人殉之兆也，故叹以痛之。
现代文：他从中看出将会用人殉葬的苗头，因此叹息哀痛用偶人殉葬。
English: From this, he saw the seeds of a human sacrifice, so he sighed and mourned the death of a puppet.

古文：即如生当备物，不示如生，意悉其教，用偶人葬，恐後用生殉，用明器，独不为后用善器葬乎？
现代文：如果孔子认为对待死人应当像对待活人那样为他备办器物，并不是表示死人真像活人一样，用意全在于宣扬他的礼教，用偶人殉葬，担心以后会用活人殉葬，用明器殉葬，难道就不怕后人用精致的器物殉葬吗？
English: If Confucius believed that the dead should be treated like the living and prepared for him with utensils, it does not mean that the dead are really like the living. The intention is to promote his etiquette, to be buried with dolls, to fear that they will be buried with living people and with bright utensils in the future. Isn't it afraid that future generations will be buried with exquisite utensils?

古文：绝用人之源，不防丧物之路，重人不爱用，痛人不忧国，传议之所失也。
现代文：杜绝了用活人殉葬的根源，而不堵塞浪费财物的渠道，重视人而不爱惜财物，爱惜人而不担忧国家，儒家议论的错误就在于此。
English: The root cause of using living people for funerals has been eliminated, but the channels for wasting wealth have not been blocked. People are valued, but wealth is not cherished. People are cherished, but the country is not worried. This is the error of Confucian discourse.

古文：救漏防者，悉塞其穴，则水泄绝。
现代文：治理有漏洞的堤坝，要全部堵塞堤坝的漏洞，这样水的泄漏就会停止。
English: In the management of leaky dams, it is necessary to completely plug the leaks in the dam, so that the leakage of water will stop.

古文：穴不悉塞，水有所漏，漏则水为患害。
现代文：漏洞不全部堵塞，水有泄漏的地方，泄漏那么水就会造成灾害。
English: If all the leaks are not plugged, the water will leak somewhere, and if it leaks, the water will cause disasters.

古文：论死不悉，则奢礼不绝，不绝则丧物索用。
现代文：论述死人无知不彻底，那么厚葬的奢侈礼节就不会杜绝，不杜绝就会让人倾家荡产。
English: If the discussion of the ignorance of the dead is not thorough, then the extravagant etiquette of thick burial will not be eliminated, and if it is not eliminated, it will make people go bankrupt.

古文：用索物丧，民贫耗，至，危亡之道也。
现代文：财物消耗干净，老百姓会贫困到极点，这是使国家走向危亡的道路。
English: The consumption of wealth and goods will be clean, and the people will be extremely poor. This is the road that will lead the country to peril.

古文：苏秦为燕使，使齐国之民高大丘冢，多藏财物，苏秦身弗以劝勉之，财尽民，国空兵弱，燕军卒至，无以自卫，国破城亡，主出民散。
现代文：苏秦为了燕国，让齐国的老百姓把坟墓造得又高又大，在坟墓中多藏财物，苏秦亲自执绋送葬以劝导齐人厚葬。齐国财物耗尽百姓贫穷，国库空虚将士无力，燕军突然打来，齐国没有什么可以自卫，国都被攻破城市被占领，君王逃走百姓散尽。
English: Su Qin, for the sake of Yan's country, let the people of Qi build tombs that were tall and large, and hid a lot of wealth in the tombs. Su Qin personally led the funeral procession to persuade Qi people to have a good burial. Qi's wealth was exhausted, the people were poor, the treasury was empty, and the soldiers were powerless. Yan's army suddenly came. Qi had nothing to defend itself, the country was broken, the city was occupied, the king fled, and the people were scattered.

古文：今不明死之无知，使民自竭以厚葬亲，与苏秦奸计同一败。
现代文：现在不阐明死人无知，让老百姓耗尽自己的财物，这和苏秦的奸计是同一种祸害。
English: It is the same kind of evil as Su Qin's treachery not to clarify the ignorance of the dead and let the common people exhaust their wealth.

古文：墨家之议，自违其术，其薄葬而又右鬼，右鬼引效，以杜伯为验。
现代文：墨家的主张同他的观点自相矛盾，墨家主张薄葬而又崇尚鬼，崇尚鬼举例证明，就以杜伯为例。
English: The claim of the Mohists contradicted his view. The Mohists advocated thin burials while advocating ghosts. To prove that they advocated ghosts, Du Bo took Du Bo as an example.

古文：杜伯死人，如谓杜伯为鬼，则夫死者审有知；如有知而薄葬之，是怒死人也。
现代文：杜伯是死人，如果认为杜伯是鬼，那么死人确实有知。如果死人有知而薄葬他，这是激怒死人。
English: Dube is a dead man, if Dube is considered to be a ghost, then the dead man really knew, if the dead man knew and buried him, this is angering the dead man.

古文：情欲厚而恶薄，以薄受死者之责，虽右鬼，其何益哉？
现代文：人的心情是想厚葬而讨厌薄葬，由于薄葬而受到死人的责罚，即使崇尚鬼，那又有什么好处呢？
English: People's mood is to want a thick burial and hate a thin burial. Because of the thin burial, they are punished by the dead. Even if they worship ghosts, what good is that?

古文：如以鬼非死人，则其信杜伯非也；如以鬼是死人，则其薄葬非也。
现代文：如果认为鬼不是死人变的，那么相信杜伯死后变鬼就不对了；如果认为鬼是死人变的，那么对他薄葬也就不对了。
English: If you think that ghosts are not dead, then it is not right to believe that Du Bo changed into a ghost after his death; if you think that ghosts are dead, then it is not right to bury him.

古文：术用乖错，首尾相违，故以为非。
现代文：基本观点和具体主张互相违背，前后矛盾，所以认为墨家的观点是错的。
English: The basic viewpoints and specific propositions contradict each other and are contradictory, so the viewpoints of the Mohists are considered to be wrong.

古文：非与是不明，皆不可行。
现代文：是与非没有阐明，所以都行不通。
English: The pros and cons are not spelled out, so it won't work.

古文：夫如是，世欲之人，可一详览。
现代文：既然如此，世俗之人，可以全面详细鉴别。
English: That being the case, the worldly person can be fully identified in detail.

古文：详览如斯，可一薄葬矣。
现代文：详细鉴别如上文所分析的，就可以一律实行薄葬了。
English: As a result of the detailed identification as analyzed above, thin burials can be uniformly implemented.

