古文：江革字休映，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江革字休映，济阳考城人。
English: Jiangge Zi Jiuying, Jiyang Gao Chengren.

古文：祖齐之，宋都水使者，尚书金部郎。
现代文：祖父江齐之，在宋朝作都水使者，尚书金部郎。
English: His grandfather, Jiang Qizhi, was an emissary of water to the capital in the Song Dynasty, and Shangshu Jinbro.

古文：父柔之，齐尚书仓部郎，有孝行，以母忧毁卒。
现代文：父亲江柔之，在齐朝作尚书仓部郎，品性孝顺，因为丧母哀伤过度而死。
English: His father, Mei Rongzhi, served as Shang Shukang's subordinate in the Qi Dynasty, and served his parents with filial piety. He passed away after the death of his mother.

古文：革幼而聪敏，早有才思，六岁便解属文。柔之深加赏器，曰： 此儿必兴吾门。 
现代文：江革从小聪明灵敏，很早就有才气，六岁就会写文章，柔之对他倍加赏识器重，说： 这孩子必定会振兴我的门第。 
English: Jiang Ge was young and intelligent. He had an early talent. He was able to write articles at the age of six. His father appreciated him very much. He once said, "This is where I will succeed."

古文：九岁丁父艰，与第四弟观同生，少孤贫，傍无师友，兄弟自相训勖，读书精力不倦。
现代文：九岁时父亲去世，他和四弟江观同母所生，从小丧父贫寒，没有师友可以依傍，兄弟二人互相督导勉励，读书孜孜不倦。
English: His father died when he was nine years old. He and his four younger brothers were born to the same mother, Jiang Guan. Since childhood, they lost their father and were poor. They had no teacher or friend to rely on. The two brothers supervised and encouraged each other, and studied tirelessly.

古文：十六丧母，以孝闻。
现代文：十六岁时丧母，以侍奉母亲孝敬闻名。
English: He lost his mother at the age of sixteen and was known for his filial piety.

古文：服阕，与观俱诣太学，补国子生，举高第。
现代文：丧服期满，和江观一起赴太学，被补缺为国子生，取得优良成绩。
English: After the period of mourning was over, Mujiang Plastic went to Taiyue together to supplement the national students, with the best results.

古文：齐中书郎王融、吏部郎谢朓雅相钦重。
现代文：齐朝中书郎王融、吏部郎谢月兆都对他很钦佩推重。
English: Wang Rong, the chief scribe, and Xie Yue Zhao, the secretary, both admired and respected him.

古文：朓尝行还过候革，时大寒雪，见革弊絮单席，而耽学不倦，嗟叹久之，乃脱其所着襦，并手割半毡与革充卧具而去。
现代文：谢月兆曾有一次在宫中值班后回家路上登门看望江革，当时下雪天气严寒，他看到江革铺一条破褥子和一条单席，却沉缅于读书不知疲倦，感叹不已，于是脱下自己身上的短袄给他，又把自己的坐毡割下一半送给他当坐垫才回去。
English: Xie Yue Zhao once visited Jiang Ge on his way home after his duty in the palace. At that time, it was snowing and the weather was very cold. He saw that Jiang Ge had a broken mule and a single seat, but he was absorbed in reading tirelessly and sighed, so he took off his shorts and gave him half of his seat as a cushion before going back.

古文：司徒竟陵王闻其名，引爲西邸学士。
现代文：司徒竟陵王萧子良听到他的名声，招揽他为西邸学士。
English: Upon hearing of his fame, King Xiao Ziliang invited him to become a scholar at the Western Mansion.

古文：弱冠举南徐州秀才。时豫章胡谐之行州事，王融与谐之书令荐革。
现代文：年二十被举为南徐州秀才，当时豫章胡谐之兼管南徐州，王融给胡谐之写信，让他举荐江革。
English: In his 20s, he was nominated as a South Xuzhou talent. At that time, Yu Zhang Huningzhi was also in charge of South Xuzhou. Wang Rong wrote a letter to Huningzhi, asking him to recommend Jiang Ge.

古文：谐之方贡琅邪王泛，便以革代之。
现代文：谐之正要荐举琅笽王氵凡，接信便用江革代替了他。
English: When 谐之 was about to recommend 邪王泛, he replaced him with江革.

古文：仆射江祏深相引接，祏爲太子詹事，啓革爲丞。
现代文：仆射江礻石很热情地接待他，江礻石任太子詹事，奏请委任江革为府丞。
English: He was warmly received by his servant, Jiang Shanshi. Jiang Shanshi appointed him as the prince of Zhanji, and asked him to appoint Jiang Ge as the prefectural governor.

古文：祏时权倾朝右，以革才堪经国，令参掌机务，诏诰文檄皆委以具。
现代文：江礻石当时权倾百官，认为江革有治国之才，让他参与机要，朝廷的诏令文诰等都委任他撰写。
English: At that time, Chiang Kai-shek had power over hundreds of officials. He believed that Chiang Kai-shek had the ability to govern the country, so he was given the opportunity to participate. He was appointed to write the Imperial Rescript and other documents.

古文：革防杜形迹，外人不知。
现代文：江革小心谨慎，不露出与江礻石关系的行迹，所以外人不知道。
English: There is no trace of the Jangge Rebellion, nor is it known to outsiders.

古文：祏诛，宾客皆罹其罪，革独以智免。
现代文：等江礻石被杀，门下宾客都被牵连治罪，只有江革因为机敏得以幸免。
English: Liao Tuo was killed, his guests were implicated, and Jiang Xuan was able to get away with his wiles.

古文：除尚书驾部郎。
现代文：后任尚书驾部郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Shuki-buro.

古文：中兴元年，梁武帝入石头，时吴兴太守袁昂据郡拒义不从，革制书与昂，于坐立成，辞义典雅，帝深赏叹之，令与徐勉同掌书记。
现代文：中兴元年，梁武帝兵入石头城，当时吴兴太守袁昂占据吴兴抗拒武帝不肯服从，江革奉命给袁昂写信，领命后随即在座位上就写成了，文辞典雅，武帝看了深表赏识赞叹，令他和徐勉共同掌书记。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, Emperor Liang Wudi's soldiers entered Stone City. At that time, Wu Xing's eunuch Yuan Ang occupied Wu Xing, resisted Emperor Wu and refused to obey. Jiang Ge was ordered to write a letter to Yuan Ang. After receiving the order, he immediately wrote it on the seat. The writing was elegant. Emperor Wu saw the deep appreciation and admiration, so that he and Xu Min jointly held the secretary.

古文：建安王爲雍州刺史，表求管记，以革爲征北记室参军，带中庐令。
现代文：建安王作雍州刺史，上表要求派一名管记，委任江革为征北记室参军，兼任中庐县令。
English: King Jian'an wrote the history of Yongzhou, and the above table requested that a record keeper be sent to appoint Jiang Ge to join the army as a record keeper, and also serve as the county magistrate of Zhongye County.

古文：与弟观少长共居，不忍离别，苦求同行。
现代文：江革和他弟弟江观从小到大生活在一起，不舍得分别，就苦苦要求一块儿去。
English: Jiang Ge and his younger brother Jiang Guan have lived together from childhood to adulthood. They are not willing to be separated, and they are struggling to go together.

古文：以观爲征北行参军，兼记室。
现代文：于是又委任江观为征北行参军，兼任记室。
English: As a result, Jiang Guan was also appointed to join the army for the northern expedition, and also served as a secretary.

古文：时吴兴沈约、乐安任昉与革书云： 比闻雍府妙选英才，文房之职，总卿昆季，可谓驭二龙于长途，骋骐骥于千里。 
现代文：当时吴兴沈约、乐安任日方给江革的书信中说： 近闻雍州太守选任英才，把掌管文书的职务，委任了你们兄弟，可以说是驾二龙长途奔腾，驰骏马千里飞跃啊。 
English: At that time, Wu Xing Sheng and Le An, who were appointed by Japan to Jiang Ge, said in a letter to Jiang Ge: It has recently been reported that the Yongzhou governor-general has selected and appointed outstanding talents, and appointed your brothers to the posts in charge of documents. It can be said that you are driving two dragons for a long distance and galloping horses for a thousand miles.

古文：途次江夏，观卒。
现代文：途中在江夏停留时，江观去世。
English: During a stopover in Jiangxia, Jiang Guanzhong passed away.

古文：革在雍州，爲府王所礼，款若布衣。
现代文：江革在雍州，受到刺史建安王的礼遇，关系如同寻常百姓之间一样融洽。
English: Jiang Ge in Yongzhou was treated with courtesy by King Jian'an, and the relationship was as harmonious as between ordinary people.

古文：后爲建康正，频迁秣陵、建康令，爲政明肃，豪强惮之。
现代文：后来作为建康府正，屡任秣陵、建康令，为政严明，豪强畏惧。
English: Later, as the Jiankang prefect, he repeatedly held the posts of Jianling and Jiankang, and was strict in politics and feared by the powerful.

古文：历中书舍人，尚书左丞，晋安王长史、寻阳太守，行江州府事。
现代文：历任中书舍人，尚书左丞，晋安王长史兼寻阳太守，并兼管江州府。
English: Successive Chinese emperors held the titles of Shushoshojin, Shangshuzojo, and Jinan Wangchangshi, as well as the title of Hoyang Taishu, and also took charge of Jiangzhou Prefecture.

古文：徙庐陵王长史，太守、行事如故。
现代文：又改任庐陵王长史，太守、行事官职不变。
English: He was also reappointed as the King of Fuling and Changshi, and his position as governor and acting official remained unchanged.

古文：以清严爲属城所惮。时少王行事，多倾意于签帅，革以正直自居，不与典签赵道智坐。道智因还都啓事，面陈革堕事好酒，以琅邪王昙聪代爲行事。
现代文：江革以办事清廉严明而被其辖区内人所惧怕，当时年轻的诸王做什么事，都要听签帅的意思，江革自恃正直，不与典签赵道智来往，道智趁回京奏事之机，向朝廷当面报告说江革好酒误事，于是朝廷派琅王牙王昙聪代理他的职务。
English: Jiang Ge was feared by the people in the area under his jurisdiction for his integrity and strictness. At that time, the young kings had to listen to the commander-in-chief in everything they did. Jiang Ge prided himself on being honest and did not associate with the signer Zhao Daozhi. Daozhi took the opportunity of returning to Beijing to report to the court in person that Jiang Ge had drunk too much wine and had made a mistake. Therefore, the court sent the King of Gong to represent him.

古文：南州士庶爲之语曰： 故人不道智，新人佞散骑，莫知度不度，新人不如故。 
现代文：江州一带的官吏百姓们造出口号说： 故人不道智，新人佞散骑，莫知度不度，新人不如故。 
English: The officials and common people in the Jiangzhou area made a slogan saying: "The deceased is not wise, the newcomer is not wise, the newcomer is not wise, the newcomer is not wise, and the newcomer is not good enough."

古文：迁御史中丞，弹奏豪权，一无所避。
现代文：江革又改任御史中丞，弹劾豪强权贵，无所避讳。
English: After the Jangge Revolution, he was reappointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and he did not shy away from impeaching the powerful and powerful.

古文：后爲镇北豫章王长史、广陵太守。
现代文：后来又作镇北豫章王萧综长史、广陵太守。
English: Later, he also wrote the Zhenbei Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zi Long History and Guangling Taishu.

古文：时魏徐州刺史元法僧降附，革被敕随府王镇彭城。
现代文：当时北魏徐州刺史元法僧归附梁朝，江革被命令随萧综镇守彭城。
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty of Xuzhou subdued and annexed the monk Zhi Yuan, and Jiang Ge was ordered to guard Pengcheng with the prefectural governor.

古文：城既失守，革素不便马，泛舟而还。途经下邳，爲魏人所执。
现代文：后来彭城失守，江革不善骑马，坐船逃回去，途中经过下邳，被魏人抓住。
English: Later, Pengcheng lost its defense, Jiang Ge was not good at riding a horse, fled back by boat, passed through the Lower Yangtze River on the way, and was caught by Wei people.

古文：魏徐州刺史安丰王延明闻革才名，厚加接待。
现代文：魏徐州刺史安丰王元延明听说他的才名，对他招待很优厚。
English: Wang Yuan Yanming from Anfeng County, Xuzhou, Wei Province, heard of his talent and invited him very generously.

古文：革称脚疾不拜，延明将害之，见革辞色严正，更加敬重。
现代文：江革借口腿脚有毛病不行跪拜礼，延明要杀他，但看到他义正辞严，对他更加敬重。
English: Jiang Ge's excuse was that he had a problem with his legs and feet, so he couldn't kneel and pray. Yan Ming wanted to kill him, but when he saw his righteous words, he respected him even more.

古文：时祖搄同被拘絷，延明使搄作欹器漏刻铭，革唾駡搄曰： 卿荷国厚恩，已无报答，乃爲虏立铭，孤负朝廷。 
现代文：当时祖日恒也被俘获，延明让祖日恒为他作了《欹器漏刻铭》，江革唾骂祖日恒说： 你受国家大恩，已经无法报答了，却又为敌寇作铭，太辜负朝廷。 
English: At that time, Zu Rihong was also captured. Yan Ming asked Zu Rihong to make the "Imprint of the Leakage of the Ploughshare" for him. Jiang Ge swore at Zu Rihong and said, "You have been greatly blessed by the state, and you have not been able to repay it, but you have made an inscription for the enemy, and you have failed the imperial court.

古文：延明闻之，乃令革作丈八寺碑并祭彭祖文，革辞以囚执既久，无复心思。
现代文：延明听说了，就命令江革作《丈八寺碑》和《祭彭祖文》，江革推辞说被拘押时间长了，没有心思写东西。
English: When Yanming heard this, he asked Jiang Ge to write about the temple monument and the Peng Zu memorial. Jiang Ge refused on the grounds that he had been imprisoned for a long time and would no longer have the heart to do so.

古文：延明将加棰扑，革厉色曰： 江革行年六十，不能杀身报主，今日得死爲幸，誓不爲人执笔。 
现代文：延明要对他用刑，江革脸色严正地说： 江革活到六十岁了，不能杀身报主，今日能死就是幸运，誓不为人执笔。 
English: Yanming wanted to use punishment on him, Jiang Ge looked stern and said: Jiang Ge has lived to the age of sixty, he can't kill himself and proclaim the Lord, he is lucky to be able to die today, I swear I won't be a writer.

古文：延明知不可屈乃止。
现代文：延明知道不能压服他便住了手。
English: Yanming knew that he could not overpower him and stopped his hand.

古文：日给脱粟三升，仅馀性命。
现代文：每天供给他粗米三升，仅够保住性命。
English: He was given three litres of coarse rice a day, just enough to keep him alive.

古文：会魏帝请中山王元略反北，乃放革及祖搄还朝。
现代文：碰上魏宣武帝要求梁朝放还被俘的中山王元略，于是也放江革和祖日恒还朝。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu of the Wei Dynasty encountered Liang Dynasty, he asked Liang Dynasty to release the captured Zhongshan Wang Yuanliu, so he also released Jiang Ge and Zu Nicheng.

古文：上大宴，举酒劝革曰： 卿那不畏延明害？ 
现代文：梁武帝举行盛大宴会，举杯给江革敬酒说： 你怎么不怕元延明杀你呢？ 
English: Emperor Liangwu held a grand banquet, raised a toast to Jiang Ge and said: Why are you not afraid of Yuan Yanming killing you?

古文：对曰： 臣行年六十，死不爲夭，岂畏延明。 
现代文：江革回答说： 臣已经活到六十岁了，死了不算短命，怎能怕延明呢。 
English: Jiang Ge replied, "The minister has already lived to be sixty years old, and his death is not short-lived. How can he be afraid of Yanming?"

古文：帝曰： 今日始见苏武之节。 
现代文：武帝叹道： 今天才算见到苏武的气节。 
English: Emperor Wu sighed: Today is the first day of Suwu.

古文：于是以爲太尉临川王长史。
现代文：于是委任他为太尉临川王府长史。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the first lieutenant of the governor of King Linkawa.

古文：时帝惑于佛教，朝贤多啓求受戒。
现代文：当时武帝沉迷于佛教，朝内贤达也多奏请要求出家。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was obsessed with Buddhism, and the wise men of the imperial court often asked him to become a monk.

古文：革精信因果，而帝未知，谓革不奉佛法，乃赐革觉意诗五百字，云： 唯当勤精进，自强行胜修，岂可作底突，如彼必死囚。
现代文：江革本笃信因果，而武帝不知道，便写了一篇五百字的《觉意经》赐他，上面写道： 惟有勤进取，自强把身修，佛岂能顶撞，如此必死囚。
English: Jiang Ge Benedict believed in cause and effect, but Emperor Wu did not know, so he wrote a five-hundred-character "Consciousness Sutra" and gave it to him. It said: "Only if you are diligent and self-improvement, can Buddha oppose you, so you must be sentenced to death."

古文：以此告江革，并及诸贵游。 
现代文：以此告江革，并及诸贵游。 
English: He used this to inform Jiang Ge, as well as other dignitaries.

古文：又手敕曰： 果报不可不信，岂得底突如对元延明邪。 
现代文：又手批说： 因果报应不可不信，对佛怎能像对元延明那样顶撞呢。 
English: Another critic said, "One should not believe in the law of cause and effect. How can one oppose the Buddha like Yuan Yanming did?

古文：革因乞受菩萨戒。
现代文：江革因此请求受菩萨戒。
English: Jiang Ge therefore asked to be ordained as a Bodhisattva.

古文：时武陵王纪在东州，颇骄纵，上以臧盾性弱，不能匡正，召革慰遣，乃除武陵王长史、会稽郡丞，行府州事。
现代文：当时武陵王萧纪在东部州郡，很骄横放纵，武帝因为萧纪的副手臧盾性情懦弱，不能匡正萧纪，便召来江革，抚慰后派他前往，委任他为武陵王长史、会稽郡丞，行府州事。
English: At that time, King of Wuling, Xiao Ji, was very arrogant and indulgent in the eastern counties. Emperor Wu, because Xiao Ji's deputy, Xuan Dun, was cowardly and unable to rectify Xiao Ji, summoned him to Jiangge, comforted him and sent him there, and appointed him as the Wuling King Changshi, the auditor of the county, to carry out state affairs.

古文：革门生故吏家多在东，闻革应至，并赉持缘道迎候。
现代文：江革的弟子及旧日下属家大多在东郡，听说江革马上要到，都带着礼物夹道迎接。
English: Most of Jiang Ge's disciples and former subordinates were in Dong County. When they heard that Jiang Ge was about to arrive, they all rushed to meet him with gifts.

古文：革曰： 我通不受饷，不容独当故人筐篚。 
现代文：江革说： 我一概不接收馈赠，不能因为是老熟人就收下来。 
English: Jiang Ge said, "I don't accept gifts at all. I can't become the deceased's gift basket."

古文：至镇唯资公俸，食不兼味。
现代文：到任后吩咐领取公家俸禄，吃饭不超过两个菜。
English: After taking office, he ordered to receive a public salary, and to eat no more than two dishes.

古文：郡境殷广，辞讼日数百，革分判辩析，曾无疑滞，人安吏畏，百城震恐。
现代文：会稽郡境内富庶，人口众多，每天打官司的状子就有好几百，江革分析判断明白无误，从来不曾含糊误事。于是人民安定，官吏敬畏，境内大小城邑都感到震慑。
English: The county is rich and populous, with hundreds of people filing lawsuits every day. The analysis and judgment of the river crisis are clear and unmistakable, and there has never been any ambiguity. As a result, the people are stable, the officials are in awe, and the cities and towns in the territory are shocked.

古文：琅邪王骞爲山阴令，赃货狼籍，望风自解。
现代文：琅笽王骞作山阴县令，因贪赃名声狼藉，看到这种形势便自动收敛。
English: As the shangyin county magistrate, wang wang wang had a bad reputation for corruption. When he saw this situation, he automatically retreated.

古文：府王惮之。
现代文：武陵王萧纪也对他有些惧怕。
English: The king of Wuling, Xiao Ji, was also a little afraid of him.

古文：每侍燕，言论必以诗、书，王因此耽学好文。
现代文：江革每次侍奉萧纪饮宴，言谈必引《诗》、《书》，萧纪也因此潜心读书而喜爱诗文。
English: Every time Jiang Ge served Xiao Ji at a banquet, he always quoted "Poetry" and "Books" in his speech. Therefore, Xiao Ji also devoted himself to reading and loved poetry.

古文：典签沈炽文以王所制诗呈武帝，帝谓仆射徐勉曰： 革果称职。 
现代文：典签沈炽文把萧纪写的诗呈献给武帝看，武帝对仆射徐勉说： 江革果然称职。 
English: Shen Gaowen inscribed the poem written by Xiao Ji and presented it to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu said to his servant Xu Mian: "Jiang Ge is really qualified.

古文：乃除都官尚书。
现代文：于是委任他作都官尚书。
English: As a result, he was appointed to the post of metropolitan official.

古文：将还，赠遗一无所受，送故依旧订舫，革并不纳，唯乘台所给一舸。舸艚偏欹，不得安卧。或请济江徙重物以迮轻艚，革既无物，乃于西陵岸取石十馀片以实之。
现代文：等要回京时，对所赠送礼品一概不收。按以往惯例，送卸任官员的船费要向民间摊派，江革也不收取，只坐朝廷供给的一条小船，而船倾斜有毛病，没法坐卧，有人说过江应该搬些重物压住轻船以免危险，而江革没什么家当，就在西陵岸边捡了十几块石头装上。
English: When he wanted to return to Beijing, he did not accept any of the gifts he was given. According to past practice, the shipping costs for sending outgoing officials should be apportioned to the people, and Jiang Ge did not charge. He only took a small boat provided by the imperial court, but the boat had a problem with tilting, so he could not sit down. Someone said that Jiang should carry some heavy objects to hold down the light boat to avoid danger, but Jiang Ge did not have much money, so he picked up a dozen stones on the shore of Xiling and put them on.

古文：其清贫如此。
现代文：他就是如此清贫。
English: That's how poor he is.

古文：寻监吴郡，时境内荒俭，劫盗公行。革至郡唯有公给仗身二十人，百姓皆惧不能静寇，革反省游军尉，百姓逾恐。
现代文：不久监察吴郡，当时吴郡荒年歉收，劫盗横行，江革到此只带有朝廷配给的二十名卫士，百姓们都怕难以平定寇盗，而江革反而撤销当地维护治安的游军将吏，百姓更加担心。
English: Soon he supervised Wu County. At that time, Wu County had a poor harvest and robberies were rampant. Jiang Ge only brought 20 guards from the imperial court to this county. The people were afraid that it would be difficult to suppress the robbers. However, Jiang Ge removed the local military officers who were on a tour to maintain security. The people were even more worried.

古文：革乃广施恩惠，盗贼静息。
现代文：江革广施恩惠，盗贼于是自然平定。
English: Jiang Geguang bestowed favors, and the thieves were naturally subdued.

古文：武陵王出镇江州，乃曰： 我得江革文，得革清贫，岂能一日忘之，当与其同饱。 
现代文：武陵王出京镇守江州，对人说： 我得江革后，文章华美清丽有长进，又得江革清贫自守，为官吏作则，这让我一天也难以忘怀，应该与他有福同享。 
English: Wuling Wang went to Beijing to guard Jiangzhou, and said to the people: After the revolution, I had to go to Jiangzhou, and the articles were beautiful and beautiful, and there was growth, and I had to go to Jiangzhou to be poor and self-sufficient, and to set an example for officials. This made it hard for me to forget for a day, and I should share the blessing with him.

古文：乃表革同行。
现代文：于是上表奏请带江革同行。
English: As a result, the above table requested that Jiang Ge accompany them.

古文：除南中郎长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：江革被委任南中郎长史、寻阳太守。
English: Jiang Ge was appointed as the Southern Middle Lord, Changshi, and the Grand Prince of Xuanyang.

古文：征入爲度支尚书。
现代文：后又征调入朝为度支尚书。
English: Later, he was conscripted and transferred to the imperial court to serve as a vassal.

古文：好奖进闾阎，爲后生延誉，由是衣冠士子翕然归之。
现代文：江革喜欢栽培出身民间的有才干的人，爱给青年人传播名声，因此不少读书人都聚集在他的门下。
English: Jiang Ge liked to cultivate talented people from the people, and loved to spread fame to young people, so many readers gathered under his door.

古文：时尚书令何敬容掌选，序用多非其人。
现代文：当时尚书令何敬容执掌选吏，所任用的人很多都不合适。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling He Jingrong was in charge of selecting talents, and most of the people he selected were incompetent.

古文：革性强直，每朝宴恒有褒贬，以此爲权贵所疾。
现代文：江革性格倔犟刚直，每次朝宴时常要对这些人进行褒贬，因此被权贵们所讨厌。
English: Jiang Ge's character was very upright, and he often had to praise and criticize these people at every morning banquet, so he was hated by the powerful.

古文：乃谢病还家，除光禄大夫，优游闲放，以文酒自娱。
现代文：于是告病归家。改任光禄大夫，优游闲散，作文饮酒来自娱。
English: As a result, he became ill and returned home. He was reappointed as a doctor of Guanglu, leisurely leisure, writing and drinking for his own amusement.

古文：子兼叩
现代文：后去世，谥为 瞗子 。
English: After his death,  became 子.

古文：头流血，乞代父命，以身蔽刃，遂俱见杀，天下痛之。徐勉字修仁，东海郯人也。
现代文：有文集二十卷流传于世。江革历任八府长史，四王行事，三次作郡太守，而身边没有姬妾侍女，家徒四壁，因此而受到当世人的赞誉。徐勉，字修仁，东海郯地人。
English: There are twenty volumes of anthologies that have been passed down to the world. Jiang Ge successively served as eight prefectural governors, four kings, three times as county governors, and there are no concubines and domestic servants around, so he was praised by the contemporary world. Xu Tsun, surnamed Shuren, a native of the East China Sea.

古文：祖长宗，宋武帝霸府行参军。
现代文：祖父徐长宗，是宋武帝的霸府行参军。
English: His grandfather, Xu Changzong, was a member of Emperor Songwu's army.

古文：父融，南昌相。
现代文：父亲徐融，任南昌相。
English: His father, Xu Rong, served as the Minister of Nanchang.

古文：勉幼孤贫，早励清节。
现代文：徐勉自幼成为孤儿，十分贫困，所以他很早就自我激励，养成清正的节操。
English: Xu Yan was lonely and poor when he was young, and he had to cultivate a high self-discipline at an early age.

古文：年六岁，属霖雨，家人祈霁，率尔爲文，见称耆宿。
现代文：六岁时，遇到阴雨天，家人向神祈求天晴，他很快写成一篇文章，被长辈宿儒们所称赞。
English: At the age of six, when his family encountered a rainy day and prayed to God for a fine day, he quickly wrote an article, which was praised by the elders.

古文：及长好学，宗人孝嗣见之叹曰： 此所谓人中之骐骥，必能致千里。 
现代文：年长之后十分好学，同族人徐孝嗣见了以后感叹说： 这就是所说的人中的麒麟啊！必定能够前程千里！ 
English: When he was older, he was very eager to learn. When his compatriot Xu Xiaozhe saw him, he sighed and said, "This is the unicorn among men! He must be able to travel thousands of miles!"

古文：又尝谓诸子曰： 此人师也，尔等则而行之。 
现代文：他又对几个儿子说： 徐勉是可以当老师的，你们要以他为榜样。 
English: He also said to several sons: Xu Mian can be a teacher, you should follow his example.

古文：年十八，召爲国子生，便下帷专学，精力无怠。同时侪辈肃而敬之。
现代文：十八岁时，徐勉被朝廷召为国子学生。他便专心致志地读书，从不懈怠，当时同辈人都十分敬重他。
English: At the age of eighteen, Xu was called by the imperial court to become a national student. He devoted himself to his studies and never slacked off. At that time, his contemporaries held him in high esteem.

古文：祭酒王俭每见，常目送之，曰： 此子非常器也。 
现代文：祭酒王俭每次见到他时，总是注视着他直到离去，并说： 这孩子不是平庸的人才。 
English: Every time he saw him, Wang Jian always watched him until he left, and said: This child is not a mediocre talent.

古文：每称有宰辅之量。
现代文：并总是说徐勉有当宰辅的气质和才干。
English: And he always said that Xu Mian had the temperament and ability to be a vice-premier.

古文：射策甲科，起家王国侍郎，补太学博士。
现代文：在朝廷举行射策考试时，他考取了甲科，开始被任命为藩王国的侍郎，补为太学博士。
English: When the imperial court held a shooting test, he passed the A-level examination, and was appointed as a chamberlain of the domain kingdom, and later as a doctor of taigaku.

古文：时每有议定，勉理证明允，莫能贬夺，同官咸取则焉。
现代文：当时每次有事情商议，徐勉说意见时总是充分论证，道理十分透彻，没有人能够驳倒他，同僚们都以他的意见为准则。
English: At that time, whenever there was a matter to be discussed, Xu Mian always fully demonstrated his opinions, and his reasoning was very thorough. No one could refute him, and his colleagues all took his opinions as the standard.

古文：迁临海王西中郎田曹行参军，俄徙署都曹。
现代文：后又改任临海王西中郎田曹行参军，不久又转任都曹。
English: Later, he was transferred to Linhai Wang Xi Zhong Lang Tian Cao Xing to join the army, and soon he was transferred to Du Cao.

古文：时琅邪王融一时才俊，特相慕悦，尝请交焉。
现代文：同时的琅笽人王融是人所公认的才学之士，他特别钦佩和爱慕徐勉，曾经请求相互交往。
English: At the same time, Wang Rong, a native of Shandong, is a well-known scholar. He especially admires and loves Xu Mian, and once asked for mutual exchanges.

古文：勉谓所亲曰： 王郎名高望促，难可轻霹衣裾。 
现代文：徐勉对所亲近的人说： 王郎名气很高而所望过急，难以轻易成功。 
English: Xu said to the people close to him: Wang Lang is very famous and his expectations are too high, it is difficult to succeed easily.

古文：融后果陷于法，以此见推识鉴。
现代文：王融后来果然陷于法网，由此可以见出他善于识人。
English: Wang Rong was later caught in the net of the law, which shows that he is good at identifying people.

古文：累迁领军长史。
现代文：累迁任军长史。
English: This is the history of successive military governors.

古文：初与长沙宣武王游，梁武帝深器赏之，及武帝兵至建邺，勉于新林谒见，帝甚加恩礼，使管书记。
现代文：起初，徐勉就和长沙宣武王经常往来，梁武帝十分器重和赏识他。当梁武帝领兵到建邺时，徐勉在新林拜见他，梁武帝对徐勉十分加恩礼遇，让他掌管书记。
English: At the beginning, Xu Mian had frequent dealings with King Xuanwu of Changsha, and Emperor Liangwu highly valued and appreciated him. When Emperor Liangwu led an army to Jianye, Xu Mian met him in Xinlin. Emperor Liangwu treated Xu Mian with great courtesy, and put him in charge of the secretary.

古文：及帝即位，拜中书侍郎，进领中书通事舍人，直内省。
现代文：梁武帝即位后，任命徐勉为中书侍郎，又晋为中书通事舍人，在内省值事。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, he appointed Xu Tsuen as the attendant of Chinese books and promoted him to the position of the secretary of Chinese books, and he was on duty at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：迁临川王后军谘议、尚书左丞。
现代文：后又改任临川王后军谘议、尚书右丞。
English: Later, he was reappointed as an adviser to the Linchuan Queen's Retaining Army, and also as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：自掌枢宪，多所纠举，时论以爲称职。
现代文：自从他到朝廷掌管法令之后，常常纠察违法行为，当时的议论都认为他是很称职的官员。
English: Since he came to the imperial court to administer the law, he often picketed illegal acts, and the discussion at that time was that he was a very competent official.

古文：天监三年，除给事黄门侍郎，尚书吏部郎，参掌大选。
现代文：天监三年，担任给事黄门侍郎，尚书吏部郎，参与选拔重要官吏的工作。
English: For three years, he served as the Heaven's Inspector, the Yellow Gate Attendant, and the Book Clerk, and participated in the selection of important officials.

古文：迁侍中。
现代文：又迁任侍中。
English: Transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：时师方侵魏，候驿填委。
现代文：这时梁军正大举进攻北魏，军使往来络绎不绝。
English: At this time, Liang's army was attacking the Northern Wei Dynasty on a large scale, and envoys were constantly coming and going.

古文：勉参掌军书，劬劳夙夜，动经数旬，乃一还家。
现代文：徐勉参与军事，日夜辛劳，经常过几十天才回一次家。
English: Xu Mian participated in the military, worked hard day and night, and often returned home after several decades.

古文：群犬惊吠，勉叹曰： 吾忧国忘家，乃至于此。
现代文：家里所养群犬不认识他而惊吠起来。徐勉叹息着说： 我因为忧心国事而忘家，竟然到了这种地步！
English: The dogs in the family didn't recognize him and started barking in alarm. Xu Mian sighed and said, "I've forgotten my home because I'm worried about national affairs, and it's come to this!

古文：若吾亡后，亦是传中一事。 
现代文：到我死后，这也是传记中的一件事啊！ 
English: If I die, it's also a matter of biography.

古文：六年，除给事中、五兵尚书，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：天监六年，任给事中、五兵尚书，又改任吏部尚书。
English: In the sixth year, he was assigned to the middle-ranking officials and five soldiers, and transferred to the personnel department.

古文：勉居选官，彜伦有序。
现代文：徐勉负责选拔官员，他依照礼法选用很有规矩。
English: Xu Mian is in charge of selecting officials, and his selection is very orderly in accordance with etiquette.

古文：既闲尺牍，兼善辞令，虽文案填积，坐客充满，应对如流，手不停笔。
现代文：徐勉擅写文书，更兼文辞善美，尽管经常公文案牍堆积，座客充盈满室，他应答如流，手不停笔。
English: Xu Mian is good at writing documents, and his words are also beautiful. Although he often has a pile of official documents and documents, and the room is full of guests, he answers fluently and does not stop writing.

古文：又该综百氏，皆避其讳。
现代文：又精晓百家姓氏，能做到避开他们的讳字。
English: He also knows hundreds of surnames and can avoid their taboo words.

古文：尝及闸人夜集，客有虞暠求詹事五官。
现代文：他曾经和门人在夜间聚会，有位名叫虞日高的门客向徐勉请求让他担任詹事等官职。
English: He once had a meeting with his protégées at night, and one protégé, named Yu Rigao, asked Xu Mian to let him take on the post of Zhanji and other official positions.

古文：勉正色答云： 今夕止可谈风月，不宜及公事。 
现代文：徐勉十分严肃地回答说： 今晚只能谈些风月的闲事，不宜论及公事。 
English: Xu replied very seriously, "Tonight, we can only talk about trivial matters, and it is not appropriate to discuss business affairs.

古文：故时人服其无私。
现代文：所以当时人都佩服他的无私。
English: That's why everyone at the time admired his selflessness.

古文：天监初，官名互有省置，勉撰立选簿奏之，有诏施用。
现代文：天监初年，官员的名称设置互有增减，徐勉撰写了有关选官的簿籍上奏，朝廷下诏依照施行。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervision, the names of officials were increased and decreased. Xu Mian wrote a book on the election of officials, and the imperial edict was implemented accordingly.

古文：其制开九品爲十八班，自是贪冒苟进者以财货取通，守道沦退者以贫寒见没矣。
现代文：这个办法是将九品列为十八班，从此以后冒贪和苟得官职的人因为有钱财物品而得到进用，而守道退隐者就因贫寒而没有出头之日了。
English: This method is to classify the nine grades into eighteen classes. From now on, those who are greedy and covet official positions will be promoted because they have money and goods, while those who keep the Tao and retreat will not be promoted because they are poor.

古文：后爲左卫将军，领太子中庶子，侍东宫。
现代文：后徐勉任左卫将军，领太子中庶子，在东宫侍奉。
English: Later, Xu Ren was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and served as the Prince Regent's middle son in the East Palace.

古文：昭明太子尚幼，敕知宫事，太子礼之甚重，每事询谋。
现代文：昭明太子当时年幼，皇帝让徐勉教他懂得宫中之事，太子对徐勉非常敬重，各种事情都同他商量。
English: Prince Akiming was young at the time, and the emperor asked Xu Mian to teach him about palace affairs. The prince held Xu Mian in high esteem and discussed all kinds of matters with him.

古文：尝于殿讲孝经，临川王宏、尚书令沈约备二傅，勉与国子祭酒张充爲执经，王莹、张稷、柳憕、王暕爲侍讲。
现代文：有一次在殿内讲解《孝经》，临川王萧宏、尚书令沈约担任太子的师傅，徐勉和国子祭酒张充担任执经，王莹、张稷、柳忄登、王日柬任侍讲。
English: On one occasion, the "Filial Piety Sutra" was lectured in the hall, with Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, Shang Shuling Shen Ying as the prince's teacher, Xu Zhen and Guozhishu Zhang Chong as the scribes, and Wang Ying, Zhang Xuan, Liu Yuden, and Wang Nichikam as assistant lecturers.

古文：时选极亲贤，妙尽人誉。
现代文：这个阵容是当时最贤能的人所组成，当时人都赞誉这是极妙的人选。
English: This line-up was made up of some of the best talent at the time, and was hailed as a great appointment.

古文：勉陈让数四，又与沈约书，求换侍讲，诏弗许，然后就焉。
现代文：徐勉多次谦让，请求将他换为侍讲，武帝下诏不答应，他这才就任了。
English: Emperor Wu did not agree to Xu's repeated requests for him to be replaced as the courtier, and only then did he take up the post.

古文：旧扬、徐首迎主簿，尽选国华中正，取勉子崧充南徐选首。
现代文：旧例由扬、徐两州首先选用主簿，全都挑选国内最有才能和最公正的人担任，当时选取了徐勉的儿子徐崧到南徐州。
English: In the old case, Yang and Xu were the first to choose the main book, and all the most talented and fair people in the country were selected to serve. At that time, Xu Zhen, the son of Xu Mian, was selected to go to South Xuzhou.

古文：帝敕之曰： 卿寒士，而子与王志子同迎，偃王以来未之有也。 
现代文：皇帝对他说： 卿本寒士，而你的儿子和王志的儿子一起先被选用，这是徐偃王以来所没有过的事啊！ 
English: The emperor said to him, "Your son and Wang Zhi's son have been selected first, and this is something that has not happened since King Xu Xi!

古文：勉耻以其先爲戏，答旨不恭，由是左迁散骑常侍，领游击将军。
现代文：徐勉认为梁武帝拿他的祖先来开玩笑，感到是一种耻辱，回答时对皇帝也不礼貌，于是被贬为散骑常侍，兼领游击将军。
English: Xu Mian thought it was a shame that Emperor Liangwu made fun of his ancestors, and he was not polite to the emperor when he answered, so he was relegated to a straggler and a leader of a guerrilla general.

古文：后爲太子詹事，又迁尚书右仆射，詹事如故。
现代文：后来徐勉又担任太子詹事，又改任尚书右仆射，仍兼太子詹事。
English: Later, Xu Zhen served as the prince Zhanji, and then changed his post to the right of Shang Shuxu, and still served as the prince Zhanji.

古文：时人间丧事多不遵礼，朝终夕殡，相尚以速。
现代文：当时民间治丧大多不按照礼制行事，早晨人刚咽气而晚上就殡葬了，相互比着快办。
English: At that time, most of the civil funerals did not follow the etiquette. In the morning, people just breathed a sigh of relief, and in the evening they buried the dead. They were faster than each other.

古文：勉上疏曰： 礼记问丧云： 三日而后敛者，以俟其生也。
现代文：徐勉上疏朝廷说： 《礼记·问丧》篇中说： 三天以后才收殓，这是期望有复活的可能。
English: Xu Min said to the imperial court: "In the "Rituals and Funerals" chapter, it says, "After three days, the coffin is closed. This is the hope that there is a possibility of resurrection."

古文：三日而不生，亦不生矣。 
现代文：三天以后不能复活，也就活不过来了。 
English: If he does not rise after three days, he cannot live.

古文：顷来不遵斯制，送终之礼，殡以期日。
现代文：但近来都不遵从这礼制，送葬的礼法，一天就殡葬。
English: Lately, however, they have not followed this etiquette, and funerals have become a one-day affair.

古文：润屋豪家，乃或半晷。
现代文：豪门富家，甚至只有半天。
English: A wealthy family, even if only for half a day.

古文：衣衾棺椁，以速爲荣。
现代文：衣裳被服棺木郭，以办得越快越荣耀。
English: The clothes were put into the coffin, so that it would be done as quickly and as gloriously as possible.

古文：亲戚徒隶，各念休反。
现代文：亲戚僮仆，也都想早些返回。
English: Relatives and servants also want to return earlier.

古文：故属纩才毕，灰钉已具。
现代文：所以墓穴刚刚挖好，灰石铁钉都已弄完。
English: So the grave has just been dug, and the grey stone nails have been finished.

古文：忘狐鼠之顾步，媿燕雀之徊翔，伤情灭理，莫此爲大。
现代文：忘记了狐鼠悲哀同类，尚且频频回首而望；愧比于燕雀忧伤同伴，多次往来翱翔。其伤情害理的事情，无过于此了。
English: The fox-mouse forgets his sad fellows, and yet frequently looks back; he is more to be pitied than the sparrow, his sad companion, who soars to and fro many times. There is nothing more injurious to his state of mind than this.

古文：且人子承衾之时，志懑心绝，丧事所资，悉关他手。
现代文：况且为人之子，继承家业之日，心中忧愁悲伤之极，办理丧事各种资财，全由他经手。
English: Moreover, he was a son of man, and on the day of inheriting the family business, his heart was full of sorrow and grief, and he handled all kinds of assets and assets.

古文：爱憎深浅，事实难原。
现代文：日常上下之间的爱憎深浅，实在难以清楚。
English: It's hard to know the depth of the love-hate relationship between the daily up and down.

古文：如觇视或爽，存没违滥，使万有其一，怨酷已多，岂若缓其告敛之辰，申其望生之冀。
现代文：如果日常探望欠缺，对其生死存亡违礼乱来，假如其间万一有违法之事，产生的怨恨惨酷就很多了。何不让其推迟收殓的时间，延长一点生还的期望。
English: If there is a lack of daily visits, if there is a violation of the etiquette of his life and death, and if there is any violation of the law during this time, the resentment generated will be very cruel. Why not let him delay the time of receiving, and extend the expectation of survival a little.

古文：请自今士庶宜悉依古，三日大敛。
现代文：请从今以后，士民众庶均依古礼，三日之后大殓。
English: Please, from now on, all junior and junior officials should follow the ancient etiquette, and the grand banquet will be held three days later.

古文：如其不奉，加以纠绳。 
现代文：如不遵从，严加纠治。 
English: If they do not comply, they will be severely punished.

古文：诏可其奏。
现代文：皇帝下诏赞同所奏。
English: The imperial edict agreed to Xu's request.

古文：又除尚书仆射、中卫将军。
现代文：又被任命为尚书仆射、中卫将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of Shangshu minion, and Zhongwei general.

古文：勉以旧恩，继升重位，尽心奉上，知无不爲。
现代文：徐勉认为自己早受皇帝知遇之恩，连续晋升重要职位，所以尽心侍奉皇帝，凡其所知，无不尽力而为。
English: Xu Mian believed that he had been favored by the emperor and had been continuously promoted to important positions. Therefore, he served the emperor wholeheartedly and did his best in everything he knew.

古文：爰自小选迄于此职，常参掌衡石，甚得士心。
现代文：他自从负责选拔地位较低的官员起直至担任现今的重要职务，其间总是参与选拔人才的工作，深得士人之心。
English: From the time he was in charge of selecting low-ranking officials to his current important position, he has always been involved in the selection of talents and has won the hearts of scholars.

古文：禁省中事，未尝漏泄，每有表奏，辄焚稿草。
现代文：朝中机密事务，从未泄漏，每当有表章上奏后，当即烧掉草稿。
English: The confidential affairs between the DPRK and China have never been leaked. Whenever a document is published, the draft is immediately burned.

古文：博通经史，多识前载。
现代文：他知识广博，精通经史，深晓古籍所载各种史实。
English: He is well-versed in books and history, and remembers many things from the previous generation.

古文：齐世王俭居职已后，莫有逮者。
现代文：在齐朝的王俭任职之后，没有一个人比得上徐勉。
English: After Wang Jian of the Qi Dynasty, there is no one who can match Xu Mian.

古文：朝仪国典，昏冠吉凶，勉皆预图议。
现代文：凡朝中的礼仪和国家的大典，婚礼、加冠、吉事、凶服等，徐勉全都参与意见。
English: In all the ceremonies of the dynasty and the country, such as weddings, crowning ceremonies, auspicious and inauspicious events, Xu Mian participated in the discussions.

古文：初，勉受诏知撰五礼，普通六年功毕，表上之曰：
现代文：很早的时候，徐勉就接受诏令撰写五礼制度，普通六年撰写完毕，便上表朝廷说：
English: At a very early stage, Xu Mian accepted the five-recipe system for the writing of the imperial edict. After six years of writing, he said to the court:

古文：夫礼以安上化人，弘风训俗，经国家，利后嗣者也。
现代文： 礼，是用以使上者安宁、教化民众，弘大正气、训导民俗，以经国家、利后代的大事。
English: Rituals are important events that are used to pacify the superior, enlighten the people, propagate righteousness, teach folk customs, and benefit the country and future generations.

古文：唐、虞、三代，咸必由之。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜、夏商周三代，都必使用的。
English: The Tang Dynasty, the Yu Dynasty, and the Xia Dynasty all used it.

古文：在乎有周，宪章尤备，因殷革夏，损益可知。
现代文：到了周代，礼法尤其完备，周人因于殷代革除夏代的弊端，损益可知。
English: In the generation of Zhizhou, the ceremony is particularly complete, and the rise and fall of the summer system can be known by following the Yinli reform.

古文：虽复经礼三百，曲礼三千，经文三百，威仪三千，其大归有五，即宗伯所掌典礼，吉爲上，凶次之，宾次之，军次之，嘉爲下也。
现代文：虽有经礼三百，曲礼三千，经文三百，威仪三千，其大体有五种，也就是宗伯所掌管的礼仪，吉礼为上，凶礼其次，宾礼再次，军礼又次，嘉礼为下者。
English: Although there are three hundred sutras, three thousand pieces of music, three hundred scriptures, and three thousand dignified rites, there are generally five kinds of them, that is, the etiquette presided over by the patriarch, the auspicious rite is the upper, the evil rite is the second, the guest rite is the second, the military rite is the second, and the honorable ceremony is the lower.

古文：故祠祭不以礼，则不齐不庄；丧纪不以礼，则背死忘生者衆；宾客不以礼，则朝觐失其仪；军旅不以礼，则致乱于师律；冠昏不以礼，则男女失其时。
现代文：所以祭祀时不依礼，就不齐整庄重；丧葬时不依礼，就会有许多人违背死者忘了生者；应接宾客不依礼，朝见时就会失去风范；军队之中不依礼，就会导致军令混乱；加冠婚姻不依礼，那么男女就会失去合适的时令。
English: Therefore, if you do not follow the etiquette at the time of sacrifice, it will not be neat and solemn; if you do not follow the etiquette at the time of funeral, there will be many people who will violate the dead and forget the living; if you do not follow the etiquette when receiving guests, you will lose the etiquette when seeing the morning; if you do not follow the etiquette in the army, it will lead to confusion in the military order; if you do not follow the etiquette in the marriage, then men and women will lose the appropriate season.

古文：爲国修身，于斯攸急。
现代文：治国修身，以此最为急务。
English: The most urgent task is to govern the country and improve oneself.

古文：洎周室大坏，王道既衰，官守斯文，日失其序。
现代文：自周室礼崩乐坏，王道衰微，官府所守此礼，日渐失其次序。
English: Since the Zhou court etiquette has fallen into disrepute and the royal way has waned, this etiquette, which is observed by the government, has gradually lost its precedence.

古文：暴秦灭学，扫地无馀。
现代文：暴秦毁灭学堂，礼法荡然无存。
English: Brutal Qin destroyed the school, and the etiquette was completely destroyed.

古文：汉氏郁兴，日不暇给，犹命叔孙于外野，方知帝王之爲贵。
现代文：汉代勃兴之后，百事繁忙，日不暇给，仍令叔孙通求之于外野，于是而知帝王身份之贵。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Pepsi was busy and had no time to give, but still made his uncles and grandsons ask for it in the outfield, so he knew the value of the emperor's status.

古文：末叶纷纶，递有兴毁。
现代文：后代混乱，递承之间，互有兴灭。
English: Subsequent generations are in disarray, with succession alternating between boom and bust.

古文：及东京曹褒，南宫制述，集其散略，百有馀篇。
现代文：至东汉曹褒，在南宫制作撰述，收集散失部分，得到一百多篇。
English: To the Eastern Han Dynasty Cao Bao, in the Southern Palace to produce and write, collect the scattered parts, get more than a hundred.

古文：虽写以尺简，而终阙平奏。
现代文：虽然写成书简，而上奏时仍有缺失。
English: Although written as a booklet, there are still some defects in the performance.

古文：其后兵革相寻，异端互起，章句既沦，俎豆斯辍。
现代文：此后兵革纷争，异端并起，章句沦没，礼制中断。
English: Subsequently, the war continued, different opinions appeared, and after the loss of the chapter and sentence, the etiquette was suspended.

古文：方领矩步之容，事灭于旌鼓，兰台石室之典，用尽于帷盖。
现代文：方领矩步的仪容，已淹灭于旌鼓之中，兰台石室之典籍，用尽于帷幄车盖之上。
English: Fang Lian Momok's appearance has been drowned in the gongs and drums, and the classics of the Lan Tai Stone Room have been exhausted on the curtain cover.

古文：至乎晋氏，爰定新礼，荀顗制之于前，挚虞删之于末。
现代文：至于晋代，才制定新礼，荀岂页制定于前，挚虞删定于后。
English: As for the Jin Dynasty, it was only after the establishment of the new rite that the rules were set out, and the rules were set out before, and the rules were set out after.

古文：既而中原丧乱，罕有所遗，江左草创，因循而已。
现代文：继而中原遭受丧乱，礼法罕有存留。江东草创之时，因循旧制而已。
English: Subsequently, the Central Plains suffered turmoil, and the etiquette rarely survived. When the East River was first created, it only followed the old system.

古文：厘革之风，是则未暇。
现代文：沿革之风，未能顾及。
English: In the spirit of reform, there is no idle time.

古文：伏惟陛下睿明啓运，先天改物，拨乱惟武，经俗以文。
现代文： 陛下睿智明察，开启圣运，先天改物，拨乱用武，化俗以文。
English: His Majesty's sagacity and wisdom saw clearly that to open the holy fortune, he had to change things a priori, use martial arts in a chaotic way, and use literature in a vulgar way.

古文：作乐在乎功成，制礼弘于业定。
现代文：作乐在于成功，制礼用以定业。
English: The creation of music after the achievement of merit, the establishment of etiquette, and the laying of a great foundation.

古文：伏寻所定五礼，起齐永明二年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容表求制一代礼乐。
现代文：近所撰定五礼，起自齐永明二年，当时步兵校尉伏曼容上表请求制定一代之礼乐。
English: The five rites of the neighborhood have been compiled since the second year of Qi Yongming, when the infantry lieutenant Fu Man Rong made a request to formulate a generation of rites.

古文：于时参议，置新旧学士十人，止修五礼，谘禀卫将军丹阳尹王俭，学士亦分住郡中，制作历年，犹未克就。
现代文：经过商议，设立新旧学士十人，只修五礼，谘禀卫将军丹阳尹王俭，学士们也分别住在郡中，制作多年，仍未撰成。
English: After deliberation, ten new and old bachelors were set up, only five rites were practiced, and they were advised by the General of the Guards Danyang Yin Wangjian. The bachelors also lived separately in Guanzhong. It has been made for many years, but has not yet been compiled.

古文：及文宪薨，遗文散逸，又以事付国子祭酒何胤，经涉九载，犹复未毕。
现代文：当文宪去世之后，遗文散失，又将这事交给国子祭酒何胤，经过九年，仍未完成。
English: After the death of Wen Xian, the remaining documents were lost, and the matter was handed over to Guo Zi, but after nine years, it was still not completed.

古文：建武四年，胤还东山，齐明帝敕委尚书令徐孝嗣，旧事本末，随在南第。
现代文：建武四年，何胤回到东山，齐明帝命令交给尚书令徐孝嗣，往事始末，随在南第。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, He Yin returned to Dongshan, and was ordered by Emperor Qiming to hand over to Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi. From beginning to end, He Yin followed Nan Di.

古文：永元中，孝嗣于此遇祸，又多零落。
现代文：永元年间，徐孝嗣在此遇祸，所撰之文又多散落。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, Emperor Xiaozhe was besieged by disaster, and most of the original texts were lost.

古文：当时鸠集所余，权付尚书左丞蔡仲熊、骁骑将军何佟之共掌其事。
现代文：当时收集所余之文，暂时交给尚书左丞蔡仲熊、骁骑将军何佟之共同负责此事，当时礼局就安设在国子学中门外。
English: At that time, the remaining documents of the institute were collected and temporarily handed over to Cai Zhongxiong, the Vice-President of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and He Ying, the General of the Chinese Cavalry, who were jointly responsible for the matter. At that time, the Bureau of Etiquette was located outside the gate of Kuniko Gakuen Middle School.

古文：时礼局住在国子学中门外，东昏之时，频有军火，其所散失，又踰太半。天监元年，佟之啓审省置之宜，敕使外详。
现代文：东昏侯时，多次遭受战火，其间散失的，又过大半。天监元年，何佟之请示设置机构事宜，朝廷下旨由外间商议。
English: In the twilight of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, it was repeatedly subjected to the flames of war, and more than half of it was lost. In the first year of the Celestial Guardianship, the matter of setting up an institution at the request of He Ying, the imperial court issued an order to be discussed outside.

古文：时尚书参详，以天地初革，庶务权舆，宜俟隆平，徐议删撰。
现代文：当时尚书省商议之后，认为正值国家变革之初，众务权宜处置，应当等到国泰民安之时，再行考虑增删修撰。
English: At that time, after deliberation by the Ministry of Education and Culture, it was considered that it was the beginning of national reform, and the expedient disposal of public affairs should wait until the time of national security, and then consider adding, deleting and revising.

古文：欲且省礼局，并还尚书仪曹。
现代文：准备暂时减去礼局，并入尚书省仪曹。
English: Prepare to temporarily subtract the etiquette bureau and merge it into the Shangshu Provincial etiquette bureau.

古文：诏旨云： 礼坏乐缺，故国异家殊，实宜以时修定，以爲永准。 
现代文：圣旨说： 礼坏乐缺，所以国有异政家的殊别，实在应当因时修定，以为永世遵从的规则。 
English: The holy edict said: "Rites and rituals are deficient, so the distinction of state-owned heretics should really be revised from time to time, as a rule to be followed forever."

古文：于是尚书仆射沈约等参议，请五礼各置旧学士一人，人各自举学士二人相助，抄撰其中。
现代文：于是尚书仆射沈约等商议，请求五礼各设置旧学士一人，每人各自举荐学士二人协助，抄撰其中的内容。
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu and Shao Shen discussed the agreement and requested that each of the five schools set up an old bachelor, and each recommended two bachelors to help copy the contents.

古文：有疑者依前汉石渠、后汉白虎，随源以闻，请旨断决。
现代文：有疑义的依照西汉石渠阁藏书、东汉的《白虎通义》，随其本源上奏，请圣旨决断。
English: If there is any doubt about the meaning, it should be based on the Western Han Dynasty Shichugaku Collection and the Eastern Han Dynasty's "White Tiger," and it should be played according to its source, and the decision should be made according to the Holy Will.

古文：乃以旧学士右军记室参军明山宾掌吉礼，中军骑兵参军严植之掌凶礼，中军田曹行参军兼太常丞贺瑒掌宾礼，征虏记室参军陆琏掌军礼，右军参军事司马褧掌嘉礼，尚书右丞何佟之总参其事。
现代文：于是便以旧学士右军记室参军明山宾掌管吉礼，中军骑兵参军严植之掌管凶礼，中军田曹参军兼太常丞贺蠩掌管宾礼，征虏记室参军陆琏掌管军礼，右军参军事司马醁掌管嘉礼，尚书右丞何佟之总参其事。
English: As a result, it was decided that Ming Shan Bin, a former member of the Right Division of the Academy of Military History, would preside over the auspicious ceremony, Yan Zi, a member of the Chinese cavalry, would preside over the ominous ceremony, Tian Cao, a member of the Chinese cavalry and Tai Chang Chung, would preside over the auspicious ceremony, Lu Yao, a member of the Conscription Records Office, would preside over the military ceremony, Sima Yao, a member of the Right Division of the Academy of Military History, would preside over the ceremonial ceremony, and He Yao, a member of the Right Division of the Academy of Military History

古文：佟之亡后，以镇北谘议参军伏揯代之。
现代文：何佟之去世后，由镇北谘议参军伏日恒代替他。
English: After He Yanzhi's death, he was replaced by Fuhihong, who was recommended by the town's north advisory committee to join the army.

古文：后又以揯代严植之掌凶礼。
现代文：后来又让伏日恒代替严植之掌管凶礼。
English: Later, he allowed Fuchihiko to take charge of the ceremony in place of Yanzhi.

古文：揯寻迁官，以五经博士缪昭掌凶礼。
现代文：伏日恒不久改任官职，便由《五经》博士缪昭掌管凶礼。
English: Fuh Rihong soon changed his official position, and Miao Zhao, the "Five Classics" doctor, took charge of the ceremony.

古文：复以礼仪深广，记载残缺，宜须博论，共尽其致，更使镇军将军丹阳尹沈约、太常卿张充及臣三人同参厥务，臣又奉别敕总知其事。
现代文：又因礼仪内容深奥广博，记载残缺，应当广泛进行讨论，共尽其力，便另派镇军将军丹阳尹沈约、太常卿张充和微臣三人共同参与此事，臣又另奉诏令总管其事。
English: In addition, because the content of the etiquette is profound and extensive, and the records are incomplete, it should be widely discussed, and everyone should do their best, he also sent the town army general Danyang Yin Shenyo, the Tai Changqing Zhang Chong and the three ministers to jointly participate in the matter, and the minister also issued a decree to take charge of the matter.

古文：末又使中书侍郎周舍、庾于陵二人复豫参知。
现代文：最后又让中书侍郎周扌舍、庾於陵两人再参与此事。
English: Later, the chancellors Zhou She and Zou Yuling were also appointed to participate in the management.

古文：若有疑义，所掌学士当职先立议，通谘五礼旧学士及参知各言同异，条牒啓闻，决之制旨。
现代文：如有疑问，所掌管的学士应当首先提出意见，通问五礼旧学士和参与此事者各谈本人意见，赞同或否定，写成条文，上奏皇上，由圣旨决断。
English: If there is any doubt, the scholar in charge should first put forward an opinion, ask the five former scholars and those involved in the matter to talk about their own opinions, approve or deny, write a provision, submit it to the emperor, and let the will decide.

古文：疑事既多，岁时又积，制旨裁断，其数不少。
现代文：所疑事项众多，经历多年积累，为数不少。
English: There are a large number of suspicious matters, many of which have accumulated over the years.

古文：莫不网罗经诰，玉振金声。
现代文：无不网罗所有经诰之文，玉振金声。
English: Without fail, all the texts of the sutras are included, with the voice of Tam Chun Jin.

古文：凡诸奏决，皆载篇首，具列圣旨，爲不刊之则。
现代文：凡所有奏请决定的奏文，都载于篇首，详列圣旨，成为不可改易的法则。
English: All the decrees of the council are written at the head of the book, and the decrees are written in detail, and they are a law that cannot be changed.

古文：甯孝宣之能拟，岂孝章之足云。
现代文：哪里是孝宣所能模拟，孝宣所能说出的呢！
English: Where is what Xiao Xuan can simulate, what Xiao Xuan can say!

古文：五礼之职，事有繁简，及其列毕，不得同时。
现代文： 五礼所管之事，各有繁简，至其撰写完毕，不能同时而就。
English: The duties of the five etiquettes are complicated and complicated, and they cannot be done at the same time until they have been completed.

古文：嘉礼仪注以天监六年五月七日上尚书，合十有二帙，一百一十六卷，五百三十六条。
现代文：《嘉礼仪注》于天监六年五月初七上于尚书，共有十二套，一百一十六卷，五百三十六条。
English: "Jiali Yi Shu" was published in Shangshu on the 7th day of the 5th month of the 6th year of Tianjing, with a total of 12 sets, 116 volumes, and 536 articles.

古文：宾礼仪注以天监六年五月二十日上尚书，合十有七帙，一百三十三卷，五百四十五条。
现代文：《宾礼仪注》于天监六年五月二十日上于尚书，共有十七套，一百三十三卷，五百四十五条。
English: "Guest Etiquette Note" was published in Shangshu on May 20th, 6th year of Tianjing, with a total of 17 sets, 133 volumes, and 545 articles.

古文：军礼仪注以天监九年十月二十九日上尚书，合十有八帙，一百八十九卷，二百四十条。
现代文：《军礼仪注》在天监九年十月二十九日上于尚书，共有十八套，一百八十九卷，二百四十条。
English: "Military Etiquette Note" was first published in Shangshu on October 29 of the ninth year of Tianjing, with a total of eighteen sets, one hundred eighty-nine volumes, and two hundred and forty articles.

古文：吉礼仪注以天监十一年十一月十日上尚书，合二十有六帙，二百二十四卷，一千五条。
现代文：《吉礼仪注》在天监十一年十一月初十上于尚书，共有二十六套，二百二十四卷，一千零五条。
English: "The Commentary on the Rite of Blessing" was added to the Shangshu on the 10th day of the 11th month of the 11th year of Tianjing, with a total of 26 sets, 224 volumes, and 105 articles.

古文：凶礼仪注以天监十一年十一月十七日上尚书，合四十有七帙，五百一十四卷，五千六百九十三条。
现代文：《凶礼仪注》在天监十一年十一月十七日上于尚书，共有四十七套，五百一十四卷，五千六百九十三条。
English: "Fierce Rites and Rituals" was published in Shangshu on November 17th, the 11th year of Tianjing, with a total of 47 sets, 514 volumes, and 5,693 articles.

古文：大凡一百二十帙，一千一百七十六卷，八千一十九条。
现代文：总共一百二十套，一千一百七十六卷，八千零一十九条。
English: A total of one hundred and twenty sets, eleven hundred and seventy-six volumes, eight thousand and nineteen articles.

古文：又列副秘阁及五经典书各一通，缮写校定，以普通五年二月始获洗毕。
现代文：又列副秘阁以及《五经》典籍各一份，经过缮写校定，在普通五年二月才得以完成。
English: A second set of secret cabinets and a copy of the classics of the Five Classics, after refinement and calibration, were completed in February of the ordinary year.

古文：窃以撰正履礼，历代罕就，皇明在运，厥功克成。
现代文： 我私下认为撰正和施行礼仪，历代罕有成功的，皇明应运而生，此功终于告成。
English: Privately, I thought that the writing of etiquette was the best, the previous generations could rarely complete it, the imperial dynasty and the national movement were clear, and the work was completed with hard work.

古文：周代三千，举其盈数，今之八千，随事附益。
现代文：周代之礼三千则举其大数，今之八千，随事增益。
English: Zhou's gift of three thousand was a large number, and the present eight thousand is an incremental gain.

古文：质文相变，故其数兼倍，犹如八卦之爻，因而重之，错综成六十四也。
现代文：质文相变，所以其数目加倍，有如八卦之爻，用以重卦，错综而成六十四卦。
English: As the form of the content changes, the amount doubles, just like the eight signs of the Eight Trigrams, and then overlaps, intricately forming the Sixty-Four Trigrams.

古文：臣以庸识，谬司其任，淹留历稔，允当斯责。
现代文：臣见识平庸，谬当此任，淹留多年，应当受责。
English: If a vassal's insight is mediocre, if he is appointed to this post, and if he stays for many years, he should be held accountable.

古文：兼勒成之初，未遑表上，实由才轻务广，思力不周，永言惭惕，无忘寤寐。
现代文：更兼写成之初，未能及时上奏，实因才轻事多，心力不足，永觉惭愧，日夜不忘。
English: Moreover, at the beginning of writing, it was not possible to play it in time, the real reason was that there were too many trivial things, lack of energy, always ashamed, day and night do not forget.

古文：自今春舆驾将亲六师，搜寻军礼，阅其条章，靡不该备，可以悬诸日月，颁之天下者矣。
现代文：自从今春皇上将亲率六师，寻找军礼，阅读有关条目，无不齐备，可以悬之于日月，颁布于天下了。 
English: Since this spring, the emperor has led six divisions to look for military etiquette and read the relevant articles, all of which are complete and can be suspended in the sun and moon and promulgated in the world.

古文：诏有司案以遵行。
现代文：皇帝诏令有关方面依照实行。
English: The Emperor's edict was carried out in accordance with the relevant aspects.

古文：寻加中书令，勉以疾求解内任，诏不许，乃令停下省，三日一朝，有事遣主书论决。
现代文：不久，徐勉加任中书令，他以有病为由请求解除内职的任命，皇帝下诏不允许，于是让他停止到省办事，三日一次朝见，有事派主事听取意见后决定。
English: Not long after, Xu Mian was appointed to the position of the central secretary. He requested to be relieved of his duties on the grounds that he was ill. The emperor did not allow it, so he asked him to stop going to the province to do business. He met with the emperor once every three days, and decided to send the person in charge of the matter after listening to the opinions.

古文：患脚转剧，久阙朝觐，固陈求解，诏许疾差还省。
现代文：后来他的脚病越来越严重，很久没有去朝见皇帝，便坚决请求解除职务。皇帝下诏允许等他脚病愈后回省。
English: Later, his foot disease became more and more serious, and he did not go to see the emperor for a long time, so he firmly requested to be relieved of his duties. The emperor issued a decree to allow him to return to the province after his foot disease was cured.

古文：勉虽居显职，不营産业，家无畜积，奉禄分赡亲族之贫乏者。
现代文：徐勉虽然身居显要的职位，却不经营产业，家中没有积蓄，所得俸禄分出一部分赡养亲族当中的贫困者。
English: Although he holds a prominent position, Xu Mian does not run an industry. There is no savings in his family, and part of his salary is used to support the poor among his relatives.

古文：门人故旧或从容致言，勉乃答曰： 人遗子孙以财，我遗之清白。
现代文：他的门人故友有时平心静气地劝说，他便回答说： 人们遗留给子孙们财产，我遗留给子孙的是清白的品德。
English: His friend and protégé sometimes calmly persuaded him, and he replied: People leave property to their children, but I leave my children a clean character.

古文：子孙才也，则自致辎軿；如不才，终爲佗有。 
现代文：子孙们如有才干，就会自己取得财富；如果无才，终为他人所有。 
English: If their children and grandchildren are talented, they will acquire wealth on their own; if they are not talented, they will eventually be owned by others.

古文：尝爲书戒其子崧曰：
现代文：他曾经写了一封信告诫他的儿子徐崧说：
English: He once wrote a letter admonishing his son Xu Jun, saying:

古文：吾家本清廉，故常居贫素。
现代文： 我家原本清廉，所以日常贫寒俭朴。
English: My family is originally honest, so we are poor and frugal every day.

古文：至于産业之事，所未尝言，非直不经营而已。
现代文：至于产业的事，我一向不曾说过，不仅是不经营而已。
English: As far as the industry is concerned, I have never said that it is not just a matter of not doing business.

古文：薄躬遭逢，遂至今日，尊官厚禄，可谓备之。
现代文：卑微之身蒙受恩遇，致有今日，高官厚禄，可谓兼备。
English: To detract from his own experience, up until now, the high-ranking official's generous salary can be said to be overflowing.

古文：每念叨窃若斯，岂由才致,仰藉先门风范及以福庆，故臻此尔,古人所谓 以清白遗子孙，不亦厚乎 。
现代文：每当私下念叨此事，岂因才能而致，也是靠着祖先家门风范和福分，所以能够至此啊！古人所谓 以清白传于子孙，不也是很丰厚的吗 。
English: Whenever this is mentioned in private, is it not due to talent, but also due to the ancestral family style and fortune, so it can be so! The ancients called it "passing on innocence to the descendants," isn't it also very rich?

古文：又云 遗子黄金满籯，不如一经 。
现代文：又说： 遗留子孙黄金满鬭，不如一经。 
English: He also said, "It is better to leave a legacy of gold to your children and grandchildren.

古文：详求此言，信非徒语。
现代文：详细求其深义，确非说说而已。
English: To explore these words in detail is indeed not an empty phrase.

古文：吾虽不敏，实有本志，庶得遵奉斯义，不敢坠失。
现代文：我虽不聪慧，只有立下志向，才能遵奉其义，不敢缺失。
English: Although I am not smart, I really have this intention and hope to be able to follow this principle and dare not lose it.

古文：所以显贵以来，将三十载，门人故旧，承荐便宜，或使创辟田园，或劝兴立邸店；又欲舳舻运致，亦令货殖聚敛。
现代文：所以地位显贵以来，已近三十年了，门人故旧，承受我的举荐的而有方便之时，或让开辟田园，或劝建造商店，又要用船舶运载而来，也是让通过商贸来增加财物。
English: Therefore, it has been nearly thirty years since the position of nobility was established, and the gatekeepers are old-fashioned. When it is convenient to receive my recommendation, it is either to open up the countryside, or to persuade the construction of shops, and to transport them by ship. It is also to increase wealth through commerce.

古文：若此衆事，皆距而不纳。
现代文：类似的事情众多，都被我拒绝不肯接受。
English: There are many similar things, all of which I refused to accept.

古文：非谓拔葵去织，且欲省息纷纭。
现代文：不仅是不愿与民争利，也是要减少纷争。
English: Not only is it not in the public interest, but it is also intended to quell divisive suggestions.

古文：中年聊于东田开营小园者，非存播艺以要利，政欲穿池种树，少寄情赏。
现代文： 中年以后，聊于东田开辟小园，并非存心耕种田园以求利，正为挖池栽树，多少寄托我的感情并得以观赏。
English: After middle age, when I talked about opening a small garden in Higashida, I didn't mean to cultivate the countryside for profit, I was just digging a pond and planting trees. I put my feelings into it and was able to watch.

古文：又以郊际闲旷，终可爲宅，傥获悬车致事，实欲歌哭于斯。
现代文：又因郊外是安静开阔之处，终可建宅院，倘若获得退休养老，实是要在此歌吟哀咏。
English: Also, because the suburbs are a quiet and open place, a residential compound can eventually be built. If you get a retirement pension, you really want to sing and mourn here.

古文：慧日、十住等既应营昏，又须住止。
现代文：慧日、十住等既要营作于晨昏，又须有住所。
English: Hui-Nichi, Jiu-Zhu, etc. must not only work in the morning and evening, but also have a residence.

古文：吾清明门宅无相容处，所以尔者，亦复有以。
现代文：我在清明门宅院已无处可以容纳，所以这样，也是有原因的。
English: There is a reason why I have nowhere to stay at the Ching Ming Men Mansion.

古文：前割西边施宣武寺，既失西厢，不复方幅，意亦谓此逆旅舍尔，何事须华。
现代文：以前已割去西边宅院施舍给宣武寺。既已失去西厢，院落不再成为方块，我心中认为这不过是寄身的旅舍而已，何必弄得华美。
English: In the past, the west wing of the house had been given to the temple as charity. Now that the west wing has been lost and the courtyard is no longer a square block, I think in my heart that this is just a guest house, so why make it beautiful.

古文：常恨时人谓是我宅。
现代文：时常以世人称这里是我宅院为恨事。
English: I often regret that people thought it was my house at the time.

古文：古往今来，豪富继踵，高门甲第，连闼洞房，宛其死矣，定是谁室？
现代文：古往今来，豪富之家接踵而来，高门甲第，连门洞房，当其死后，定是谁家之室？
English: From ancient times to the present, wealthy people have been moving in and out of the mansions of high-ranking aristocrats, one room after another, until his death, who's residence was it?

古文：但不能不爲培塿之山，聚石移果，杂以花卉，以娱休沐，用托性灵。
现代文：但也不能不培造假山，堆积石块，栽移果木，杂以花卉，以为娱乐休息之时，寄托性灵。
English: However, it is also necessary to cultivate a rockery, pile up stones, plant fruit trees, and use flowers to entertain and rest.

古文：随便架立，不存广大，唯功德处小以爲好，所以内中逼促，无复房宇。
现代文：随便架立而就，不求广大，惟做功德以小为好，所以内中十分狭窄，再无房屋。
English: It was erected arbitrarily, not seeking to be large, but to do good deeds with small ones, so the inner middle school is very narrow, and there are no more houses.

古文：近修东边儿孙二宅，乃藉十住南还之资，其中所须，犹爲不少。
现代文：近日修建东边为儿孙们居住的二处屋宅，是靠十住南归之资，其中所需之物，仍有不少。
English: Recently, the construction of two houses on the east side for the children and grandchildren to live in was funded by ten residents who returned to the south, and there are still a lot of things needed.

古文：既牵挽不至，又不可中途而辍，郊间之园，遂不办保，货与韦黯，乃获百金。
现代文：既无牵牛挽车以远贸之资，又不可中途而停止，郊外之园便难以保全，卖给韦黯，所得百金。
English: Since there was no cowherd to drive the cart with the capital of long-distance trade, and it was impossible to stop halfway, the garden in the suburbs was difficult to maintain, and it was sold to Wei Ying, and the income was a hundred gold.

古文：成就两宅，已消其半。
现代文：修成两处宅屋，已耗费其半。
English: Two houses have been built, of which half has already been spent.

古文：寻园价所得，何以至此？
现代文：小园何以能得此价钱？
English: Inferring the income from the sale of the garden, why is it so high?

古文：由吾经始历年，粗已成立，桃李茂密，桐竹成阴，塍陌交通，渠畎相属。华楼迥榭，颇有临眺之美，孤峰丛薄，不无纠纷之兴。
现代文：因我已经经营多年，大体已经建成，园中桃李茂盛，桐竹成荫，阡陌相通，渠亩相连，华楼高榭，颇得临眺之美；孤峰丛林，不无繁茂之盛。
English: Because I have been in business for many years, it has been largely completed. In the garden, the peach and plum trees are luxuriant, the paulownia and bamboo trees are shady, the ferns and weeds are intertwined, and the canals are connected. The high-rise buildings are tall, which is quite beautiful to look at; the lonely peak jungle is flourishing.

古文：渎中并饶苻役，湖里殊富芰莲。
现代文：渎中多有水草，湖里莲藕丰饶。
English: There are many aquatic plants in the lake, and the lake is rich in lotus root.

古文：虽云人外，城阙密迩，韦生欲之，亦雅有情趣。
现代文：虽在人境之外，却靠近城阙，韦生购得，也雅有情趣。
English: Although there are few traces of people, it is very close to the city, and it is also very interesting for Wesson to think about it.

古文：追述此事，非有吝心，盖是事意所至尔。
现代文：追述此事，并非有惜售之心，因此事而心中联想而已！
English: To retell this matter, it is not a matter of being reluctant to sell, so it is just a mental association!

古文：忆谢灵运山家诗云： 中爲天地物，今成鄙夫有。 
现代文：忆起谢灵运《山家诗》中道： 中为天地物，今成鄙夫有。 
English: Recalling the middle of Xie Lingyun's "Mountain Family Poem": In the middle is heaven and earth, and now there is nothing.

古文：吾此园有之二十载，今爲天地物。
现代文：我得有此园已二十年，如今真成为天地之物了！
English: I've had this garden for twenty years, and now it's really something out of this world!

古文：物之与我，相校几何哉。
现代文：物之和我，相比几何呢！
English: What are things compared to me!

古文：此直所馀，今以分汝营小田舍，亲累既多，理亦须此。
现代文：此园剩余之财，今分给你以营建小田舍，亲属拖累既多，理应如此。
English: The remaining wealth of this garden is now allocated to you to build a small farmhouse. Since there are many relatives dragging their feet, this is how it should be.

古文：且释氏之教，以财物谓之外命。
现代文：况且佛教说法，称财物为外命。
English: Moreover, according to Buddhism, wealth is a foreign life.

古文：外典亦称 何以聚人曰财 。
现代文：另外经典也称： 何以将聚人而得者称为财。 
English: In addition, the classic also said: Why is the one who gathers people and wins called wealth?

古文：况汝常情，安得忘此。
现代文：况且你为常情所需，怎能忘怀此事。
English: Besides, how can you forget about this when you are in need of comfort?

古文：闻汝所买湖熟田地，甚爲舄卤，弥复可安，所以如此，非物竞故也。
现代文：听说你所买的湖熟的田地，盐碱颇多，怎能安心经营？所以这样，并非与人竞争。
English: I've heard that the field you bought is well-trodden and has a lot of salt and alkali, so how can you operate it safely? Therefore, this is not a competition with others.

古文：虽事异寝丘，聊可髣佛。
现代文：此事虽与孙叔敖的寝丘封地有别，但也可仿佛相比。
English: Although this matter is different from Sun Shuxuan's sleeping hill fiefdom, it can also be compared.

古文：孔子曰： 居家理事，可移于官。 
现代文：孔子说： 居家理事，可移于官。 
English: Confucius said, "A director who lives at home can be transferred to a government post."

古文：既已营之，宜使成立，进退两亡，更贻耻笑。
现代文：既已经营，就应使之成功，进退两失，更贻留笑柄。
English: Once the campaign is over, it should be a success, not a failure, and not a laughing stock.

古文：若有所收获，汝可自分赡内外大小，宜令得所，非吾所知，又复应沾之诸女尔。
现代文：如有收获，你可以分出一部分赡养内外大小，应让各得其所，这本不是我所要知道的，又应当让诸女也得到一点好处。
English: If there is a gain, you can allocate a part of the maintenance to the internal and external size of the camel. It should be allowed to have its own place. This is not what I want to know, and the women should also get a little benefit.

古文：汝既居长，故有此及。
现代文：你既身为兄长，所以我才这样提及。
English: You're in the position of the eldest son, so to speak.

古文：凡爲人长，殊复不易，当使中外谐缉，人无间言，先物后己，然后可贵。
现代文： 凡为人尊长，确实不易，应当使中外和睦，人无怨言，先人后己，然后可贵。
English: It is not easy to be a dignified person. It is necessary to make peace between China and the rest of the world. People should have no complaints. They should respect themselves first, and then others.

古文：老生云： 后其身而身先。 
现代文：老子说： 后其身而身先。 
English: The old man said, "Being behind others but being in the front."

古文：若能尔者，更招巨利。
现代文：如果能做到这样，就会获得大利。
English: If we can do this, it will bring Italy even more.

古文：汝当自勖，见贤思齐，不宜忽略以弃日也。
现代文：你应当自勉，见贤人而思学习，不应忽略而放弃时间。
English: You should make your own efforts. When you see a wise man, you should try to be equal to him. Don't neglect cultivation and waste time.

古文：弃日乃是弃身，身名美恶，岂不大哉，可不慎欤！
现代文：放弃时间便是放弃自身，身名之好坏，岂不是最大的事吗？
English: To give up time is to give up oneself, whether one's reputation is good or bad, isn't that the greatest thing?

古文：今之所敕，略言此意。
现代文：能够不注意吗？今日所写，略谈心意。
English: Can you afford not to pay attention? What I've written today is a little bit about my thoughts.

古文：政谓爲家以来，不事资産，暨立墅舍，似乖旧业，陈其始末，无愧怀抱。
现代文：只因成家以来，不营资产，既建有别墅，似乎有背于旧愿，所以陈述此事之始末，才能无愧于本心。
English: Only because since starting a family, they have not invested in assets, and even though they have built a villa, it seems to be contrary to their old wishes. Therefore, the presentation of the beginning and end of this matter can be worthy of their original intention.

古文：兼吾年时朽暮，心力稍单，牵课奉公，略不克举，其中馀暇，裁可自休。
现代文：况且我已是老朽暮年，心力已觉不足，牵累于考课官吏，奉公守法，略感难以胜任，其中有闲暇，才能休息。
English: Moreover, I am already in my twilight years, my mental strength is already insufficient, I am involved in the examination of officials, I am obedient to the law, I am slightly incompetent, and I have leisure time to rest.

古文：或复冬日之阳，夏日之阴，良辰美景，文案间隟，负杖蹑履，逍遥陋馆，临池观鱼，披林听鸟，浊酒一杯，弹琴一曲，求数刻之暂乐，庶居常以待终，不宜复劳家间细务。
现代文：或于冬日之阳，夏日之阴，良辰美景之时，得处理完文案的间隙，负杖穿履，逍遥于陋馆，临池观鱼之游，林间听鸟啼鸣，浊酒一杯，弹琴一曲，以求片刻之乐趣，才能安然以待晚年，不应再劳心家中小事。
English: Or in the sun of winter, the shade of summer, and the beauty of the beautiful scenery of good time, you have to deal with the gap after the copy, wear a cane, walk in a shabby house, watch the fish in the pond, listen to the birdsong in the forest, drink a glass of wine, play a piece of piano, in order to have a moment of fun, in order to wait for the old age, you should no longer worry about the small things.

古文：汝交关既定，此书又行，凡所资须，付给如别。
现代文：你交通已定，此书送去，凡所需之资，如常付给。
English: Your transfer has been confirmed, this letter has been reissued, and whatever is needed will be delivered separately.

古文：自兹以后，吾不复言及田事，汝亦勿复与吾言之。
现代文：从此以后，我不再和你谈及田园之事，你也不要再告诉我。
English: From now on, I won't talk about farming, and you shouldn't talk to me about it either.

古文：假使尧水汤旱，岂如之何。
现代文：假如遇到水旱灾害，岂有办法？
English: If there is a drought, is there any way out?

古文：若其满庾盈箱，尔之幸遇，如斯之事，并无俟令吾知也。
现代文：如果仓满箱盈，是你的幸运，如此之事，也不必等我知道。
English: If you are lucky enough to have a warehouse full of boxes, you don't have to wait for me to know about it.

古文：记云： 夫孝者善继人之志，善述人之事。 
现代文：《记》中说： 孝顺的人善于继承祖先的志向，善于绍述祖先的事业。 
English: "Record" says: Filial people are good at inheriting the aspirations of their ancestors, and are good at recounting the undertakings of their ancestors.

古文：今且望汝全吾此志，则无所恨矣。
现代文：如今我指望你来成全我的志向，我就死而无恨了。 
English: Now I hope that you will fulfill this ambition of mine, and there will be no regrets.

古文：第二子悱卒，痛悼甚至，不欲久废王务，乃爲答客以自喻焉。
现代文：徐勉的二儿子徐悱去世，徐勉极为悲痛，他又不愿意长时间耽误国事，便写了一篇《答客》文来自我宽慰。
English: Xu Mian, the second son of Xu Mian, passed away. Xu Mian was extremely grief-stricken. He did not want to delay state affairs for a long time, so he wrote an "Answer" article to console himself.

古文：普通末，武帝自算择后宫吴声、西曲女妓各一部，并华少，赉勉，因此颇好声酒。
现代文：普通末年，梁武帝自己从后宫选择善于唱《吴声》和《西曲》的歌伎各一人，都是一些美丽的少女，送给徐勉，他因此而颇喜好听音乐和饮酒。
English: Towards the end of his life, Emperor Liangwu himself selected from his harem a number of beautiful maidens who were good at singing "Voice of the West" and "Song of the West," and gave them to Emperor Xu, who was quite fond of listening to music and drinking alcohol.

古文：禄奉之外，月别给钱十万，信遇之深，故无与匹。
现代文：在正常俸禄之外，每月另给钱十万，其宠信礼遇之深，无人可以相比。
English: In addition to his normal salary, he is also paid 100,000 yen a month. He is so well-liked and respected that no one can compare to him.

古文：中大通中，又以疾自陈，移授特进、右光禄大夫、侍中、中卫将军，置佐史，馀如故。
现代文：中大通年间，徐勉又以有病为由陈告朝廷，转任特进、右光禄大夫、侍中、中卫将军，设佐史之官员，其余职务照旧。
English: During his junior and senior high school years, Xu also reported to the imperial court on the grounds that he was ill, and was transferred to the posts of special envoy, doctor of Uguanglu, chamberlain, and general of the middle guard, and was appointed an official of Sashi, while the rest of his duties remained the same.

古文：增亲信四十人。
现代文：增派亲信人员四十人。
English: Add forty cronies.

古文：两宫参问，冠盖结辙。
现代文：两宫交互派往问候的使者，冠盖连成一路。
English: The envoys of the two palaces sent greetings to each other, and the crown caps were connected into one road.

古文：有敕每欲临幸，勉以拜伏有亏，频啓停出，诏许之，遂停舆驾。
现代文：皇帝多次下诏准备前来看望，徐勉以为君主拜问臣下有亏大礼，连连上书请求不要出行，皇帝应许了，于是停止出发。
English: The emperor repeatedly issued an edict to prepare to come and visit, but Xu Mian thought that the monarch was asking too much of his vassal, and repeatedly sent a letter requesting him not to travel. The emperor promised, so he stopped his departure.

古文：及卒，帝闻而流涕。
现代文：当他去世时，皇帝听到消息而流下泪来。
English: When he died, the emperor burst into tears at the news.

古文：即日车驾临殡，赠右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：当日，皇帝亲临徐勉家中参加殡礼，赠为右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: On the same day, the emperor personally attended the funeral ceremony at the home of Xu Rong and presented him with the doctor of Uguanglu, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：皇太子亦举哀朝堂。
现代文：皇太子也在朝堂上举行哀礼。
English: The Crown Prince also presided over the funeral at the Imperial Palace.

古文：有司奏諡 居敬行简曰简 ，帝益 执心决断曰肃 ，因諡简肃公。
现代文：有关方面上奏谥号说， 居敬行简称为简 ，梁武帝增加了 执心决断为肃 ，因而谥为 简肃公 。
English: Relevant parties said in the announcement that Ju Jingxing was abbreviated as "Jian," and Emperor Liang Wu increased his "perseverance and determination" to "Shu," and thus became "Jian Su Gong."

古文：勉虽骨鲠不及范云，亦不阿意苟合，后知政事者莫及，梁世之言相者称范、徐云。
现代文：徐勉的骨气比不上范云，但他也不曲意随声附和，后来任政的人都比不上他。梁朝一代说起担任相位而受到称赞的就是范云和徐勉。
English: Xu Tsun's backbone is not as good as Fan Yun's, but he does not meekly go along with it, and later politicians are not as good as him. It is Fan Yun and Xu Tsun who have been praised since the beginning of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：善属文，勤着述，虽当机务，下笔不休。
现代文：徐勉善写诗文，勤于著述，虽然负责机要大事，但下笔不停。
English: Xu Qian is good at writing poetry and diligent in writing. Although he is in charge of important things, he keeps writing.

古文：常以起居注烦杂，乃撰爲流别起居注六百六十卷，左丞弹事五卷。
现代文：他认为起居注过于烦杂，便撰写了《流别起居注》六百六十卷，《左丞弹事》五卷。
English: He thought the commentary was too complicated, so he wrote 660 volumes of "Farewell Commentary" and five volumes of "The Story of Zojo."

古文：在选曹，撰选品三卷。
现代文：在吏部时，撰写《选品》三卷。
English: While in the cadre department, he wrote three volumes of "Selected Works."

古文：齐时撰太庙祝文二卷。
现代文：齐朝时，撰有《太庙祝文》二卷。
English: At the time of the Qi Dynasty, there were two volumes of "Imperial Temple Congratulatory Messages."

古文：以孔、释二教殊途同归，撰会林五十卷。
现代文：他认为孔子的儒教和释迦牟尼的佛教两教殊途同归，撰写了《会林》五十卷。
English: He believed that the two religions of Confucius' Confucianism and Shakyamuni's Buddhism were the same, and he wrote fifty volumes of "Meilin."

古文：凡所着前后二集五十卷，又爲人章表集十卷。
现代文：他平日所撰写的文章共有前后二集五十卷，又写有《章表集》十卷。
English: The articles he wrote on weekdays totaled two sets of fifty volumes, and he also wrote ten volumes of "Chapter Table Collection."

古文：大同三年，故佐史尚书左丞刘览等诣阙陈勉行状，请刊石纪德，即降诏立碑于墓焉。
现代文：大同三年，徐勉的原佐史尚书左丞刘览等人到朝廷陈述徐勉的事迹，请求刻石记载他的德行，皇帝立即降旨在徐勉的墓地立碑。
English: In the third year of the Datong era, Xu's former aide, Shangshu Zuoren Liu Shan and others went to the imperial court to present Xu's deeds and request that a stone be carved to record his virtues. The emperor immediately lowered the monument to be erected in Xu's cemetery.

古文：悱字敬业，幼聪敏，能属文，位太子舍人，掌书记。
现代文：徐悱字敬业，自幼聪明机灵，能写诗文，任太子舍人，掌书记之职。
English: Xu Yanzi was dedicated to his work, clever and witty from a young age, able to write poetry, and was appointed as the prince's secretary.

古文：累迁洗马，中舍人，犹管书记。出入宫坊者历稔。
现代文：累迁至太子洗马，中舍人，仍掌书记，出入于宫中多年。
English: He moved to Prince Saima, the middle son, was still the secretary, and went in and out of the palace for many years.

古文：以足疾出爲湘东王友，俄迁晋安内史。
现代文：由于有脚病出任湘东王友，不久迁任晋安内史。
English: Due to a foot ailment, he took up the post of Shandong Wangyou, and was soon transferred to the post of Jinan Inner History.

