古文：朱熹乾道四年，民艰食，熹请于府，得常平米六百石赈贷。
现代文：原文宋孝宗乾道四年，人民缺乏粮食，朱熹求救于州府，借到常平米六百石来施救。
English: In the four dry years of Song Xiaozong, the people were short of grain. Zhu Xi sought help from the state government and borrowed 600 kilos of rice from Changping to help.

古文：夏受粟于仓，冬则加息以偿；歉，蠲其息之半，大饥尽蠲之。
现代文：夏天从社里的谷仓借米粮，冬天加利息偿还。歉收时免除一半利息，大饥荒时利息全免。
English: In the summer, rice grain is borrowed from the company's barn, and in the winter, interest is added. In the event of a poor harvest, half of the interest is waived, and in the event of a major famine, all interest is waived.

古文：凡十四年，以米六百石还府，见储米三千一百石，以为 社仓 ，不复收息。
现代文：十四年后，六百石米全数还给州府，尚有储米三千一百石，作为社仓，不再收利息。
English: Fourteen years later, the entire 600 koku of rice was returned to the state government, and there were still 3,100 koku of stored rice, which was used as company warehouses and no longer charged interest.

古文：故虽遇歉，民不缺食，诏下熹 社仓法 于诸路。
现代文：所以虽然遭到歉收，人民也不担心缺乏粮食。孝宗于是下诏，使朱熹的社仓法在各路推行。
English: Therefore, although the harvest was poor, the people were not worried about the lack of grain. Therefore, Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict to implement Zhu Xi's Shachang Law in all areas.

古文：陆象山曰： 社仓固为农之利，然年常丰，田常熟，则其利可久；苟非常熟之田，一遇岁歉，则有散而无敛；来岁秧时缺本，乃无以赈之，莫如兼制平籴一仓，丰时籴之，使无价贱伤农之患；缺时粜之，以摧富民封廪腾价之计，析所籴为二，每存其一，以备歉岁，代社仓之匮，实为长便也。
现代文：陆象山说： 社仓固然是为农民的利益着想，然而要常年丰收，这种制度才可保持长久，如果不是可常年丰收的田地，一遇到歉收，则社仓的米只有借出而没有收入，来年播种时缺少种子，仍然没有办法施救。不如同时设立一个平籴仓，丰收时买入米粮，防止价贱伤农的祸害；歉收时出售米粮，以防止富家囤积粮食，抬高价格来获取暴利。把买进来的米粮分存两个仓库，其中一个仓库的存粮保留起来，不随便使用，以为歉收的年头所用，用这种方法来替代动辄匮乏的社会，显然比较实用。
English: Lu Xiangshan said: Of course, the warehouse is for the benefit of farmers, but it is necessary to have a good harvest all the year round for this system to be maintained for a long time. If it is not a field that can be harvested well all the year round, in the event of a poor harvest, the rice in the warehouse will only be lent out without income, and there will be a lack of seeds when it is sown next year, and there is still no way to rescue it. It is better to set up a flat warehouse at the same time, buy rice grain when there is a good harvest to prevent the scourge of low prices from hurting farmers; sell rice grain when there is a

古文：听民之便，则为社仓法；强民之从，即为青苗法矣，此主利民，彼主利国故也。 
现代文：顺从人民的方便，是社仓法；强制人民听从的，则是青苗法。是因为前者主张利民，后者主张利国的缘故。 
English: It is the Shechang Law that is convenient for the people to obey, and the Young Seedlings Law that forces the people to obey. This is because the former advocates benefiting the people, while the latter advocates benefiting the country.

古文：今有司积谷之法，亦社仓遗训，然所积只纸上空言，半为有司干没，半充上官，无碍钱粮之用。
现代文：当今官吏积存谷物的方法，也是社仓的遗训。然而所积的只是纸上的空言，一半已被负责官吏据为己有，一半变成朝廷非正常调用的钱粮来源。
English: The method by which today's officials accumulate grain is also a legacy of the warehouse. However, the accumulation is just empty words on paper, half of which has been appropriated by the responsible officials, and half of which has become a source of money for the imperial court.

古文：一遇荒歉，辄仰屋窃叹，不如留谷于民间之为愈矣。
现代文：一碰到荒年歉收，除了摇头叹息，一点办法也没有，还不如不要设置，单纯的把谷物留在民间的好。唉！
English: When faced with a poor harvest in a bad year, there's nothing to do but shake your head and sigh. It's better not to set it up and simply leave the grain to the people. Alas!

古文：噫!何良俊《四友斋丛说》云： 今之抚按有第一美政所急当举行者，要将各项下赃罚银，督令各府县尽数籴谷；其有罪犯自徒流以下，许其以谷赎罪。
现代文：何良俊《四友斋丛说》说： 当今地方首长的真正德政，当务之急是将各项赃款及罚银，督促各府县隶全数购买谷物。犯徒刑、流放以下的罪犯，准他们用谷物来赎罪。
English: He Liangjun's "Four Friends of Grain" said: The most urgent task for today's local leaders to carry out a truly virtuous policy is to use all kinds of stolen money and fines to urge all prefectures and counties to purchase grain. Criminals who have been sentenced to imprisonment or banishment are allowed to use grain to atone for their sins.

古文：大率上县每年要谷一万，下县五千。
现代文：大致上大县每年要买谷一万石，小县要买五千石。
English: Generally, large counties need to buy 10,000 koku of rice per year, and small counties need to buy 5,000 koku.

古文：两直隶巡抚下有县凡一百，则是每年有谷七十余万，积至三年，即有二百余万矣。
现代文：两直隶巡抚之下有一百个县，则每年就有七十多万石谷物。累积三年之后，就有两百多万石了。
English: If there are one hundred counties under the supervision of two successive governors, there will be more than seven hundred thousand koku of grain every year. After three years of accumulation, there will be more than two million koku.

古文：若遇一县有水旱之灾，则听于无灾县分通融借贷，俟来年丰熟补还，则东南百姓可免流亡，而朝廷于财赋之地永无南顾之忧矣。
现代文：如果遇到一个县有水旱灾，就向无灾害的县通融借贷，来年丰收补还，则各地百姓就免于流离逃难，而朝廷对那些供应政府财政支出的重点税收地区，也永远不需忧心荒年歉收的问题。
English: If a county is hit by floods and droughts, it will borrow money from a disaster-free county to make up for the next year's bumper harvest. This will prevent people from being displaced and forced to flee, and the imperial court will never have to worry about the problem of poor harvests in key tax areas that supply government financial expenditures.

古文：善政之大，无过于此! 
现代文：最大的德政，没有比这样更好了。 
English: The greatest German politics, it doesn't get any better than this.

